L1330 12185409 55755
CLEMENS IX. PONTIFEX MAXIMVS, CREATVS DIE XX IVNII. ANNO M. D. C. LX. VII.
Il Cardinalismo di Santa Chiesa; OR THE HISTORY OF THE CARDINALS OF THE Roman Church, From the time of their first Creation, to the Election of the Present POPE Clement the Ninth, With a full Account of his CONCLAVE. In Three Parts. Written in Italian by the Author of the Nipotismo di Roma, and faithfully Englished by G. H. LONDON, Printed for John Starkey, at the Myter betwixt the Middle-Temple-Gate, and Temple Bar in Fleet-Street. 1670.
A SUMMARY Of the Matters contained in the Three Parts of this Book. THE First treats of the Essence of the Church; of the Controversies which arise betwixt the Religious Orders, the Princes, and the ergy: Of the Pontifical Autho∣rity, how it is understood in Rome; and how it ought to be, by the Soveraign Princes: Of the Original, Augmentation, and Essence of the Cardinalitial Dignity; and of the manner of li∣ving of all the Cardinals in general. The Second shews how careless, and perfunctory the Cardinals are in defending the Church from the rapacity of the Nipotismo, with the reasons and obligations they have thereunto: As like∣wise the Promotions, Titles, Alliances, Qualities, Vices, and Virtues, of all the Cardinals now living. The Third discourses of all the Treaties, Negotiations, Diffe∣rences, Disputes, and Dissentions, happen'd amongst the Cardi∣nals in the Conclaves; and betwixt the Cardinals, the People, and the Emperors, in the Elections of all the Popes, and Anti-Popes, from the Incarnation of our Saviour, to the Conclave in the Year 1667. in which Clement the 9th. was elected Pope: To which are added certain Politick Aphorisms, written by Cardi∣nal Azolini, upon the Cardinals of the said Conclave.
THE AUTHOR TO THE READER. Kind Reader, I Present you here with the Cardinalismo I promis'd you in my Nipotismo; Read it as your own, not as mine; for he who pro∣mises a thing, obliges himself de jure to him that expects its per∣formance. Certain Criticks who vouchsafe to throw away some moments of their time in the perusal of the Nipotismo, won∣der'd exceedingly that I should publish that book first, having declar'd the Car∣dinalismo to be my first born. The first pangs and qualms which I endured, were (I must confess) in the Conception of my Cardinalismo; but I laid that aside, and fell upon my Nipotismo. You will ask me upon what grounds, or inducements? VVhat necessity was there for that? I will tell you sincerely, my design was to publish them together; but upon second thoughts, I made an Esau of Jacob, and a Jacob of Esau, that is, I put forth my Nipotismo by way of Essay, resolving, if that had not had the approbation I expected, to have stifled the other, or confin'd it to my own Cabinet. But things succeeded accor∣ding to the predictions of my Friends, and the Nipotismo relishing even a∣mongst those Argus's, and Criticks, who read books only to correct them, and upbraid the Authors: I concluded forthwith to present this Cardinalismo likewise, for the benefit of the Publick, presuming its reception would be no worse than the other, if the Readers judgement, and the Authors do agree: which nevertheless I cannot but apprehend, when I consider how frequently they differ. This I know, that if any book ever gave occasion of Censure, this will, and that not only to the Catholicks, but to the Protestants also, (for even amongst them there are such as will find fault, where they do not sometimes under∣stand.) Methinks I hear a Protestant at one of my ears, crying out already,
You might have left out this, you should have omitted that, it would have been better thus, and thus, and thus: and in the other, a scandaliz'd Catho∣lick complaining, that I write several things superfluous to the very nature of History, and pass by others which would be proper and adequate. But he who should write a book, and undertake to give universal satisfacti∣on, would but lose his time, and have his labour for his pains. Nor is it to be expected the general will submit to a particular. The Apostles were holy men, guided by the holy Spirit, and according to that direction, they writ the book of the holy Gospel: yet how many Hereticks are there found, who fear not to con∣demn, what they ought in Conscience to adore? How many prophane persons which despise the Apostolical instructions? How many Divines, that with a thousand niceties, and distinctions, do controvert and dispute against the wri∣tings of the Apostles? Now if the nature of man be so dogged and perverse, that it cannot accommodate with so sacred a book, so necessary to our Salvation, and so infallible in its Composition; how is it possible they should receive one kindly, that perhaps is contrary to their own sence and inclinations? I am sa∣tisfy'd it is impossible this Cardinalismo should please both Catholick and Pro∣testant, because the one contemns what the other approves, and the other em∣braces what the first has rejected. Many things are inserted which are familiar amongst the Catholicks, and for that reason those are contemptible to them. Many others there are which are common amongst the Protestants, and accor∣dingly as inconsiderable to them: but all things are to be regulated with order, and the good intention of the Author is to be excused, because his design is to give general satisfaction as near as he can. Should he have writ only what had been palatable to the Catholicks, the Protestants would have disgusted it; and on the other side, to have address'd himself only to the satisfaction of the Protestants, would have been as ingratefull to the Catholicks. Seeing therefore what is acceptable to the one, is unacceptable to the other; the Catholick may read what makes for his interest, and the Protestant, what the Catholick rejects: (and I am certain he will reject what is most worthy to be read.) For my part, I advise the Protestant to read nothing but what the Catholick condemns; and the Catholick, only what the Protestant despises: that both of them may suck what honey they can, and throw away the sting which pricks them within. Thus far kind Reader, I have spoken in general, I shall now apply my self par∣ticularly to thee: and first I desire thee to take notice, I am not the only person concern'd in the composition of this book. For these two last years I have en∣deavour'd (notwithstanding some trouble and expence) to procure such Me∣moires as were necessary for my design, from the hands of other persons: so that if the book happens to be dislik'd, let not the whole blame be laid at my door, but let them have their share who cooperated in the work, which I cannot call mine, because my Memoires came from the hands of other people; people I may say, for I depended not upon the Relations of any one man. Yet there is one thing I may properly call my own, and that is the Stile, and Contexture of the book, in which also you may have occasion (and perhaps in every leaf) to condemn me, as not observing the rules of the current Stile. I confess I thought the trouble unnecessary to apply my self to those niceties, and punctilioes, to which the writers in this age are so much addicted, and it pre∣ceeded
from an inclination I had to the common (not a particular) benefit to the Publique, and not to any private Party. Those who writ with so much glo∣ry in this age, do it to gain applause amongst the learned, because they are learned themselves. For my part I am conscious of great insufficiency, and that I have nothing to recommend me, but an immense, and insatiable desire, to make my self intelligible to the most illiterate people in the world: for this reason (being unable to arrive at that pitch of satisfaction (which is natural to all writers) to see my self favour'd by the learned, and receiv'd by them, though as the meanest of them all). I endeavour to gain the acceptance of the commoner sort, by fra∣ming my self to the capacity of every body; and the rather, because those stran∣gers who are most curious of learning our tongue, venture not but upon such books as are easie and familiar. Thou wilst not deny, but the learned do under∣stand what is easie, and that the common-people abhor what is difficult. He therefore who writes smoothly end plain, writes to every ones understanding; whereas he that is abstruce, designs only to please a few. Such books as these, ought to be read by many, rather than by particular persons, though but few of the Commonalty are acquainted with such things, the rigour and severity be∣ing so great in Rome, no books are permitted, but Encomiums and Panegy∣ricks. Many will blame me for writing with that freedom, of persons of so great quality, and now living, and not unworthily: yet I am not the only man, if I were, I should not (I hope) deserve to be condemn'd, writing nothing but the truth, for it would be cruelty against nature it self, and the right of reason, and History, if verity should be persecuted. If the good Catholicks will look impar∣tially upon what I have written of the Church of Rome, they will find my aim is no other, than to admonish them of the errours into which the world imagines they are fallen, and ought therefore to incourage and commend the piety of my design, there being no greater expression of kindness, than for one to advertise his friend of a Precipice which he sees not himself. Neither have the Cardinals more reason to complain, the whole drift of this Cardinalismo being nothing, but the elevation of their authority, too much depress'd by the Popes: and al∣though they perhaps will despise such advertisements as Satyrical, yet have their Eminences no reason to be offended, if they be made acquainted with what the world sayes of them. And if from the variety of Pens, which co-operated in this work, they meet with any thing netling and pungent, they are in all humility desired to gather the Rose with such artifice, as not to prick themselves with the Bryars. The Princes, on the other side, are most humbly beseech'd, (and their Ministers of State with them) that they would peruse this book intentively, and not make any judgement upon the information of any prejudic'd Ecclesiastick: and I am of opinion (if they vouchsafe to read it themselves) they will rather applaud than explode it. You are desir'd likewise (kind Reader) to excuse the Errors of the Press: they are too numerous indeed, yet in respect of your judgement, they are the fewer, for I am confident there is nothing, but what your learning will correct as you read, and by that means cover those defects, as well as the Errors of the Author, who promises for the future to write nothing but in generals, without any particular reflections, either upon Rome, or any other place. The Books which I intend to publish, are, L'Europa Morta; and Il Christianismo Universato: Farewell.
A Catalogue of some Books lately Printed for John Starkey Bookseller, at the Miter in Fleet-stteet near Temple-Bar. THE Voyages and Travels of the Duke of Holsteins Ambassadors into Muscovy' Tartary, and Persia, begun in the year 1633. and finish'd in 1639. containing a Compleat History of those Countries; whereto are added, the Travels of Mandelslo from Persia, into the East-Indies, begun in 1638. and finish'd in 1640. the whole il∣lustrated with divers accurate Maps and Figures. Written Originally, by Adam Olearius, Secretary to the Embassy; Englished by J. Davies of Kidwelly. The second Edition in Folio. Price bound 18 shillings. The Present State of the Ottoman Empire in three books; containing the Maxims of the Turkish Politie, their Religion, and Military Discipline: Illustrated with divers Figures. Written by Paul Rycaut, Esq; late Secretary to the English Ambassador there, now Consul of Smyrna. The third Edition in Folio. Price bound 10 s. The History of Barbado's, St. Christophers, Mevis, St. Vincents, Antego, Martinico, Monserrat, and the rest of the Caribby Islands, in all twenty eight; in two books, con∣taining the Natural and Moral History of those Islands; Illustrated with divers pieces of Sculpture, representing the most considerable rarities therein described. Written by an Ingenious hand. In Folio. Price bound 10 s. A Relation of Three Embassies, from his Majesty Charles the Second, to the Great Duke of Muscovy, the King of Sweden, and the King of Denmark, performed by the Right Honourable the Earl of Carlisle, in the years 1663, and 1664. Written by an At∣tendant on the Embassies. In Octavo. Price bound 4 s. Il Nipotismo di Roma, or the History of the Popes Nephews, from the time of Sixtus the 4th. 1471. to the death of the last Pope Alexander the 7th. 1667. Written in Italian, and Englished by W. A. Fellow of the Royal Society. In Octavo. Price bound 3 s. The Present State of the Ʋnited Provinces of the Low Countries, as to the Govern∣ment, Laws, Forces, Riches, Manners, Customs, Revenue, and Territory of the Dutch. Collected out of divers Authors by W. A. Fellow of the Royal Society. In Twelves. Price bound 2 s. 6 d. The Art of Chymistry as it is now practised. Written in French by P. Thybault Chy∣mist to the French King; and Englished by W. A. Dr. in Physick, and Fellow of the Royal Society. In Octavo. Price bound 3 s. Basilia Chymica & Praxis Chymiatricae, or Royal and Practical Chymistry, in three Treatises; being a Translation or Oswald Crollius his Royal Chymistry; augmented and enlarged by John Hartman. To which is added his Treaties of Signatures of Internal things, or a true and lively Anatomy of the greater and lesser World. As also the Practice of Chymistry of John Hartman, M. D. augmented and enlarged by his Son, with considerable Additions; all faithfully Englished by a Lover of Chymistry. in Folio. Price bound 10 s. Accidence Commenc'd Grammer, and supply'd with sufficient Rules; or a new and easie Method for the learning the Latin Tongue. The Author John Milton. In Twelves. Price bound 8 d. In the Press this 5th. of November, 1669. The Jesuites Morals, faithfully extracted from their own books which are Printed by the Permission and Approbation of the Superiours of their Society. Written in French by a Serbon Doctor, and faithfully Englished in Folio.
Il CARDINALISMO di Santa Chiesa, OR THE HISTORY OF CARDINALS. In III. Parts. PART I. BOOK I. The Contents. In which is discoursed, concerning the weakness of Humane Ʋnderstanding. The manner of God's speaking to Men in old time, and at present. The Ex∣cellencies of the H. Scripture. How R. Catholicks, live in Protestant Coun∣tries, and Protestants in those of R. Catholicks. Of turning from one Reli∣gion to another. Of those, who relinquish the Church wherein they were born, and know not for what reason. The promiscuous admission of Doctors in the Ʋniversitie of Valenza, applyed by a Protestant Preacher in discourse with a R. Catholick. Of some Missionary Priests who receive licentious per∣sons for Converts. What answers the Priests and Friars of Italy make to their Superiors, when these go about to punish their Miscarriages. An Ex∣ample of a certain Florentine who went to Geneva to change his Religion. Another of a Neapolitane, to the same purpose. Of those Missionary Priests who buy their Faculty of Mission from some Courtier at Rome. What reme∣dy is requisite in these matters. Of the Protestant Ministers who are con∣tented to live in their Pastoral charge, without thrusting themselves into
matters of State. Of Liberty of Conscience, so much talk'd of amongst Chri∣stians. What Authority the Emperors and Magistrates, had over Church-men in the Primitive times. In what particulars the several parties of Christian Professors lament their miseries in these dayes. Of the zeal of Princes towards their Subjects. What Effect the Magistrate's diligence in visiting the people's Actions produceth. Of the neglect of Princes in observing the wayes and proceedings of Church-men. How the respect given antiently by the people to Princes and Magistrates, differs from what is given to them at this day. Of Church-men who assume authority to pry into the actions of Soveraign Princes. A Parallel between the Princes and people in reference to the Exercise of Religion. Of the Policy of Church-men, how exquisite to preserve their Grandeur. Some Examples of Preachers as to the matter of Ecclesiastical Grandeur. Of the disaffection of Ecclesiasticks to the Soveraign∣ty of Princes. Of some Differences wont to arise between R. Catholicks, and Protestants, in the Elections of Preachers. The Example of Moses, ap∣pointed a Preacher to Pharoah. Of the Vigilance of France in maintaining the Gallicane Rites. Of a Book printed at Rome in diminution of the Sove∣raignty of Princes. The Jesuites question'd by the Parliament of Paris, con∣cerning the Impression of the said Book. Their Answer to the Parliament. The great Devotion of the Venetians to the service of God, and the preserva∣tion of their Liberties and Privileges. Of some pretendedly scrupulous, wh blame the Venetians for being too jealous of their Soveraignty. Of the danger wherein all Princes would be, were it not for the resistance which France and Venice make to the ambition of Church-men. Of some discourses concerning the Authority of the Pope. Of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical and Temporal compared together. What effects the Excommunication of the Venetians by Paul V. produc'd to the Church. Of the blame those Popes in∣curr, who by their Excommunications, forbid Subjects to obey their Natural Princes. What Obedience both people and Magistrates owe to the Pope. The Opinion of a Dominican Divine. The heady Opinions of the Roman Divines concerning the Popes Authority. The subjection of such Princes as are con∣strained by the Pope to obey the caprichio of those Divines who write accom∣modately to the Pope's humour. How easily the Popes may Excommunicate Soveraign Princes, and what mischief that easiness produceth. How the Popes deal with Princes who have deserv'd well of the Church. The chief causes which mov'd Paul V. and Urban VIII. to thunder out Excommuni∣cations against the Venetians, the Commonwealth of Lucca, and the Duke of Parma. In what manner the Pope ought to be honour'd by Princes and their people. Of the difference betwixt being of the Church in the dayes of the Apostles, and now. Of the effects wrought in the persons of Popes by the H. Ghost. Of the Offences arising daily between Popes and Princes, by reason of the misdemeanours of Churchmen. VVhat great fear Popes of the Primi∣tive Church had of falling into any Error prejudicial to the publick good of Christendome. How little now adayes they regard the Ʋniversal Good. Of the great zeal wherewith of old they exercis'd their Pastoral charge. VVhat Esteem all people had of Popes in consideration of their holy Lives. VVhat kind of persons ascend the Papal Throne in these times. VVhat persecutions they suffer, who either by tongue or pen, reprove the faults of Popes and
Churchmen. Of the praises attributed to the Popes by some writers. Of the Flatteries which sound well in the Popes ears. Of those who are look'd upon well or ill by the Pope. Of those who write of the Pope's Impeccability. Sme Reasons and Instances proving the Pope fallible like other men. Some Conclusions and Disputes maintain'd at Paris by the Jesuits in defence of the Popes power and Infallibility. The cause why Popes are deficient in Mira∣cles. The corruption of the Age. Some deserving persons kept farr from the Court. Of the scandals committed by Churchmen in Rome. Of a Bull of Boniface VIII. Of an Opinion written by John XXII. VVhat was the judgement of Paul II. concerning the Infallibility of the Pope. Of a Book written by Pope Adrian VI. The Error Princes commit in suffering publick disputes touching the Popes Infallibility to be held in their Dominions. Of some disgusts given by Alexander VII. to the most Christian King. A Bull put forth by the said Alexander against some Decrees of the Parliament of Paris which rejected the Popes Infallibility. The censure of the Faculty of Sorbonne of writings which defended the Papal Infallibity. Of Odoardo Farness Duke of Parma, who of a friend became an Enemy to Urban. VVhat the Author thinks the Pope conceives of him. The Popes desire that no Pens were in the world, but those which write in their favour. Of the Rodomontadoes which the Roman Theologues write in magnification of the Pope. The Opinion of a certain Theologue, That a Pope cannot be damn'd though never so wicked. The Impeccability of the Pope which the Jesuits begin to teach. Of the Opinion of those who hold the Pope not subject to Ge∣neral Councils. Of the Title of Eternity which some Flatterers would apply to the person of the Pope. The Obligation of people to reverence and honour the Popes whilst they are good, and to blame and avoid them, when they are wicked. Divers other particulars touching the Popes Grandeur. THE dulness of Humane Understanding renders us uncapable of com∣prehending the mysterious conduct of Divine Providence, whose Counsels and Designs are as to us involv'd in a most profound night of impenetrable Obscurity. The Apostle St. Paul, after a Transport even into the third Heaven, gives this plain Advice to Inquisitive Spirits, Non plus sapere quam oportet sapere, sed sapere ad sobrietatem. Which Doctrine, if receiv'd by the more speculative sort of Christi∣ans, with the same lowliness of mind wherewith the Apostle writ it, would undoubtedly free the minds of men bewildred in those perplexities wherein even the most learned have been inextricably intangled by too nice and curious Contem∣plation. But so deeply rooted in our Nature is the Insatiate Desire of Knowledge, that we are continually climbing above our own Level, though, besides the trouble of the Endea∣deavour, we run a hazard of falling from the Precipice, and of loosing the eyes of our minds, by tyring them in a prospect of things Invisible. Nature hath allotted to Birds a light body fit for flying; to Oxen a heavy one accom∣modate to the slower motion of progression; the former being design'd to adorn the Re∣gion of the Air, and the latter for Labour and Service on the Earth. Mankind, not content to enjoy the Measure of Understanding given them by Divine Providence, seek to raise their heavy clods beyond their assigned Sphere by speculations of things incomprehensible, as if it were free for them to out-do Nature, and make a new Creation of Spirits. Many admire, and amidst the confusions of their admiration, ask why God speaks no
more to men since the Incarnation of our Saviour, as he did in old time to the Israelites? But for my part I wonder more, that Men in these times cannot understand the Language of God as the Israelites did in times past; and this wonder makes me sometimes pour out very pathetical complaints. To the Israelites God spoke seldome; few were the words; and many times 'twas on the tops of very high Mountains, from amidst thick Clouds, and darkness; some∣times in profound sleeps, cloath'd with Robes of invisible Air, and sometimes with a Voice only deliver'd by some Celestal Messenger. Now this Seldomness enhanc'd the wonder and Surprise in the Israelites themselves, whilst they observ'd how they were fa∣vour'd at times and places by measure and proportion; and they were not a little proud of these favours. Those who doubt at present whether it be true that God speaks no more to Men, have all the reason of the world to change that doubting thought, if they will but seriously consider that God speaks now, not from Mountains but from Pulpits, not by Night but by Day, not in Sleep but to men Awake, not in the Air but in the Church, not seldome but often, not at some definite times but continually: So that if they hear him not, they are either deaf to the Voice of God, or else nautiateth the great plenty of Celestial favours. The Israelites boasted that God writ the Divine Law in Tables of Stone, in order to the better preservation of the same; and why should not Christians glory of the H. Charter written by the Apostles and Evangelists, by the assistance of the H. Ghost, for the propagation of Christianity? God Almighty writes every day in Characters so legible, that those who cannot read them, may deservedly be called blind. But, which is worst, those that are thus blind, are the very same that take up a belief, that in these dayes God neither speaks nor writes, as he did in former Ages. Whoso would understand the Divine Speakings, and Desires to read the Characters of Heaven, let him not be at distance with the H. Scripture, inasmuch as this is the Key of Paradise, and the H. Ghost hath left the same to us, to declare to men what the Lan∣guage of Heaven is in the New Testament. The H. Scripture is the Book wherein God spoke to the Israelites, and speaks still to Christians. And 'tis so replete with sweet expressions, and wholsome discourses, that 'tis not possible to go away hungry from so plentiful a Table, nor sick from so efficaci∣cious a Medicine. That wretched Impostor Mahomet, who to blind others made himself blind, forbad the Translation of the H. Scripture into the Turkish Language under severe penalties, as doubting lest the Doctrine thereof being so pure and holy as it is, should purifie and sanctifie the minds of such as should read it: And the Roman Church permit it not in any other Language but the Latin, as if the Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets, had writ∣ten for a few, and not for all men, for some peculiar persons, and not for the Universal Church. Where can Christians of all sorts and conditions better spend the most precious Laws of the day, where refresh themselves in afflictions, where enrich themselves in poverty, than in reading of the Volume of Divine Laws. The Political Books of the Heathens, which contain nothing but Secular Maximes, cannot furnish us with other than Worldly Knowledge; But the H. Volume which de∣scended from Heaven brings Celestial Instruction with it, whence those that read the same with great ardor, find consolation in it amidst their greatest calamities end miseries. The holy, pure, clean, and simple Doctrines of Christian Religion give solace, and comfort not only the most ignorant who live by direction, but even the most learned, who give directions to others; or to express my self better, they refresh and relieve not only the most learned who teach, but even the most ignorant who are taught. The Catholicks think to be sav'd by going to Mas, and the Hereticks by hearing Sermons. Some of these to appear good Christians, read the H. Scripture, sing Psalms, and say Grace at Table; and divers Catholicks make Confessions to a Priest, go in Pilgrimage, and receive Indulgences; and all this to avoid being pointed at by others, by which manner of living they intimate the difference of Religion consists in
nothing but in an outward and (as I may say) constrain'd appearance. The Protestants deny not but that there are many in their Communion, who lead Atheistical Lives, making every thing lawful to themselves, and stretching liberty of Conscience, to a liberty of Sinning: So likewise the Catholicks confess that many of themselves too, live as if there were neither God nor Christ, nor Law, nor Faith in the World. In this matter of Religion I find one Evil of which the Catholicks are more to be blam'd than the Protestants themselves, and 'tis this: When Catholicks go into the Country of Protestants, they not only accommodate themselves to live with the liberty of the place, but assume a greater liberty of Conscience, and abstain as well from some Exercises of Religion which are not forbidden, as from such as are. In like manner the Protestants in Catholick Countries, not only abstain from reading the H. Scripture, singing of Psalms, and frequenting Sermons, but besides making a medley of Omissions, they forbear to pay their Devotions to Almighty God, both when they go to sleep in the Evening, or rise from bed in the Morning. 'Tis true, the Pro∣testants well knowing the extreme rigor of the Inquisition, find themselves necessitated to dissemble their Religion for avoiding the anger of men, whereas the Catholicks ha∣ving greater liberty in Protestant Countries wherein they find no such rigour against themselves, grow careless of their Religious Observances, insomuch that many times they will ask for good Capons on Friday or Saturday, although they may have plenty of good Fish. If you ask a Catholick why he commits such faults as these, he presently answers you, Dum fueris Romae, &c. Whilst one is at Rome, one must live as they do there, out of Rome, as in other places. Nor are the Protestants unprovided of the same answer when they reside in Catholick Countries, And this is the miserable case of Religion. Yet I will not pronounce this Depravation general, because I have known many Catho∣licks live with great modesty, and exemplary piety, in the Countries of Protestants, as do also many of these in the Countries of Catholicks, insomuch that many Catholicks do very much approve of, and are edifi'd with the manner of living of the Protestants, and these likewise with theirs; but they are such Catholicks and Protestants as have not study'd the abovemention'd Axiom of Rome. This last Easter I saw a certain Catholick, a friend of mine, in a Protestant Country, and asking him why he went not to Mass which was celebrated not above a mile off, he answer'd me, That when he Travell'd, he carry'd no Religion at all along with him. Which a Protestant, who was present, over-hearing, reply'd, You are a gallant man, I take the same course. But in my judgement, the thing most to be consider'd concerning this point of Religi∣on, is the dayly transition and change of Christians from the Catholick to the Pro∣testant Church, and from the Protestant to the Catholick; and this by persons who oftentimes know not the cause either why they leave the one or embrace the other; but run like Goats up a precipice, whilst they behold others fall down from it at the same time: Yea some Christians have left the Religion wherein they were born, to take up another, in which they know not whether it will be fit for them to dye or no; inasmuch as they go upon no other account, but the seeing others go before them. Nor is it an extravagante to compare such Christians to Brutes, since there is no greater Brute than that man who lives without the Instructions of Religion, without knowing the Obliga∣tions of Christianity; or the duty of his own Conscience. The Protestants are so easie to admit those that leave the Catholick Church to em∣brace theirs, they receive them so blindly sometimes in some places, that they do not so much as examine them concerning the Principal Grounds, and the Essential parts of the Christian Faith. I know not whether they do thus, as judging it better than to leave the Sheep to wander in the Desart, or else to populate their Church the more: but 'tis cer∣tain that for the most part they find themselves deceiv'd, by receiving ravenous Wolves instead of gentle Lambs. Being at first not a little scandalis'd at such stories, I had the curiosity to enquire the reason of this slight proceeding, in a matter of so great impor∣tance, from a Protestant Minister, who answer'd me in the following words, Sir, We do
like them in the College of Valenza in France, who give the Doctoral Cap even to Asses, sub spe futuri Studii. But 'tis true being now adayes well aware of this Error, lest they should be mistaken in Wolves, they let go the Lambs also; or at least they turn and wind them so about with multiplicity of questions, that they cool their desire of change∣ing their Fold. On the other side, the Catholicks not only readily receive both Wolves and Lambs, but moreover they endeavour to draw from the Protestant Flock the most infected Ani∣mals of all, by promising them gifts and presents with a large hand, in order to compass the more easily the end of their purpose: and because Wolves commonly run with a more greedy appetite to the prey than Lambs, by this means they get Wolves and not Sheep, who after they have devour'd the prey, return back to their first Herd more sa∣vage than before. There are some Missionary Priests (for I except those who are full of true zeal) who admit to the Catholick Religion, any wild-headed, indocible, and debauch'd persons, who think of nothing less than of leading a Christian life; and so likewise some Protestant Ministers (I speak with reverence to the good) who receive to their Communion such people, as have nothing of Man besides the shape, being otherwise, as to what con∣cerns the Conscience and Soul, Devils incarnate. I could here insert a Story as long as curious on this occasion, and demonstate by good proofs and examples, the Errors which the Catholicks commit in forcing Protestants to change their Religion; and likewise the failings of Protestants in receiving amongst them fugitive Catholicks. But I have neither will nor time to rub the soars of the one or the other; only, it would be great Prudence and Charity in both parties to use greater cir∣cumspection, and to have their eyes a little more open, that Christianity might not be subverted by Hypocrisie, and the Lambs expos'd to the discretion of the Wolves. In Italy, accounted the soundest part of Christendom, yea in Rome it self, and the Pa∣pal Dominions, Bishops and Superiors of Monastick Orders, have indeed the title of Masters, but scarce any power to correct any of their refractory Subjects; for no sooner are reproofs us'd towards them, but the Scandalous Priests and Friers, have a common custom to retort insolently these express threatnings to their Superiors, Per Dio, per Dio, che me ne andero a fare Heretico; I will turn Heretick. But these Varlets often∣times find themselves deceiv'd, for the Hereticks sift them so much, and examine them so with multitude of questions, that they make the Fugitives themselves confess the cause of their flight; after which confession, they find themselves oblig'd not without great shame, to return back with more hast than they departed, I say not from their Religion (because such wretches know not what Religion is) but from their Country; for proof of which, it will not be amiss to subjoyn here a short, but very true and fresh instance. A certain Italian who affirm'd himself born of one of the most Eminent Families of Tuscany, (although his garb spoke him rathera Hedge-bird, having nothing but the Im∣pudence of a Fryar, and the pronuntiation of a Florentine) I know not out of what Ca∣prichio, took a resolution to relinquish the Catholick Religion, to no other end, but to go to Geneva, and live there (as he said) like a very good Heretick. Being arriv'd at Geneva, he imparted his purpose to a certain man there, who might indeed have claim'd alliance with him, for he was not inferior to the most subtle Snap of Siena. After some discourse and questions concerning his resolution, the Inhabitant of Geneva ask'd this new-commer, What Art he was skill'd in whereby to get a Subsistence after his Conversion? The honest Italian answer'd him boldly, That his intention was to live like an honest man. The Protestant smil'd, as well understanding his meaning; nevertheless he made as if he understood him not, (as indeed he did not in that manner wherein he explain'd him∣self to him afterwards) and therefore he intreated him to declare himself more openly and in plain words, what he meant by living like an honest man. The other with a face more impudent than before, thinking to acquit himself well, and to oblige, not only the Protestant with whom he talk'd, but the whole City, (and perhaps too hoping to receive some present before-hand) answer'd him in the following words.
Sir, I resided eighteen years at Venice, in which City I liv'd alwayes like an honest man. My peculiar and most frequent imployment was to serve my friends, by killing sometimes one at the request of another, and sometimes cudgelling such or such a man at the instance of this or the other. My pay was not great; for commonly I took but ten Crowns for killing a man, and five for giving one the Bastinado. But this practice of mine being by my envi∣ous Enemies signifi'd to the Councel of Ten, order was issu'd forth for my Imprisonment. Whereupon I found great difficulty to escape the hands of the Officers, who together with se∣veral of my ill-willers, search'd for me in all the places where I us'd to practice. But to secure my person from a Persecution so dangerous to my life, I determin'd to leave not only Venice and Italy, but likewise the Catholick Religion, and to embrace Heresie, it being to me a thing indifferent to live a Catholick or Heretick. Now therefore if you will do me the honour to receive me into this City, I promise to keep my self alwayes in the estate of a gal∣lant man, with the same employment: and I shall say further, and engage my word for it, that I will practise here at far cheaper rates; for whereas at Venice I us'd to kill a man for ten Crowns, I will kill a man in this City for five, and give the Bastinado to any Body for a single Crown. And thus having an imployment of my own, it will be no hard matter for me to maintain my self, and live like an honest man. The Protestant amaz'd hereat, remain'd a while in a manner out of himself, and took himself to be rather in a dream than awake: till after some space for recollection, he fell to consider the Orator with a more heedfull eye, and observing that his whole outside gave confirmation that he was really such a Varlet as his discourse had pourtray'd him, he gently took up the fold of his Coat, and smelling to it between jest and indignation, he said to him, my good friend, you smell strong of the Gallows, and I shall tell you further, that if the Senate receive any intimation of your quality, they will soon create you a Knight of the Hempen Cord, and not fail to give you a passport to the Gallows, whether such gallant fellows are wont to be sent by the Justice of this place. At the hearing of these words of the Protestant, the blood became frozen in the veins of the Florentine, who lik'd not such Honours for the Commonwealth of Geneva: and if at first he thought to make his fortune by discovering his Profession, he now fell down trembling at the feet of the Protestant, praying him with tears not to discover him, and telling him that he was resolv'd to depart the Town; whereupon the Protestant yielding to his request, he made such hast out of Geneva, that he went not back to the Inn to fetch his Portmantle, which 'tis likely the Host keeps to this day, though I believe but little worth. Another not unlike Example, I will likewise set down with brevity, because more fresh than the other. It came into the head of a certain Neapolitan to change his Religi∣on, although he had never liv'd in Italy with the appearance of any at all. To which purpose he went to Geneva, where at his arrival, inquiring for somebody that under∣stood Italian well, his Host conducted him to the same Protestant mention'd in the above∣mentioned Story of the Florentine. After some common Ceremonies, the Protestant ask'd him concerning his quality, and what cause had brought him thither. To the first question, the Neapolitan answer'd that he was the Son of the Duke della Noce: and indeed his hands look'd as if they had been employ'd in pilling Wallnuts. And to the second, he answer'd that he had left Italy out of an humour, having a fancy to try his fortune in another Climate, and to live in a travelling way without being oblig'd to go to Mass; and in brief he declar'd that he had good inspirations to become a Heretick, and was firmly resolv'd upon it; and therefore desir'd counsell and assistance in the matter. Whilst these two persons were talking together, the Bell chim'd to Church, where∣upon the Protestant took leave in order to go to the Sermon; at which the Neapolitan amaz'd, said to him, to the Sermon? Why, do they believe a God in this City? The Ge∣nevese laugh'd at the ignorance of the man, or rather the impiety of the Beast, and re∣ply'd, Did you leave your Country, Sir, to go and live in some place where God is not ac∣knowledg'd? If so, for my part I advise you to recommend your self to the Devil; for there is no other place but Hell wherein there is not a God and some Religion profess'd. But in earnest I shall give you the counsel of a Friend, which is, to lose no time but get out of
the Town as soon as possibly you can: Otherwise, you will be made to understand at the Gal∣lows what punishment they deserve who speak in the manner as you do. The poor Neapoli∣tan terrifi'd at this language, was not slow to take his leave, but presently ran away on foot, lest it might be too much loss of precious time to fetch his horse; so great was his fear of being discover'd and brought under a tryal of dangerous questions. From hence one may easily gather what reason there is to deplore the calamitous state of both Religions, or rather the wretchedness of both sorts of Professors, who live without knowing the true obligations and duties of Christian Life. 'Tis true, the Examples of this nature are more numerous in the Catholick Church, in regard of the greater multitude of Protestant Fugitives. And I know a certain Pro∣testant who keeps above half a dozen Letters of a certain Missionary Father, which con∣tain the agreement made between them, the sum which the Missionary offer'd, and that which the Protestant demanded, to leave his own, Religion, and embrace the Roman Church. This indeed is the practice of certain ignorant Missionaries, who buy Missions of some Servant of the Cardinal who is Head of the Congregation de Propaganda fide, and think by shewing a long list of Hereticks converted by their means to obtain of the Roman Court, not only Bishopricks and Masterships, but even Cardinalships too. But those Missionaries who have wit in their heads, and zeal in their hearts, go in another road, and do things with more maturity of judgement. For remedy of such disorders as these, 'twere fit some persons of authority had in∣spection into the promoting of Religion; otherwise, the ordinary Clergymen, either through ignorance, passion, or humour, spoil all, break a sunder what ought to be joyn'd together, and joyn what ought to be separated, and bring things into confusion and ruine. The Roman Church having resolv'd to assume to its self both a Spiritual and a Tempo∣ral Dominion, and to make Cardinals precede Princes, and Priests Magistrates, hath thought fit for the more easie preservation of its Grandeur, that not only the Cardinals, but the Priests too, should keep up a certain Majesty and eminent decorum, which in∣tention been so diligently pursu'd, that they run even into excess; without which ex∣cess,, I believe things would not proceed so agreeably to their humour. On the other side the Protestants, that is to say, the Ministers and Ecclesiastical Pastors, for the better preserving their Religion in its due decorum, are contented to live with modesty suitable to their Pastoral Charge, that is, to administer the Sacraments, to Preach, to visit the Sick, to instruct the people in the power of the H. Scripture, re∣ferring Command, Authority, Temporal Dominion, and even the Protection of Reli∣gion to the secular arm of Magistrates and Princes; and teaching all to know, by proofs both Holy and Political▪ the Preheminence of the Majesty of Soveraigns above the Ju∣risdiction Ecclesiastical, and the obligation incumbent upon Ecclesiasticks to obey the Temporal Power. And indeed the Protestant Religion flourishes more, and shines with more decency in those places where the Magistrates and Secular Governours have their eyes most open over the people, taking cognisance of their actions, not only so far as concerns the duty of a Subject towards his Prince; but also in reference to Spiritual matters; and this not only by the assistance of the Pastors, but also by their own proper office, which suffers not any to exercise their Spiritual Function, but by derivative power from the Magistrate; as he that is chosen by God to preside in the midst of his people, to the end they may not run headlong without such a stay and guide, into irremediable and dan∣gerous errors. The Magistrates and Princes study and endeavour, as much as possibly, to advance their Soveraignty more and more above the Jurisdiction of Churchmen, but these, aware of the design which might prejudice their independency, are not asleep in the mean time, but strive not only to preserve, but likewise to promote their jurisdiction beyond what they have already, if it be possible: and they would effect it, did not Princes and Magistrates make use of Policy, whereby without prejudicing the Church's Interests, they restrain the ambition, which in these dayes seems natural to all the Churchmen of the world; to say no more.
The Ecclesiasticks, who take it in disdain when they see Magistrates intermeddle with their Assemblies, the Elections to Spiritual Charges, and the Orders of Spiritual Functions, have no reason at all to complain of a thing so reasonable; because, to speak truth, Churchmen are in these dayes so farr respected by the people, as the Magistrates cause them to be respected by their secular power; and the people are so farr inflam'd with zeal for their own Religion, as they see the Magistrate zealous for it, and the pre∣servation of the Common Liberty. For my part, I firmly believe, there can be no better course to destroy the Protestant Religion, than to sow discord between the Clergy and the Magistrate, and to bring it to pass that the Ecclesiasticks not contented with the degree and limits of their proper charge, may rise against the Princes and Governours; an instance whereof is to be seen in a certain Kingdom, which perhaps bewails the effects of that Policy even to this day. But the thing were impossible in these times, inasmuch as the Magistrates well aware of the project, have provided remedies against it in such sort, that the Churchmen glory in their Loyalty and Obedience towards them, if for no other reason; yet at least to avoid the involving of Religion in some Schism, or other, and the bringing of themselves into a Labyrinth, hard to get out of, without first undergoing the consequences wont to ar∣rive upon civil broils. In short, the Roman Religion continues such as it is, (that is, good for the Church∣men, and bad for the Laity) on this account, that the Ecclesiasticks make use of an ab∣solute and independent authority in Spirituals, and very much likewise in Temporals: and on the contrary, the Protestant Religion is so far Protestant, as the Magistrates have the supremacy both in Spirituals and Temporals. If Liberty of Conscience, (which is so much talk'd of amongst the Protestants, and the principal point of the Reformation) should any wise come to be molested by the Supreme Authority, upon the Ecclesiasticks ambition and invasion of the same, there would no longer be a Liberty, but a Slavery: for People seeing themselves commanded by the Ecclesiasticks, would think their Consciences enslav'd, and not free; it being proper to Churchmen to proceed with too much Zeal, or too much Ambition, and to be displeas'd when they see that they are not obey'd like Angels, although in their com∣manding, they remember not that themselves are but men. And indeed the Protestants desire to serve God, not according to the Orders and Pre∣cepts of men, but according to the Divine Laws registred in the H. Scripture, which they daily read in their Assemblies publick and private; and therefore they reverence their Ministers, as men who are contented to preach, without commanding. The Protestants doubt, I conceive, lest the Ecclesiasticks being addicted to study and speculation, in case the Supreme Authority should be united in them, they would reverse the old Model which is Christs, and impose a new one upon them of their own, and of a plain Ecclesiastical Ordinance, make a new Divine Precept: and therefore they▪ are very well pleas'd to see the Magistrate use such great care and diligence for the pre∣servation of that Religion which they pretend to be of Divine Institution without any ad∣ditions of humane invention, although the Catholicks accuse them of pinning their Faith upon Luther and Calvin; which is false; for neither Luther not Calvin instituted any new Religion. The Catholick Religion (or rather the Roman, as we call it) in the Primitive times, when the piety of Pastors was as conspicuous to their Flock, as the Sun, went al∣most in the same order, whilst the Emperors manag'd Ecclesiastical Elections, and the Magistrates not only preceeded the Churchmen, but besides in case of deficience, oblig'd them to their duty, and constrain'd them to be diligent in feeding the flock of Christ with Charity; yea they permitted them not to exercise any publick Function, but in the pre∣sence of their Deputies, and oftentimes ordain'd that businesses of the Church should not be handled in any other Assemblies but their own Councils, whereunto such Bishops were call'd, as were esteemed necessary and fit for regulating sacred matters. The terror which Tyrannical Emperors spread abroad in the world, so aw'd the Ec∣clesiasticks, that lest they should see Christianity extinguish'd, they humbled themselves to very Tyrants, judging it better to overcome by humility; than to break by pride.
They humbled themselves to good Emperors likewise, because they saw them zealous in defence of the Faith, and the propagation of the name of Christ; and therefore they scrupled not to engage them in the care and Spiritual Government of the Church, to the end the interest of Christian Religion might have the more strength and Majesty. This Correspondence and Union of Secular and Spiritual Power, of Magistrate and Priest, Prince and Bishop, not only kept the Laity in awe, but oblig'd them to a prompt Obedience; the Subject being not a little edifi'd by seeing his Soveraign interessed in the Government of the Christian Religion. And indeed how could it be otherwise, but that the Prince's zeal should produce great ardour and affection in the Breasts of the people? For generally the Subject bears a cer∣tain occult hatred (yet not so occult, but that it is discernable) against the Majesty whereunto he is subordinate; which hatred is suppress'd either by force of the Sword, or by reciprocal Affection and Love, which is the less durable when it is not deeply rooted; and therefore 'tis expedient for a Prince to know with what kind of love his people is to be oblig'd, in order to the extinguishing of that hatred which seems natural∣ly seated in their breasts. Now what greater instance of love and benignity can a Prince show to his Subjects, or a Magistrate to his Citizens, than to declare himself zealous, not only in preserving of their privileges, abstaining from lading them with impositions and taxes, dispensing fa∣vours liberally, executing justice impartially, honouring the well-deserving, and pu∣nishing the guilty, but also in watching, that together with external privileges, they may enjoy those of the Soul inviolate, which are alwayes the dearest to the Commonal∣ty, and consequently aptest to cause in them good or ill sentiments towards those who carefully protect them, or supinely betray them. There is no people in the world so barbarous, but they rejoyce more to see their Re∣ligion, which concerns the good of their Souls, zealously and vigorously maintain'd, than the privileges of the State which referr only to the commodity of the Body; and 'tis certain that a people is more sensible of injuries done to their Consciences, than of the spoiling of their goods, which are nothing but corruptible things, whose value de∣pends much upon humane fancy and avarice. Those popular Revolutions are easie to be quieted which arise from the grievances and Taxes laid by Princes upon their Subjects; for when these impositions are taken away, the arms fall out of the hands of the incensed multitude. Whereof we have seen sundry Examples in our times, particularly in the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily, and the Dutchy of Milan. But when the Subject draws his Sword against his Prince, or the Citizen against the Magistrate, upon account of Religion, 'tis a hard matter, if not im∣possible, to appease the tumult; because in this case, his Soul is engag'd, and sets his hands on work: and suppose the Prince should promise to yield to the demands of the people, they will scarce take his word. And indeed 'tis a common saying, That the wounds given to the Conscience in matter of Religion, are hardly to be cur'd by the same hand that inflicted them. I find that two effects are produc'd by the diligence of a Prince or Magistrate, in taking good heed to the deportment of Churchmen, and to the preservation of the Laws and Ordinances of Religion. First it increases the people's devotion towards the service of God, and kindles more ardour in their breasts to frequent the Sacraments; and this by virtue of their Superiors example: so that when Subjects behold their Princes full of zeal, and vigilant for the good of their souls, they become so inamor'd on them, that in requital, they would even spend their blood for the service of their Princes: which is for the advantage of the Prince, as well of the people. And 'tis certain, that 'tis more easie for a Soveragin, who takes care for preserving the Laws and Religion, to obtain supplies of mony from his people, than for another Prince, who thinks of nothing less, than of Religion. The second effect is, That the spiritual service of the Church is carried on with better order, and the number of pious Souls is alwayes more multiply'd, when Churchmen find that Princes keep an eye upon them; and for the fear of being corrected in case of deviating from their duty, makes them bestirr themselves to perform their charge with
all imaginable zeal and diligence, and if they be not really religious, yet they become wary of being accounted scandalous or negligent. Not but that they are of a nature weak and apt to fall into great miscarriages; but they know that they are under the Ma∣gistrates eye, and feel his goad at their sides, which keeps them both from tripping and jading. And to speak truth, if we compare the present obedience and respect that is paid by Subjects, to their Princes and Magistrates, with the alacrity of former times, we shall find the present to come much short, and in probability too unlikely to continue; so as (there being great Armies in some places, and strong Cittadels and Fortification in others to keep them in subjection) I am of opinion that that reverence the Princes re∣ceive, is not radicated in the heart of the Subject, but proceeding as it were ab extra, may more properly be reckon'd the policy of the Prince, than the affection or good na∣ture of the Subject. For my part, I believe (and have many others of the same faith with me) that the respect, obedience, honor, and affection, the people of this Age do bear to their Ma∣gistrates, is either forc'd or miraculous. Forc'd, because the Princes understanding their own Power and Supremacy, or (to speak more properly) knowing the humour of the people very little inclining to obedience, they do either actually force them by the power of their Arms, or fright and terrifie them into an unwilling allegiance. Miracu∣lous, because Religion having naturally the strongest influence upon the People, there is nothing moves and actuates them like that, either into tumult or obedience. So as the Magistrate interrupting, and even opposing that zeal and fervour of Religion the Layity ought to enjoy as freely as the Ecclesiasticks, no wonder if their obedience be a Miracle. A great reason is, that the Ecclesiasticks are permitted to pry and peep into the acti∣ons of Princes and Magistrates: To have a finger and intelligence in the most secret Se∣cular Councel, which in reason they ought not to come near; that the Secular Magi∣strate may (for the greater benefit of the people) have an eye over the actions of the Ecclesiasticks, and an inspection into all things transacted in their Consistories and Con∣gregations, which they hold now so privately, the Civil Magistrate can scarce know whether it be matter of Religion that is before them, or whether they be contriving, if not the destruction, at least the subduction of the Temporal Power to the Spiritual. In some places these Princes do not only neglect the concerns of their own Conscien∣ces, but are much more incurious of regarding, visiting, or giving out seasonable or∣ders, that the Sacred and Religious offices might be administred with decency and deco∣rum, and that the Religion profess'd by the people might not suffer by the Critticismes or Speculations of any Malancholly Divine. But the people observing their neglect or aversion to all this, cannot be brought easily to believe that their Princes are of the Re∣ligion they profess themselves, it being impossible (in their judgements) that they who receiv'd their Authority immediately from Heaven, should be so forgetful in their returns, and so careless in matters of Devotion. But that which is most scandalous and blame-worthy now is, that the people do not well understand whether they be to comport themselves with more Veneration towards their Bishop, or towards their Prince, towards their Ecclesiastical Governours, or to∣wards their Civil, for the people observing their Princes driving only at their own In∣terest, the ostentation of their Court, the augmentation of their Revenue, and the ad∣vancement of their power, and (in things relating to the benefit and conservation of the Church) too careless and remiss. And beholding the Bishop on the other side, with his Clergy, reforming this Statute and that, commanding Processions, renewing of Orders, introducing of Ceremonies as he pleases, assembling, excommunicating, and in short, manifesting himself not only a Minister, but a Patron and Defender of Religion, they are perswaded, that as the Soul is to be considered before the body, so their Bishop, whose Office it is to respect the profit and salvation of that, ought in reason to have more Re∣verence than the Prince that regards only what belongs to the body. To speak impartially and without passion: what is it these Princes do in their Domi∣nions as to matters of Religion? They go to Mass on Sundays, and their Subjects do as much; They hear Sermons in Lent, and their Subjects do the same; They receive In∣dulgencies;
They Worship the Altar, They profess themselves sons of the Church, their Subjects do no otherwise; They are afraid of being Excommunicated as their Sub∣jects are; They regard not what is done in the Ecclesiastical Synods or Assemblies, and their Subject; are as indifferent as they. How therefore can the people respect their Princes, whilst their Princes behave themselves no otherwise, or how can they have any care of their Princes, whilst their Princes are so careless of themselves. If a Prince should seem zealous to his Subjects, and watchfull over the safety of his people, and with his whole power to intend the Government of the Church, the pro∣pagation of Religion, showing his care and solicitude as well in Ecclesiastical Councels, as in Civil, or at least advising and consulting with the Bishop in the administration of such things as are necessary for the Regiment and well Ordering of the Church. It is most certain, that as such a Bishop as should incite him, and put him forward in so good a design, would with just reason receive great reverence from the people, so such a Prince would receive likewise no less honor from them, and be esteem'd their Lord in their Temporals and Spirituals. The Policy of the Churchmen has in all ages been very considerable, but for these two or three hundred years last past, it has been very much augmented, to the prejudice and diminution of the Civil Authority, against which the Ecclesiasticks do principally direct their designs. And there is one thing that still perplexes the hearts and spirits of the wi∣sest States-men, which is, that four little, ragged, inconsiderable Priests, should by their cunning and industry advance themselves to that height, to set their naked feet up∣on the Crown'd heads of Monarchs, whilst the whole force of their Dominions was too weak to defend their Supremacy, or to preserve them from the arrogance of the Clergy. And indeed so industrious have they been in the maintenance of their Grandeur and Majesty, and making themselves considerable in the World, that they have introduc'd several great Dignities into the Church, as Abbats, Bishops, Arch-bishops, Patriarchs, and at last Cardinals, which is a degree so high, that the greatest Princes in Christen∣dome do not only glory in their correspondence, but express a kind of reverence and awe they have for them whilst they give them preceedence, and receive them into their Do∣minions as if they were Crown'd Kings, and not Persons Ministerial and Subservient in the Church. Nor indeed is the respect they give them improper or inexcusable, the Cardinals be∣ing not only great and magnificent, and acknowledg'd of principal dignity in the Church of Rome, but (which is above all) Electors of the Pope, who is one of the greatest Mo∣narchs in Christendom. Yet that which astonishes me most is, that both the Historians and Priests of the Ro∣man Church are not asham'd, with their pens, as well as tongues, to inculcate into the people a business so repugnant to the reputation and right of Supremacy in Princes; a thing I cannot think of without some trouble and regret, though indeed matters of that nature are fitter to be laugh'd at than otherwise. Baronius, Peter de Prisse the Sorbonist, Gabriel Biel, Azolinus, Caluus, Cadana, and others, maintain that the Hierarchy and Divinity are of the same nature. That the Priests are more great than the Angels or Virgin Mary, and that Kings are oblig'd to give them preceedence, as the first born of the Kingdom of Heaven. In the great Church at Florence, where the Great Duke himself was present, it is not many years since, I heard a certain wooden footed Frier Preach, Orator good enough, and of the Order of St. Francis. His Text was, Super Cathedram Mosis sederunt Scribae & Pharisaei. The Scribes and the Pharisees sat in Moses Chair. which he apply'd on∣ly to the Sacerdotal Office, and had the day before invited his Highness thither, to ob∣lige him (perhaps) to believe those impertinent time-spenders, the Priests, and the Fri∣ers, and such other raffle, to be such as he should perswade him in his Pulpit. The sum of all was, this excellent Orator insisted much upon the dignity of the Priesthood, amongst the rest I remember these Expressions only; Tour Princes are not to be nam'd the same day with your Priests, I cannot but smile at their comparison, one single Priest is of more value than all the Princes in Europe, though their Principalities be reckon'd into the bargain.
Another Dominican of Placenza Preaching upon the same Text before the same Duke, reiterated three or four times, That those Princes that had the honour to wear Crowns upon their heads, ought not to come in competition with the Priests. They wearing their Miters to show, that as the high Priest (which is God himself) intitled himself King of Heaven, so the Priests (who are but inferior Deities) ought to be receiv'd by all the world as Kings and Supreme Lords of the Earth. In Cenoa, in the presence of the Duke (and by consequence of the whole Senate) there was a Carmelite with great gravity, and as if he had been actuated by some Spirit, delivered this Doctrine, That Kings, Princes, and Senators, were as good as nothing; That the Priest was all in all; That if their Dignity was much greater than it was, it was to be thrown down at the feet of the Priests, forasmuch as their Office was but Hu∣mane, and the Priests Divine, they were men and not Gods, but the Priests both Gods and Men. Not much unlike this was the discourse held by a Franciscan in a Church in Milan, in the presence of the Marquess Caracena; having made a parallel before betwixt God and a Priest, he pronounc'd this very boldly, That God as he was God, had preceedence of a Priest, but that a Priest as God and Priest too, was to have preceedence of our Saviour, so as those two were to be united before a Priest could be equall'd, But that which in my judgement savour'd most of Buffonry and Blasphemy in the whole Sermon, was another Comparison he had betwixt a King and a Priest in these very termes, That Kings were made up of Humane flesh, but Priests of the Spirit of God. That Kings were indeed above other men, but that Priests were Superiour to Kings. That Kings did converse with their Courtiers, but Priests with Angels the Courtiers of Heaven. That Kings had a Temporal Jurisdiction, but that the Authority of the Priesthood was Spiritual. And lastly, That Kings could command the Creature 'twas true, but 'twas the Priest that commanded the Creator. That Kings had much trouble and difficulty to make the people obey them, but that the Priests by virtue of the words of Consecration, constrain'd God Almighty himself to de∣scend into their hands upon the very first signal. Never in my whole life was my mind under greater disturbance, than at that time to hear that Beast of a Priest deseminate such Doctrine, and that which aggravated my in∣dignation was, that I could not resolve with my self whose indiscretion was greatest, the Franciscan in preaching after that rate, or Carazens in hearing him. Before this time, I made it my business to magnifie the Valour and Prudence of that person; after this, I could never have that reverence for him, to see him prostitute his attention to such wick∣ed discourse, and with patience endure such insufferable insolence, the whole Sermon being but a drol and derision of Kings and their Ministers, as if he had design'd to mock and jeer the veneration they had for their lawfull Prince out of the breasts of the people. But this was Venial in respect of what was maintain'd by another Father, who de∣serv'd the next day to have ascended again, but to the Gallows; and not the Pulpit; and I am confident my Reader will be of the same mind: God Almighty be my witness if I add or diminish any thing in my Relation. Being in the City of Naples, in Lent 1647. it was my fortune to hear a Franciscan Preach in the Church dedicated to Saint Mary, but with more Volubility than Virtue. True it is, I was not present at the beginning, I came time enough to understand that the principal drift of his discourse was to evince the people, that the Religious (which he restrain'd to their Preachers and Priests) were oblig'd to reprehend the Errors and Enormities of all people, but especially of Kings; and advancing in this manner with great Oratory, he pronounc'd the Priests to be as Gods to all Princes, and to prove it, produc'd that place of Scripture where God Almighty commanded Moses to go unto Pharaoh, said this to him, I have made thee a God to Pha∣raoh, and Aaron thy Brother shall be thy Prophet, &c. From which words he drew se∣veral consequences, and amongst the rest this, That the Princes of this Age were the Pharaohs of Christendome, and the Priests the Gods of those Pharaohs, and in the height of his Rapture he cryed out two or three times, Ah Pharaohs, Pharaohs, why will you be disobedient to the Priests that are your Gods. From such kind of discourses as this, it is that all the Tumults and Revolutions of the people do proceed, as was too lately manifest in the Kingdom of Naples. Nay would to God that furious Rebellion had
not been hatch'd in the Studies of the Priest, where 'tis to be fear'd, the ruine of Secular Monarchie is principally contriv'd. For my part I could swear without much scruple, that the Ecclesiasticks are the greatest Rebels, because in their Commotions they per∣vert the zeal of the people towards God, joyning it with their passion and indignation towards man. In the presence of Madam Royall in Turin, a certain Priest that is still living, and there∣fore I will not name him, in a Sermon he was preaching upon the Excellence of the Sa∣cerdotal dignity, could not hold from crying out twice or thrice, Princes, Princes, so many Priests so many Princes. But that which pleas'd me most of all was, the conclu∣sion of his Sermon, in which, casting up his eyes very gratefully to Heaven, he us'd this Expression, O Lord, I give thee thanks thou hast decreed me to be a Priest and not a Prince, I believe my Priesthood of more value than all the Principalities in the world, as I am a Priest, I am a Prince, whereas had I been a Prince, I should have been nothing. And these are the excellent Harangues the Italian Preachers do frequently make in the presence of their Soveraigns. From hence it is the Grandeur and Lordlyness of the Car∣dinals does spring. From such discourses as these it is, that the Sacerdotal Monarchy is sprung, which gnaws and devours insensibly the very bowells of Secular Principalities, whilst the Ecclesiasticks advance themselves dayly by preaching up themselves Monarchs, and Gods upon Earth, whereby they secure what they have got, are adding hourly new dignities to their Priesthood, and that to such a height, that at this time it may be said as properly at Rome, as the good Father said at Turin, Princes, Princes, as many Princes as Cardinals. God Almighty has been pleas'd I should be a poor man, not a Prince, so as my con∣dition is to obey, not to command. Yet had the Divine Providence seen it fit to have alter'd my Station, and brought me forth a Prince into the world, I should not certain∣ly have suffer'd such liberty of publique discourse within my Dominions; or that Christi∣ans by such Gibberish should be brought into a contempt of their Soveraigns, and in∣slav'd by a blind obedience of the Church. For my part, I think those kind of delin∣quencies no less than Treason, and that though such expressions appear at first sight but trifles, and rhetorical ornaments, yet 'tis not to be imagin'd what influence they have upon the people, how much they inflame and enamour them with the service of the Church, and how much they lessen their devotion to their Prince, whilst they perswade them that their Princes are inferiour to themselves. That Race of Incendiaries is fit for nothing but the fire, or to be banish'd out of every Kingdom as unworthy to dispense the Oracles of God; that their Pulpits may be supply'd by sober and learned men, and such as will preach the Word of God, and not the Policies of Man, the Doctrine Christ hath left us in the Gospel, and not such Insinuations and Inveglements as they make use of in their Pulpits, that thereby the affection of the people may not be perverted from their Prince, but that they may be inflam'd and excited to a more cheerfull Obedience. Had the Priesthood no designs against the Authority of Princes, their proceedings would be with more sincerity than they are, and they would give unto Caesar the things that are Caesars. I have known contention in more than three or four Cities in Italy, be∣twixt the chief Magistrate and the Bishop, and the occasion was, that the Bishop preten∣ded to the presentation of the Preacher, and the Prince would allow none of them to preach without his License. So as by reason of these controversies, Lent has several times past without any News from the Preacher. I call it News, because their preach∣ing is now adayes little else but Novelties, or (which is worse) Trifles, or Sacrilegi∣ous Speculations, unworthy to be publish'd in any Christian Church. Amongst the Protestants also, there are the same differences. The Clergy pretend to the Election of their Ministers, and that they can do it at their pleasure, which notwith∣standing is not conceded by the Civil Magistrate, who will not suffer any to preach in his presence, but such as he chooses himself; so as in a certain City I could name, there have some Cures been void above two years together, because they could not agree in the Election of their Preacher. But from whence, I would fain know, does their pre∣tension proceed? If the Clergy be Subjects, upon what grounds is it they would behave themselves like Princes? The privilege of Licensing or Electing of Ministers, is in my
judgement absolutely politick, and therefore pertaining to the Civil Magistrate, and not to the Church, to whom the power of Ordination belongs indeed, but not the pow∣er to Present; and in this case, it is of very great importance that all Princes and Ma∣gistrates be vigilant. For the end of the Clergy in preferring their Preachers in the Ci∣ties, is nothing else, but that seeing themselves excluded from all secular jurisdiction, they would this way take their Liberty, and publish what Doctrines they please. It is con∣venient therefore that all Soveraigns should consider that the people are at their dispose, and that such Ministers are to be put over them as are suitable with the Genius of the people. Moses could not readily resolve to go and speak unto Pharaoh, till it pleas'd God to con∣strain him by the force of his power, Now therefore go, and I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shalt say. However in these times, the Prelats presume to put what Preachers they please upon their Princes, and such sometimes as are ignorant in the Fun∣damentals of Christianity, and that fall upon discourse nautious and unpleasant to the Palats of their Princes. But of all Nations, France is the happiest, for preserving intirely the privileges of that Church, it will by no means admit of that Ecclesiastical Grandeur and Authority, which the Clergy have usurp'd in other Countries, and which with great arrogance they do still exercise, as if they were Princes, and not subordinate at all. And for conservation of the privileges of the Gallican Church, the King of France loses no opportunity; in the year 1626. as soon as news arriv'd at Paris that there was a Scandalous Book printed at Rome the year before, intituled, Antonii Sancterelli Jesui∣tae de Heresi, Schismati, Apostasi, &c. in which, he spake to the disparagement of the Power of Princes, but magnity'd and exalted the Authority of the Pope. The Parlia∣ment was immediately call'd by his Majesties Order, and every period of the book strict∣ly examin'd, and having deliberated as was fit in a business of that importance, at last by an Arrest of the whole Parliament, it was Decreed that these following Articles should be Seal'd, Subscrib'd, confirm'd, and Sworn to by the Jesuits, in the presence of the whole Court of Parliament, to the no small disgust, and dissatisfaction of that Order. The Articles were these, That the King of France holds not his Kingdom from any thing, but from the bounty of God Almighty, and the power of his Sword. That the King in his own Dominions had no Superiour, but God. That the Pope cannot upon any occasion whatsoever Interdict or Excommunicate either the King or his Kingdom, nor in any case dispence with the Allegiance and Fidelity his Sub∣jects were oblig'd unto him. These Articles were receiv'd with no small compunction by the Jesuits, whose design being alwayes to aggrandise the Pontifical Authority, by the diminution of the Regal, they could not advance the one, but by depression of the other. The President of the Parliament having demanded of the said Fathers, if they did approve of that book of Santerelli's, they answered, no they did not, being ask'd again, why then their Gene∣ral at Rome had approv'd it, they made answer, That those who were at Rome, could do no less than comply with the Court of Rome. The President, to entrap them perchance, as in∣deed it fell out, demanded immediately, If you had been at Rome, what would you have done, to which they reply'd, We would have done as they have done that are there; which being heard by a Grave Person of the long Robe, he spake out these words aloud, I be∣lieve our Father Jesuits have two Consciences at their Command, one of them for Rome, and the other for Paris. Venice is a place as eminent for Devotion in Religion, for Piety and Zeal in the Ser∣vice of God and the Church, not only as any Republique in Christendome, but as Rome or the Pope himself. Yet when any thing is in agitation about the Popes Authority, or the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, they will by no means permit the Clergy of their Domi∣nions, to Intrench or Usurp upon their Supremacy, which they acknowledg'd only from Heaven, and the Conduct and Valour of their Ancestors. In Venice, the Churchmen are Subjects, not Princes, 'tis the Senate that Governs all with an effectual and Independant Authority, as well in Spiritual things as Temporal,
insomuch, that the Introduction of any Novelty, is with great penalty forbidden, as well to the Bishops as Friars, they are not permitted to exercise any publique Function, or to publish any Order whatsoever, though from Rome its self, without notice given to the Senate, and their License obtain'd: and from hence it is, that the Service of God, and the Majesty of the Church, is carry'd on with that Order, that they have made them∣selves Emulated at Rome, as well as in other States; and all by the Authority the Senate keeps over the Clergy, looking on them as Subjects, not Equals, as other Princes do. And without question, had it not pleas'd God by opposing the powers of those two Countries France and Spain against their ambition, and by their means to put a stop to that torrent that was overflowing all Christendome, the present Princes of Italy had been either chased out of their Dominions, or forc'd to have ow'd their Liberties to the Libe∣rality of the Popes. If the Princes of Italy would but yet take their natural Liberties into consideration, and follow the Examples of France and Venice, it would not be too late; and doubtless of all Nations, they are most worthy to be imitated, though the Ecclesiasticks are not asham'd to asperse the former with Heresie, and the other with Atheism. But indeed the Priests and Pontificians, esteem none other Christians, but such as believe them to be as they would be believ'd themselves. Some there are, who making judgement of things from their outward appearances, do imagine the Spaniard much more Zealous for the Catholick Religion, than the French: but they are certainly mistaken, for that zeal the Spaniard pretends to the Apostolick Chair, and the Service of the Church, is but a Copy of his Countenance, and rather the formal result of his Policy and Interest, than an ingenuous effect of his piety and Devotion. The Spaniards have indeed a great Reverence for the Pope, but none at all for the Church; The French have much for the Church, but little for the Pope; for which reason, the Popes look upon the Spaniards as Saints for being on their side, and on the French as Devils for being on Gods. And this Influence and Authority of the Popes over the Consciences of the Spaniard, (besides a natural animosity that is betwixt them) is a great impediment to their Uni∣on in Religion: the Spaniards (as it were in a Bridle) are manag'd by the Pope; but the French keep close to their Gallican Church. Others there are, that think the Conscience of the Venetian of the largest size, but for what reason? Because in their Dominions, they will not suffer the Priesthood to Usurp that unlimited and irregular power they exercise with so much detriment to the Sove∣raignty of Princes in other States; and indeed what mieseries, what calamities, do we see dayly spring up in Christendome by their ars? what anxieties and perturbation in peoples minds? and yet because the Venetian distinguishes betwixt Gods Service and the Popes, betwixt the power of Princes, and the power of the Church, betwixt Spiritual things and Temporal, they are aspers'd with largeness of Conscience. But would to God that Zeal and Sincerity for Religion that raigns in the hearts of that Senate, raign'd also in the Courts of all other Princes in Christendome, and doubtless their affairs would have better success. Some few years since, it was my fortune to Travel upon the Road with two Roman Abbots, one of them, after several other discourses, happen'd to fall upon the Authori∣ty of the Pope, and to declare what great power God Almighty had given him over all people in the world. I (who Travell'd on purpose to make observation of the pro∣ceedings of the Ecclesiasticks, and of the Jurisdiction every where, but especially in some principalities of Italy, to the prejudice of Princes) was very glad of the occasion, as hoping thereby to receive some matter for my pen. It is the custom of the Italians, to constrain and reserve themselves as much as possibly, and keep their opinions close from the rest of the world: but it is my humour on the other side, to speak freely what I think, and to write all I know, whether it be good or bad; which, though they look upon as imprudence, I cannot dislike. However, with these Abbots, I thought it best to conceal my own, and attend an opportunity of discovering their Judgements. At last, one of the Abbots took occasion very seriously to bewayl the extravagant liberty, which the French and the Venetian assumed, concluding, that were it not for the repugnancie of
these two States, the Pope would be absolute Monarch of the whole World; or at least the greatest Prince would fear the censure of the smallest Priest; whereas by observing how little the French and the Venetian regard the Authority of the Church, all others, in like manner, despise the solemnest Excommunication, though from the Pope himself. Being always delighted to hear other men speak, I made him no answer at all, thereby in a manner inticing him to proceed in his discourse; but, when he came to complain heavily of the French and Venetian for suffering Stationers to Print and Vend books frequently in their Dominions, so much to the prejudice of the Pontifical Authority, I could not forbear gi∣ving him this answer; Dear Sir, shall it be lawfull for the Pope to cause to be printed so many thousand books at Rome in favour of his own Authority, and in prejudice of the Su∣premacy and Majesty of Princes, and shall it be unlawful for Princes to permit the reading of such books as are written in the defence of their falling Authority, and in diminution of the Papal? The Abbot reply'd, with the passion and insolence of a Priest, That Princes could not in Conscience challenge their Authority, but from the Pope's blessing and benignity, who, as Christ's Vicar upon Earth, has power to dispose of all things in this world which are bestow'd by Heaven; whence Princes are styled Sons, and the Pope Father, because as a Father, he gives them their patrimony. But this, by your leave, is a mistake reply'd I. True it is, Princes are Sons of the Church indeed, but not of the Pope: and they are ob∣lig'd to defend that Church which is their Mother, but not that Pope who is their Enemy. The Goods of this world do indeed belong unto the Lord, but not at all to the Pope, who by pre∣tending to a Ʋniversal Dominion, is so far from being Christs Vicar, that he goes contra∣ry to the Doctrine of our Saviour, who (besides the command he has left us to render unto Caesar the things that are Caesars) has declared that his Kingdom is not of this world, and how then could the Pope, who is but his Vicar, confer, or take away, any Kingdoms here. That which netled the Abbot most, was, my calling the Pope an Enemy to Princes, to which he answered, And why an Enemy, I pray you? I reply'd, may not he too pro∣perly be call'd my Enemy that seeks to rob me of my birth-right. When Christ came down from Heaven for the Redemption of man-kind, he acknowledg'd with his own most holy Lipps, that he came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfil it. Now that Kings and Princes have been been alwayes acknowledg'd as Gods Ministers by the people, there are a thousand places of Scripture that prove, whereas the Popes can hardly produce one Text to confirm that Autho∣rity they challenge over Princes. And to speak impartially, and without interest, what reason have the Romanists to withdraw themselves as they do from their obedience to their Soveraigns? are they more holy than the Apostles, are they more zealous than St. Peter, or more politique than St. Paul? Yet these who were the founders of Christianity, (as I may say) and the propagators of our Faith, paid tribute to Kings, obey'd their Magistrates, ne∣ver enterpris'd any thing without leave of the Governours of places whether they went; and in short, have not only left us their Examples to walk by, but this express praecept and command, That we give Obedience to all powers, for there is no power but from God. The Abbot was touch'd to the quick, he fix'd his eyes upon me, repeated my words one after another, and gave me so many tokens of his indignation, that I was very well sa∣tisfy'd he could have wish'd me in the Inquisition; however I took no notice, and he thought fit to change the discourse, and I in compliance with him, took occasion to com∣mend the Countrey through which we travell'd. By this relation, it is manifest what is the principal thing that the Churchmen drives at; namely, the ruine of the Authority of Princes, and the exaltation of the Pope who is their Prince and Supreme. Nor indeed, can I see with what policy (I had almost said Conscience) Princes suffer books to be printed and sold in their Territories, which speak with that liberty, or rather insolence, in behalf of the Majesty and Jurisdiction, not only of the Pope, but of all Ecclesiasticks, against their own Soveraignty, and such books as these are the great Volume of Sorbou, Bellarmine, Toletus, Diana, Candidus, Palavicino, and the aforesaid Santerelli, with hundreds of other Ecclesiastical Writers, whose preferrment depending upon the Church, they are by their own interest prompted to such expressions, whilst on the other side, they prohibit books which directly offend not the Church they pro∣fess,
but only the Authority of the Pope, and that too in nothing but what respects their incroachments upon the Civil power. And in this manner, the Jurisdiction of the Pope and the Ecclesiasticks, and the Ma∣jesty and Soveraignty of Princes, stand as it were in a ballance, the Subjects of each party contending with might and main to gain upon the other, and to make their own side preponderant: the former endeavour daily to lighten the latter, and 'twere good that the Ministers of Princes would use the like diligence to diminish the Papal power, lest in time it swallow up both Princes and Principalities too. That the Pope should be Reverenc'd as first Minister in the Church; That he should be acknowledg'd Superior to the rest of the Bishops; That he should be esteem'd as Christs Vicar in Spirituals, and respected as Successor to the Apostles, I do hold very rea∣sonable; but that he should impugne the Soveraignty of Princes, justifie Rebellion, ex∣empt four pittiful Ecclesiasticks from Obedience to their Soveraigns, and excite others to the same height of disobedience, is in my judgement intollerable. St. Peter receiv'd the Keys of Ecclesiastical power from the hands of our Saviour, and his office was acknowledg'd independant in Spiritual affairs: Yet whilst he had the Go∣vernment of the Church both at Rome and at Antioch, he was imprison'd, and several times persecuted by Temporal Princes, and yet he never threatned any Temporal Mini∣ster with his Censures and Excommunications, all which notwithstanding, the Popes at present do not only make no scruple of menacing with their Bulls and Arms the lesser Princes that are near them, but with their Armies and Excommunications, they have the confidence to infest the greatest Monarchs in Europe, and such as have deserved very well of the Church. But the most Reverend Casuists of the Church of Rome, will tell me, the Pope may lawfully, and with a good Conscience, dispence with the Obedience a Subject owes to his Prince. What, has he Authority to invert the order of Nature? I am certain, he that fears God, will not say so. When Pope Ʋrban, at the instance of his Nephews, Ex∣communicated Odoardo Farnise Duke of Parma, a Prince that had deserv'd very well of the Church, he was not content to interdict him the Sacrament, but he Excommunicated all such as paid him the ordinary obedience and respect that was due to him as a Duke; decreeing expresly, that he should be look'd upon as an Enemy and not as a Prince; by this means subverting his Authority, and to the universal scandal of Christendome, ma∣king a Prince a Subject, and his Subjects Princes. Paul the fifth did no less to the Senate of Venice, by the fulminations of his Interdict, pronouncing all people Excommunicate that should any wayes obey them. All the Historians, and all the Orators in the world, shall never perswade me that there can be any thing more barbarous and Tyrannical, than to forbid a Subjects Obedi∣ence to his Prince, to restrain the people from communicating their interests to their Prince, to prohibit to a Magistrate the protection of his Subjects, to chase the Judges from the Throne of Justice, to shut up the doors of Churches, and give Liberty to Vice, to imprison Princes, and put their Subjects in confusion? Oh God, what greater barbarity and injustice can be thought of amongst men, than to bring a State to be without Justice, a people without a Prince, and a Prince without a people. Nero, Heliogabalus, Tarquin, Caligula, and Dionisius, who were in a manner the Founders and Contrivers of Tyranny, never arriv'd at that perfection of wickedness, as to divide betwixt the Subject and his Prince; and yet this Cruelty, which was too great to be practis'd amidst Barbarism, is familiar now where Holiness reigns. And perhaps the Divine providence has order'd that Christians should suffer more now in the time of Christianity, than formerly under all the Tyranny and Iniquity of Heathenish Ages. Whence it is, that so many Kingdoms have been lost from the Christian Faith, so ma∣ny Nations have revolted from the Papal Obedience, and so many Provinces have deser∣ted the Roman Church, but from these practises and actions of the Court of Rome. The Protestants make no scruple to deny both the Spiritual Authority of the Pope, and his Temporal too; and for what reason, but because they observe with what auda∣city and arrogance, under pretence of his Spiritual power, he Usurps upon the Tempo∣ral, as if Christ had given him Spiritual Dominion for nothing else but the subversion of
the Civil. Though, for my part, I am far enough from thinking as they do. It is one thing to obey the Pope as he would be obey'd, that is, as head of the Church, and 'tis another thing to obey him as a Minister of Christs Flock, as sober people ac∣count him. I can allow him to be Christs Minister, but not head of the Church; as a Pastor like other Pastors, I can own him, as Superior to others, I cannot; as one of those that are chosen to guide and direct the Flock of Christ, I allow him, but as pre∣tending to the principal Government of all, I reject him. And in this point it concerns all Christian Princes to be exceeding watchfull, to pre∣vent ill consequences that may follow; for should the Christian Princes acknowledge him head of the Church, he would inferr most logically that his Excommunications are Lawfull; arguing, that if the Princes be Members of the Church only, and the Pope the Head, the Members are naturally to receive their Nourishment, Life, Motion, and Or∣ders from the Pope, as Head. I desire to be inform'd by the Grave Assertors of that Doctrine, if the Pope be Head, what place Christ ha's in the Church? If the Church consists only of Members and Head, if the Faithfull be the one, and the Pope the other, there is no room at all left for our Saviour. In my judgement, it would be more modest in the Pope to give place, or at least not to usurp, and ravish as it were, Christ's prerogative out of his hands, but to content himself to be one of the principal Members of the Church; and certainly, his so doing, would be a great means to multiply the number of his Flock, many having left him, for no other reason, than lest they should be forc'd to give to him that is but Man, the Adoration that is due only to God. The greater part of the Roman Divines, especially those that pretend to any prefer∣ment or Prelacy, use but drolling and impertinence in their Arguments in this matter, and maintain what is contrary to their own judgements, for proof whereof, I shall by the way insert one Example. A few months since, it was my fortune to meet a Dominican Frier, of a very grave Aspect like a Divine, as indeed he was; we fell at first into discourse of general matters, after which I had an opportunity, as I desir'd, to question with him a little about the Essence and Prerogative of the Pope. The Frier fail'd not to defend the Papacy with the usual Arguments of Rome, which are already common throughout the world; denying my propositions, and rayling with all the liberty that might be against the Authority of Princes. But above all, he insisted that the Pope was unquestionably the lawfull and confest Vicar of Christ, and Head of the Church: urging often, that without this belief, there could be no Salvation in the Christian Church. I (who by Natural Instinct am inclin'd to take part with the Inte∣rest of Princes, as supported by the most rational Arguments) desir'd with all reasonable respect (however he was transported) that he would please to inform me what part Kings represented in the Church, seeing the Pope was the Head? The Frier was ingenu∣ous, and told me, that Secular Princes might lawfully pretend to be chief Members of the Church, provided they submitted themselves to the Pope as Head, from whence they were to receive their necessary Nourishment, otherwise they were to be look'd up∣on as Members, ampulated and divided from the Body, and as such, they might easily be excommunicated, and rejected by the Head. This the good Father most civilly did assert, to which, I as civilly reply'd, that I de∣sir'd to know, If the Pope were Head, and the Princes Members, according to his opi∣nion, what place Christ was to have? For if the Pope and Princes take up all, there will remain nothing for our Saviour. The truth is, his whole discourse appearing but rayllery, I made him this question in jest. He reply'd with the greatest Sobriety he was able, that Christ represented the whole Body of the Church, whilst the Head and the Members stand in such Union with this Body, that it was impossible to offend any of the parts, without offending the whole body. When he had thus given me his judgement, I was oblig'd necessarily to reply to him thus, Reverend Father, I grant what you say; but if Christ be the Body of the Church, the Pope the Head, and Princes the Members, then Princes may with good reason be call'd Members of Christ, but not Members of the Pope; because if the Pope
be Head, he is then but a single Member of the Body: and for that reason Princes are not Members of the Head, which is a part of the Body, but Members of that Body which nourishes without difference both the Head and the Members. Now if the Pope who is Head, receive his Being from the Body, which is Christ; so the Princes who are Mem∣bers, depend directly upon Christ who is the Body, and not upon the Pope who is the Head, Christ being the Body, and not the Pope, who pretends to be Head. And if so, what has the Pope to do to command, or to dilacerate the Members of this Body, to cut them off with his Excommunications; or to dis-member them with their Interdicts? The good Father sticking close to the Pope still, made me a long discourse for an An∣swer, alleging reasonless reasons the Story of Nebuchadnezzars Statue, whose Head was of Gold, the Body of Silver, and the Feet of Clay. He apply'd this Vision to the Anti∣type of the Christian Church, or rather of the Church of Rome, by declaring that the Trunck or Body of the Statue, represented our Saviour, the Head the Pope, and the Princes the Feet, without allowing any part to the people. I was amaz'd at the Fathers Answer, I began to suspect him a much greater fool than I thought him at first, for urging so ridiculous a comparison, so that smiling, rather than in good earnest, I subjoyn'd, I do not wonder so much, most Reverend Father, that Princes should be the Feet of Clay to that Body of Silver, but it astonishes me to think that Christ should be that Body of Silver, and the Pope the Head of Gold, lest because from hence may Arguments prejudicial to the Deity be drawn, and I fear your Father∣hood may believe, that as Gold is of greater value than Silver, so the Pope typifi'd by Gold, is more estimable than our Saviour, whom you denote by Silver. The good Father was somewhat surpriz'd, and continu'd a while in a pause, as deli∣berating whether to deny or grant this inference, during which silence, it came into my head to ask him, how he would dispose of the people? for seeing that in the Statue which figur'd the Church he would have the Pope the Head, and the Princes the Mem∣bers, there was nothing left for them at all? He reply'd hastily, that the people were Members of the Church also, as well as the Princes. How, reply'd I, (though I know that we are all Members of Christ, with whom there is no respect of persons) is the most vile and abject man in the world of as great esteem in the Church as the greatest Monarch? The good Father, as if he had recollected himself, and found out a most pro∣found way of satisfying the Quaere, return'd this answer, That the people were not the Members of the Church's body figur'd by Nebuchadnezzars Statue, as he had said be∣fore, but the Guts rather, as he had found upon second thoughts. This Answer, set three or four Protestants that were in my Company, and had heard our discourse, into a great laughter, which indeed it deserv'd, and I my self having had my share, ook my leave, as perceiving him fuller of smoak than of meat, and indeed I entred into that Dialogue only to pass away the time, and take off the tediousness of the way. But I have been too long in this digression; to return therefore where I left, I must needs assert, that almost all the discourses of all the Roman Divines, are altogether of the same strein, and deliver'd almost in the very same words upon all occasions; for in hopes of a Cardinals Cap, or some other preferment from the Pope, they all con∣spire to advance his Prerogative, contrary to the interest of Temporal Princes, whose cause is so clear, that the whole world wonders it could ever be brought in question. To what misery are poor Princes brought, who not only lye at the mercy of the Pope, chief Sheepherd of Christ's Flock, and his Vicar General upon Earth, but are in∣slav'd and prostituted to the caprichio and fantastical humour of every pedantick Theolo∣ger, who undertakes to assassinate their rights of Soveraignty. Nor are the Popes indeed so much to be blam'd by Princes as the Theologers, and themselves; the Theologers, in that they dare infuse such principles of ambition into the Hearts of Popes, which otherwise, perhaps they had never been inclin'd to. And themselves, for admitting without any consi∣deration, such Books, and such Divines, into their Dominions, as diffuse Doctrines into the people, utterly destructive to their Soveraignty. Nor can I imagine how Princes are able to endure so many Bulls, Decrees, Writs, and Ordinances to be pasted up dayly at every corner of their Streets, and so many books
to be printed and publish'd expresly against their Supremacy; neither can I on the other side conceive, why the Pope should suffer himself to be flatter'd by his Divines, to the perpetual disturbance of all the Princes of Christendome, by the intrenchment their dis∣courses and writings make upon their Soveraignty. How deplorable a thing is it, and almost above the patience of a Saint; to see a Prince, though never so good, never so holy, and never so innocent, Excommunicated by a Pope perhaps a thousand times more wicked and perverse, who nevertheless cannot be Excom∣municated by any other. That is should be lawfull for the Pope to inhibit the Subjects conversation with his Prince, though never so worthy, and no body should have power to prohibit Subjects conversing with the Pope, though never so bad. I remember, be∣ing in discourse with a great Churchman of Spolito about ten years since, he told me, That the Pope had not only an Arbitrary Power of Excommunicating what Princes he pleas'd without any occasion, but that his Authority was so great, that he could fetch a Saint out of Paradice, if he thought good, and cast him headlong into Hell. I gave him no answer, but smil'd to my self, and wish'd him in Paradice, and some Pope his Enemy, who might remove his Quarters for him, and give him the gentle toss to the Devil. For these two last Ages especially, there have been Barbarous, Tyrannical, Cruel, Scandalous, and Lascivious Popes in the Church of God, that flea'd and devour'd this Flock, instead of nourishing and preserving them. Yet the people were constrain'd, not only to obey and converse with them, but upon their very knees to adore them. Yet du∣ring this time, even such Popes have taken the liberty to Excommunicate Princes motu proprio, to interdict the people, to suspend the proceeding of Courts, to forbid Com∣merce, and in short, to form a new Scheme of Government, rendring the people with∣out a Prince, and the Prince without a people; than which, if a greater Calamity can befall any Nation, let the world judge. In respect therefore of these manner of peoceed∣ings with Christian Princes, it is obvious that the Subjects in the Dominions of the Church, have better times of it, and injoy more privileges, than Temporal Princes themselves do; for these, though born to command, rather than to obey, may fall un∣der the displeasure of some capricious Pope, be Excommunicated, and deprived of the Obedience of their Subjects, as Odoardo Duke of Parma, was for not condescending to the humour of the Barbarini; whereas the Popes Subjects know no such matter. Be∣cause, though the Pope may dispense with the Obedience of other Princes Subjects, yet 'tis not to be imagin'd he is so foolish as to Excommunicate himself, and discharge his own Subjects from their Allegiance. Pope Alexander the sixth, whose memory is scandalous to the Church to this day, Tyrannis'd over the people at his pleasure, took delight to threaten his Neighbour Prin∣ces, and clapt several great Prelats in prison, and all to satisfie the impetuosity of his Re∣venge, and took away the Jewels and Plate from the Altars to inrich his Bastards, so that those miserable poor Romans that liv'd in the time of Nero, and seem'd born for no∣thing, but to see their own Bowels pull'd out by their Governours, were not under half that affliction that the Church was under in the time of this Pope. The Cryes of the people for the innumerable Extortions and Oppressions that were committed upon them, and the Tears and Compassionate Groans that were heard for the Expulsion of Justice and Equity, were enough to have melted and wrought pity in the very Marble it self. But alas! are there such great Iniquities committed, and shall no punishment follow? Shall the Pope satisfie the Exorbitance of his nature in the destructi∣on of the people, and no remedy? 'tis too true. Is there no Temporal Prince that will appear, for the Glory of God, for the Honour of the Church, and for the Interest of the Saints? Fye, say his Theologers, what against the Head of the Church, Christs Vicar, and Gods Vicegerent upon Earth? God forbid; he cannot sin, by virtue of his being Pope (so they believe) and those actions that to humane appearance seem wick∣ed, are indeed effects of Sanctity in the person of Alexander the sixth, and such like Popes. A Churchman of Note Travelling in Cardinal Chigi's Train into France, had occasi∣on one day to discourse with certain Protestants of that Kingdom, with whom himself introduc'd a dispute about the power and impeccability of the Pope. The Protestants
declin'd it as much as they could, knowing very well it could not be done without exas∣perating the Churchman, but at last being press'd on all sides, they were oblig'd to say something against the Churchman's positions, which were, that the Pope could not be deceived, nor err in any matter whatsoever, to the publick prejudice of Christianity; but being unable to oppose the numerous examples brought by the Protestants, of Popes that had erred, he concluded at last, that though the Pope should commit a considerable error, or be a Tyrant, yet being Superior to all other people of the world, there was no body had Authority enough to correct him; and therefore, that in such cases, both Prin∣ces and people were to commit that matter to God Almighty, who had the sole power to chastise him. An excellent remedy indeed, and of great Comfort to the Afflicted! If things were to go after this manner, Judges would have no more to do but to pardon the Male∣factors, and allege for their excuse to the people, that God will revenge all in the other world. Christ himself knew very well the State of the Case, and yet he advises St. Peter to repent and bewail his offences, not in the next world, but in this, not in the presence of Angels, but of Men, in the sight of the Church Militant, and not in the sight of the Church Triumphant. What greater injustice can the heart of man imagine, than to see a wicked Pope Go∣verning the Church ill, the People worse, but the Princes and Magistrates worst of all, and yet be secure and uncapable of Correction, not enduring the least injury himself, and yet committing all insufferable outrages upon others, crying up his own wicked actions as Sanctify'd and good, and decrying other peoples good actions as unholy? Whoever will but reflect upon the Excommunication publish'd against the State of Ve∣nice, and the Duke of Parma, and the Commonwealth of Lucca, will without doubt find them full of nothing but carnal passion. The Venetians were Excommunicated by Paul the fifth, for zealously preserving their antient privileges pertaining to them both by Humane and Divine right, and ratified by so many Emperors and Popes; but that which is the principal remark is, that Paul the fifth, who went about to destroy the said privileges, was a great hater of this Common∣wealth, although it had deserv'd so well of the Church, so that his actions towards them were not like those of a Father, but of a particular and profess'd Enemy. The Commonwealth of Lucca's case was no better; I may say indeed, it was worse: for where the Popes find weaker resistance, they lay'd about them so impetuously that they resemble Furies; as the poor Luccesses experienc'd, who were forc'd to defend themselves against the Rage which Ʋrban the 8. had conceiv'd against them, for no other reason, but for taking the courage to chastise the insolences of some Priests, who under pretence of being exempt from the Jurisdiction of that Commonwealth, had committed more Villanies than they had said Masses in their lives. But all this is nothing in respect of Barbarini's usage of Odoardo Farnise Duke of Par∣ma, whom he Excommunicated, Interdicted, Declar'd an Apostate from the Church, and Depriv'd of his Dutchy, and for what reason? Marry, because the Duke did not as he past from Capraruola to Rome to see the Pope, give a visit to Donna Anna Barbarina, Wife of Don Tadco his Nephew (who had a great ambition to see him at her house) which his Highness for some reasons did not judge convenient at that time. And this was the true occasion which the Barbarini took to persecute the Duke, and still to this day they swear they will be reveng'd of him. This was the original of the Ecclesiastical Ex∣communications, and this is the manner of the Popes proceedings with Princes; let the world judge whether they can deal worse with their Slaves. It were indeed to be wish'd, that Princes would alwayes seek occasions to testifie to the world the great respect they bear to the visible Head of the Catholics Church; were it not that experiences teaches them, that the Popes exaltation to St. Peters Chair, or ra∣ther the transfiguration of a Man into a Pope, does not extinguish all humane passions, nor quench that fire of ambition and revenge, which is wont to consume even Holyness it self, much more in those persons that borrow only the title of Holyness, most of whose actions are very contrary to that quality. Upon very good grounds therefore, and for good reasons of State, are the Princes
oblig'd to distinguish betwixt the effects of the Popes power, and those of his passion, and not confound and mingle as the Popes would fain have them, Divine things with Hu∣mane, Spiritual with Temporal, the Church with the World, the Gown with the Sword, and Priests with Princes. I could wish that the Princes would receive these Orders, Bulls, and Decrees of the Pope, which respect the Edification of the Church, and the Salvation of the people, with all Reverence and Submission, but not that they prostitute and debase themselves to the pleasure and humors of the Pope in matters conducting to their honor, and to the conser∣vation of their Temporal Majesty, which the Popes with all diligence endeavour to destroy. As the Popes are St. Peters Successors (though like nothing less than St. Peter) and as they are Shepherds of the Flock of Christ, (though they have nothing of Shepherds but the Sheers to clip) and as they are indued with a great Dignity and Character, it is fit they should be honoured by Princes. But I would not have them forget that the E∣lection of a Pope is made by the Cardinals, who are but men, and swayed too by a thou∣sand worldly interests and designs; there being scarce a person, not only in Italy, but in the whole world, that is ignorant of the intrigues and canvasings in the Conclave; so that that Sentence of the Apostle St. Paul is fit to be remembred, as in a manner ex∣presly intended for instruction of Princes, Omnis Pontifex ex hominibus assumptus, cir∣cumdatus est infirmitate. I think it fit that Princes should own and acknowledge the good actions of the Popes before the people, but 'tis fit too that they take notice of their wicked actions, which the people perhaps imagine to be good; according to St. Leo's judgement, That 'tis not enough to oblige the Faithfull to respect the Pope as lawfull Successor of St. Peter, but the Successor of St. Peter should indeavour to imitate the good works of St. Peter, as his works of justice and piety, to the end they may be really styl'd his true and lawfull Suc∣cessors: Manet Petri privilegium quoties ex ejus aequitate fertur judicium. I would know whether any Court of Justice in Christendom, or elsewhere, would de∣clare a man Heir, without obliging him to perform the duties, and discharge the debts of the Inheritance. Certainly I think not; because Justice requires alwayes that the Heir be charg'd with the debts upon the Estate, otherwise he is to be excluded, and the Inheritance divided amongst the Creditors. But this Law seems to be repeal'd at Rome; the Pope can be contented with St. Pe∣ters Inheritance, but he is unwilling to be declar'd Heir to those duties and obligations which the said St. Peter has left upon him to the Church: he can be content to be own'd his Successor, but 'tis in what only relates to the Authority, Majesty, and Jurisdiction of the Church, and to the power of opening and shutting the Gates of Paradice which St. Peter had; but with this difference, that the Apostle refus'd to admit those that offer'd mony for the power of working Miracles, whereas the Pope does nothing with∣out ready mony. In short, the Popes boast themselves Heirs of what is profitable and beneficial, but as to debts, obligations, and incumbent charges, they speak not a word, these things are not comprehended in the Inheritance: Do the Popes pay Tribute to Temporal Princes as St. Peter did? Not a penny; they receiv'd not the Inheritance forsooth, upon such terms. Do they pay that respect to Princes which St. Peter did? No, they are not his Heirs in this point. Do they comport themselves with St. Peters zeal and humility? No. Do they leave the Government of the people in Temporals to their Princes as St. Peter did? No, by no means; these are too great burdens and incumbrances for Popes, who would rather renounce the whole Sacred inheritance, than charge themselves with any such obligations. 'Tis sufficient for them, that they are called Christs Vicars, and that they hold the Keys fast in their hand, which they say our Saviour gave to St. Peter, with power to dispose of them at his death as he pleas'd. Many times have I been ruminating of the great difference betwixt the primitive and the present Church. Nowadayes there is nothing but Threats, Sword, War, Extorti∣on, Theft, Luxury, Blasphemy, Scandal, Malice, and Enmities. On the contrary, in the primitive times, nothing was seen but Martyrs and Saints, whose blood, shed in de∣fence
of their Faith, made Rivulets in the Streets; no discourse was heard then, but of Miracles, of the Cross, and of Edification; nothing was regarded, but good examples, nothing thought of, but fasting and praying, and holiness of life. In those dayes, great reverence was given to the Sacerdotal Function, because their Priests were pious, and of very good lives. In these dayes, it is undervalued and de∣spis'd, because the Priests are Devils (I speak with exception of the good.) In those dayes, when they saw the Cross of Christ wav'd gently over their heads by the hand of the Pope, they prostrated themselves reverently in his presence; but now they are forc'd to kneel, because they see a menacing Sword in the Popes hands. It was then the care of Christs Vicars, to win the Secular Princes, and work themselves into their affections by their good Deeds; now their design is nothing, but to be fear'd by Prin∣ces for their threats. Then they affected and endeavour'd peace and friendship amongst Christian Princes; but now they are grown Martial, and think of nothing but War. Then they were so devoted to the Service of the Altar, that they took no care of their kindred, whom they kept at distance from the Vatican; but now are so wholly addicted to the advancement of their families, that they never think of the Altar. Then they were meek and humble; now proud and imperious. It was their glory then to admi∣nister the Sacrament with their own hands; now they will scarce vouchsafe to have it taken in their presence. Then they had golden Consciences and wooden Walls; but now they have wooden Consciences and golden Walls. Lastly, Then their Arithmetick was im∣ploy'd in reckoning up the Miracles and good Actions of the Saints; and now 'tis of no other use, but to count out their Money to their Kindred. A difference so great and deplorable, 'tis enough to force tears from the eyes of all the faithfull that consider it. But why do not the Popes at this day work Miracles? Why do not they practice that holy and severe way of living which they did formerly? or why have they laid aside those rules that conduce so much to the edification of the Church? It will be answer'd perhaps, that in those dayes, Miracles were necessary for the establishment of the Church, but that being now establish'd, there needs nothing but Faith for its conservation; but this is meer equivocation, and a gilding of Pills to disguise their bitterness. If in the Infancy of the Church there was need of Holy men to establish it, there is as great need now of Miracles to reform it; and this opinion of mine, is founded upon the opinion of certain of the H. Fathers, who assert the Conversion of one Sinner, to be a greater Miracle than the Creation of the whole World, because there is more difficulty in the Conversion of an old Sinner, than in the Creation of a new Man. And from whence is it that this vast difference proceeds? I know not, unless that the Popes minds are so taken up in the enjoyment of their unmeasurable wealth, they have no leisure to look over the sufferings of their Predecessors, or to consider the benefit those holy men brought to Christianity by their Mortifications, and the injury them∣selves bring to it, by their Luxury and excess. Can it possibly be believ'd, that the Holy Spirit should not have that influence in the creation and guiding of the Modern Popes, as it had formerly upon the Antient? But Experience tells us, that the nature of Popes being now changed, they are contented to dye Martyrs of their own passions, rather than to live triumphantly with Christ; so frequently are interests of this world preferr'd by them, before those of Heaven and the Church. Some there are, who believe that Miracles are not ceas'd, but the Modern Popes thinking that which was the glory of their Predecessors, their shame, will not trouble themselves to perform them. Others are of opinion, that our Saviour has taken away that power from them, lest they should fall into the temptation of Lucifer and Adam, and the addition of Sanctity of life to the title of Gods Vicegerent, should induce the people to pay them the adoration of a Deity. And others believe, that the Popes can∣not do Miracles, because their Nephews hinder them. I am of opinion contrary to all these, that the same Spirit that govern'd and directed Popes heretofore, still guides, and will guide them to the end of the world. I am per∣swaded they are no sooner in the Vatican, but they are prick'd forward, and instimulated
to good deeds by the Divine Spirit, their hearts cleansed from bad thoughts, and impreg∣nated with an affection to the Church of Christ. In short, I hold it as an Article of my Faith, that the Popes are not the primary Au∣thors of those Scandals and Controversies that fall out daily betwixt the Temporal Prin∣ces, and the Popes who are holy men, nor yet of any of the Calamities of the Church; but rather those Churchmen who are Devils; it being most true, that the Popes sin so farr as the good Ecclesiasticks make them sin, by putting thoughts into their heads which otherwise had never come there. But who are those audacious Ecclesiasticks that dare to put ill thoughts into the heart of his Holiness? What Devil possesses them with such wicked designs? What Malig∣nant Star is it that guides them? what Land that bears, what Heaven that nourishes them; Let them be known, let them be discover'd, that the eyes of the Faithfull be blinded no longer. And yet indeed in some respects they are to be excus'd; 'tis contrary to their intenti∣on if they do any hurt; they sin by striving to do too well; 'tis their great zeal to the Church and the Pope, that makes them ill servants to both: They are like the Ape that hugs and imbraces what it loves, so hard, that it many times kills with its kindness; and I am afraid one day they will bring an old house over their heads. But you will ask who these are? The Divines. What Divines? Those Divines, who being Partisans of the Court of Rome, employ a thousand Artifices for the depression of Secular Authority, and elevation of the Papal. Whence in hopes of a Cardinals Cap, will with great impu∣dence maintain that the Pope is not only infallible, but also impeccable. This is the Source of all the mischief and Heresie in the Church; hence proceeds the sorrow of Christians, the failing of Miracles, and the Scandal of the See of Rome. In the Primitive dayes, when there were no such Doctors, but such whose business was to correct, not to flatter the Governours of the Church in their iniquities, holiness flourish'd, miracles were frequent, zeal and sincerity was alwayes in the Hearts, morti∣fication in the Countenances, and edification in the Mouths of the Saints. Piety was showr'd as it were from Heaven, and perfum'd the Altars in the Churches, whilst the Priests by their good lives, won over the people to Devotion. Those Popes that were inwardly holy, forbore not to confess themselves Sinners pub∣lickly, and because those Divines that writ then as with pens from Heaven, did not as∣cribe to them that outward appellation holiness, they endeavour'd to attain inward holi∣ness by Mortifications and Sackcloth, and all imaginable subduing themselves, lest (as the Apostle admonishes his followers) preaching to others, they themselves should be∣come cast away. Those Primitive Popes were in such fear of erring, that they undertook not any busi∣ness of importance, but after long fasting, and severe pennance; they willingly follow'd the advice of the most pious Prelats, and submitted with humility to the judgements of such as had more zeal in their hearts, than honey in their tongues. They gave ear always with so great attention of mind, that by-standers conceiv'd them rapp'd into an exstasie, but not to such as flatter'd them with panegiricks, or tickled them with stories of the peoples applause; not to such as cry'd up the grandeur of their charge, the holiness of their lives, and happiness of the people, in being under such holy Pastors; not to such as strein'd their wits for far-fetch'd adulations to tickle their ears, loosing themselves some times in magnifications of their virtues, as false as tedious. Such as these, were not suffer'd in Rome, were not receiv'd into the Vatican, were not admitted into the presence of the Pope, but were chased from the Court, banish'd from the Church, suspended from the Ministry, and depriv'd of their Priesthood; and why? Because the Popes in those dayes being holy as David, would not hearken to any of their Doctors, but such as were like the Prophet, who dar'd to rebuke iniquity even in David himself. They would sit whole dayes together in the Chair of St. Peter hearing such Divines, Ambassadors, and Ministers, as with tears in their eyes recounted the miseries of the peo∣ple, the afflictions of the Faithfull, the necessities of the Church, the ill administration of Officers, the irreverence of Priests, the scandals of Prelats, and the little care which Churchmen took of the Service of God.
Oh! What effect did these complaints work in the hearts of the Popes in those times? With what hast would they apply themselves to the finding a remedy? How they would embrace those that gave them such informations, and with what ardour and zeal would they implore the Divine assistance? How blessed a sight was it to see Criminals reverently fall upon their knees in the presence of those Popes that reprehended them? And what heart could be so stony as not to melt at their pious and humble admonitions? They did not threaten, but im∣brace Offendors; and if they threatned, their threats awaken'd repentance, as being affectionate and void of worldly design. When those Popes admonish'd Sinners, they did it not to revile them with reproachfull and injurious language; but acknowledging that themselves also had their frailties, and were subject to errors as other men, said, We are all Sinners, not, you are all Sinners. Our flesh is lyable to Sin, we are not Angels but Men: with which meek and humble expressions, they wrought themselves first into the hearts of Sinners, and afterwards apply'd all fitting remedies to their condition. Such was the holy Church in the Primitive times, such were the Popes; whose piety was a great cause of miracles being so frequent, and of the universal holiness of that age. But now let us see the difference of times, and the reasons why no Popes do miracles now adayes, nor holy men shine any longer in the Church. God forgive those Divines that have been the chief occasion of that loss to the Church. Before the Divines turn'd Parasites, the Popes were holy, but they became Devils after the Court of Rome was once fill'd with those Virmin, who are become the very Plague of all Christendome. Let us ask those Courtiers, that from Sun rising, to Sun setting, walk up and down in the publick Chambers of the Pontifical Palace, expecting, when by the favour of the Nephews, a Cardinals Cap should fall upon some of their alwayes uncover'd heads. They can tell us, if they please, and give us a list of what persons are admitted now adays into Ecclesiastical charges, and who have the most familiar and frequent access to the Pope's presence: which if they would do, I am confident the Faithfull would be no lon∣ger at a loss in seeking the cause of the cessation of miracles, provided those persons would be exact in relating the truth. Miracles! From whence should they come, if Sanctity be banish'd from Rome, and the Popes follow not those excellent examples that were left them by their Predecessors? In the Vatican, there is now nobody to be seen, but people crowding in with their offer∣ings, and full of hopes of obtaining those dignities by their mony, which they could never have expected from their merits, whilst out of the City Gates are to be seen melanchol∣ly and afflicted troops of the best deserving persons unprovided for, the places which they had merited, being given to the unworthy Simoniacks. Miracles! And how should that be, if they who rebuke the iniquities of the scanda∣lous are persecuted to the death, if it be not permitted to any body to put his hand to the Plough, and discover the calamities of the people: if the most able Preacher be not al∣lowed to reprehend Sin either in the Pope or his Nephews, if iniquity that runs like a Torrent through the Streets of Rome, and the Chambers of the Vatican, must be wink'd at, and past by, if the wicked must be adored, and the holy man despised, if those must be clapt in Prison, that were worthier to be Judges, if the ignorant be advanc'd, and the learned be banish'd, if the Thefts of the Priests be more numerous than their Masses, and if there be no distinction betwixt good and evil. Miracles! How, whilst they who come to complain of the hourly oppressions of the Popes Ministers, cannot be admitted into the Gate of the Vatican; if the Cardinals Hor∣ses be fed with more care than the poor of Jesus Christ; if the walls of Churches be left naked to adorn the Palaces of the Nephews; if the Inheritances left by Religious persons for pious uses, be imploy'd to buy Principalities to satisfie the pomp and pride of the Popes kindred; If the Clergy spend more time at Playes and Brothel-houses, than they do at Church, or at Prayers. But how would he that should dare to give these informations to the Pope, be welcom'd in Rome, with Kindness and Love? 'Tis madness to imagine it. Chains, Manicles, Pri∣sons, and Fagots, would be the recompence of his Zeal, and his entertainment sooner with the Hangman, than with the Pope.
In Rome, in the Vatican, those Divines are well look'd upon that write great Volumes in defence of the infallibility and impeccability of the Pope; that Canonize the actions of his Nephews; that cry up the Glory of his Family to the Skyes, pronouncing him one of the greatest Monarchs in the World; that insinuate into his ear the satisfaction of the people with his Government, and what necessity they had of such a Pastor; that make comparisons in their writings, and parallels between God and the Pope; with a thousand other extravagant flatteries, enough to urn the stomach of all Religious Men. Oh how sweet are these notes in the Ears of the Popes! How harmoniously do they Eccho within the walls of the Vatican! In this manner are things now carried at Rome; he that doubts it, had best go see, for my part I am satisfy'd with what I have seen al∣ready. I am no flatterer of that Court, and therefore not like to be so welcome, as to take a new Journey. However, I may perhaps do better service to the Church, by bla∣ming and pointing out the Corruptions of its Ministers, than the false Priests do with all their Adulation and Oratory. But whether do my thoughts wander? He who makes the Pope equal with God, may be a favourite of Pope; but he that compares a Prince to the Pope, shall be laid by the heels. He which maintains the dignity of a Prince to be inferiour and subordinate to a Popes, may be rewarded; but he that says Princes are independent, is sure to be persecu∣ted. He that asserts the Decrees of a Councel to be of more Authority than the Pope's, may be Excommunicated for his pains; but he that affirms all Councels subject to the Pope, shall receive his Benediction: he that affirms the Popes power to be Monarchi∣cal, and depending of God alone, may be a favourite; but he that pronounces him in∣feriour to the Church, shall be sure to be hated: he that holds the Pope to be infallible, shall have a Bishoprick, whilst he that holds the other side, is sent a Slave to the Galleys: he that preaches up the Popes power of Excommunicating and deposing of Kings, shall be sure to be protected from receiving punishment from his Prince; but he that sayes that Doctrine is false, shall be hang'd in spight of the intercession of Kings. Thus you behold the present State of Rome, the Corruptions of this Age, the Iniqui∣ties in the Church, and the pernicious degeneracy of the Popes. Those very Divines that think to make the Popes holy by declaring them infallible, render them guilty even to their own Consciences, whilst the innocent Popes trusting to the flatteries and adula∣tions of these Divines, walk on careless and inconsiderate of what they do, mistaking even evil for good. Pope Sextus the fifth, caus'd the Bible to be printed, and by a very severe Bull, re∣quir'd not only that it should be read, but that it should be used in perpetuum. In a few years after, Clement the seventh succeeds him, and with another Bull as rigid as the for∣mer, suppress'd Sextus's Edition, and commanded all the Copyes that could be found, to be burnt in the Inquisition. John the two and twentieth, with his own hands writ and publish'd, That the Souls of the Saints injoyed not the Beatifical Vision till after the day of Judgement. This opi∣nion being contrary to the formulary of the Church, and his Holiness being advis'd of his errour, he disclaim'd it himself, and publish'd a Bull (which is at this day to be seen in the 15th. Tome of the Ecclesiastical Annals) against the erroniousness of that Opi∣nion. Boniface the eight, in that wild and extravagant Bull, which begins, Ʋnam Sanctam, pronounc'd it as one of the principal Articles of Faith, that Kings in Temporals, as well as Spirituals, are absolutely dependant upon the Pope. But his Successor▪ Clement the fifth, finding the ill effects it had upon the people, revok'd that Bull some few years af∣ter, as pernicious, and publish'd another in favour of the Soveraignty of Princes. And now let that Reverend Father Diana tell me, (that Diana, who in hope to have been Worshipp'd like an Idol, hath made himself ridiculous by his works, I mean that great Diana that was Examiner of the Bishops, and took more pains than all of them to defend the impeccability of the Pope) let him tell me, whereas he writes the Pope can∣not err; these Popes Sextus Quintus, or Clement the seventh, Boniface the eighth, or Clement the fifth, did err; it cannot be deny'd but one of them did err, and i that be
clear, why must the people be deluded any longer with so false an opinion? but that which is of most importance is, that they deceive the Popes themselves whom they cry up for Infallible: and of this Innocent the tenth in an instance; who when the people complain'd to him of the Oppression and ill Government of his Ministers, reply'd, That his Officers must of necessity be just, because he that was infallible, ad chosen them; where∣upon the oppressed people return'd home, cursing that opinion, and those Divines that had perswaded them to't. Paul the fourth was not of that Judgement, for being supplicated by a person of great quality, in the year 1557. to dissolve a Contract that had been made by words de pre∣senti, he refus'd it absolutely, and declar'd, That his Predecessors had many times de∣ceiv'd themselves in matters of that Nature, but for his part he would not continue in an Errour with the rest. Adrian the sixth, before he was Pope, writ in his fourth Book of Sentences, That the Pope may err even in matters of Faith, by asserting of Heresie either by his particu∣lar determination, or by a Decretal, there being really several Hereticks o be found in the Catalogue of Popes. His words are these, Certum est quod Romanus Pontefex possit errare etiam in his quae longunt fidem, Haeresim per suam determinationem aut decretale asserendo, plures enim fuere Romani Pontifices Haeretici. After he was Pope, he order'd his book to be re-printed in the Vatican printing house, at the charge of the Church, without expunging the least word of what he had writ be∣fore. And being importun'd by the Cardinals, at least to correct that passage, as being scandalous to the Pontifical Dignity, he reply'd, That it had been alwayes his opinion in the times of other Popes, and he would not be contrary to himself. When Opinions are directly contrary to one another, 'tis impossible but one of the parties that maintain them must be mistaken; and of the Roman Popes, there have been many that have acknowledg'd themselves subject to err, and inferior to Counsels, and that for twelve entire Ages together. On the contrary, in these last Ages, especially for these last fifty years, they admit not any such thing, but (which is still more absurd) they maintain the whole body of the Church to be inferior to the Pope, and not the Pope to the Church. Which of these Opinions is the wrong, I leave to the Judicious to determine. Whe∣ther they were deceiv'd whose ashes the people do worship at this day for their Piety and Devotion, celebrating their memories with Divine Offices, or the other that were scarce dead before they were condemn'd by all the World, I leave the very Romanists to judge. And indeed these abuses are so great, and so frequent, that if the Temporal Princes do not look to themselves, God knows what will follow, considering the temper of the Court of Rome. The Popes never punishing any body, but to advantage themselves, most of the Writers to comply with his humour, and multiply their Estates, heap privilege upon privilege, title upon title, and authority upon authority. There are notwithstand∣ing many sober and solid Divines amongst them, of good principles, and such as abomi∣nate this kind of flattery, but they dare not speak their Opinions openly, knowing how vindicative the Court of Rome is. And I believe, did not Secular Princes protect these kind of Divines, as the Pope does the other, it would go very ill with the dignity of Princes in a short time. I do not wonder that the Roman Divines maintain the Popes infallibility at Rome, but I am astonish'd that they should be allow'd to do it in the Dominions of other Princes, and that to their no small detriment, since to permit such books, is in a manner to con∣firm them; and to confirm the Popes infallibility, is to weaken and diminish the Autho∣rity of Princes. From whence it will follow, that they must patiently sit down with what injuries any capricious Popes shall please to lay upon them, it being irrational to complain of one they have own'd to be infallible. About two years since, some certain Jesuits disoblig'd by some check which they had receiv'd in Paris about Santarelli's Book, fell publiquely to maintain, before the Kings face, the question of the infallibility and impeccability of the Pope. The Gallican Divines thought themselves concern'd for the honor of the Crown, and
conservation of the antient privileges of their Church, to answer them with a most just and well grounded censure, wherewith they rigorously condemn'd the Doctrine of the Jesuits, as too remote from the general Opinion, and of great prejudice to the Sove∣raignty of Princes. Pope Alexander the seventh, having notice of what past, testify'd to the most Christi∣an King his dislike of this proceeding. The King recommending the examination of the matter to the wisdom of the Parliament of Paris, they upon mature deliberation, concluded that the Popes infallibility was not to be admitted in France, as being an in∣novation and inconsistent with the antient privilege of that Church; and therefore they saw no reason to admit a new opinion known only to such as depended on the Court of Rome, and reject that which was of greater antiquity, and had been own'd by so many Religious Popes, which determination so netled his Holiness, that he fell immedi∣ately to his Bulls, and with great threatning and curses, forbad the printing or reading of the above said Censures. Amongst other Expressions in his Bull, there were these, Praefatas censuras uti prae∣sumptuo sas, temerarias, at que scandalasas. It is very well known, that those censures were made by the Sorbonists, by the Kings principal Divines, by the Parliament it self, which is as much as to say, by the King himself. Notwithstanding the Pope does not spare any revilings, but throws forth peals of invectives indiscriminately, as if nothing were inju∣rious from a Pope; and this is the respect they bear to such Princes as the most Christi∣an King, and to such a State as France. But if the Popes will persist in cursing and reviling of those that take part with Prin∣ces, let them not take it ill, if the Princes take such into their protection, as publish the Popes injustice, and the rights of Princes. Let the Princes lay aside all scruples, when the Interest of their States is in question. The Pope is but a man, and as such may err: let them respect, honor, and reverence him, as he does them; and let them stand alway upon their guards, especially whilst he is in amity with them, for 'tis the ordinary practice of the Divines, in such times of tran∣quility to disseminate their Doctrines of Papal infallibility and impeccability, whereof they reap the profit in time of difference: so that in all policy they are oblig'd to have a care of the dangerous insinuations of the Roman Ecclesiasticks. Odoardo Farnese Duke of Parma, whilst Ʋrban the eight was his friend, condescended to all his Holiness desired; he gave liberty for the publick preaching up of his infallibi∣lity; he gave no refuge or shelter to such as writ against him; he order'd their books to be burnt, or at least prohibited such as spoke ill of Rome, in short he advanc'd the Popes Interest, by the diminution of his own; but when afterward they were at variance, he found his errour, and he had much ado to disintangle himself from those troubles which he had created to himself. I am very well satisfy'd that the Court of Rome had much rather see me a Martyr than a Prophet; otherwise I could presage many things that will fall out unfortunately to the quiet of the Church, if no stop be given to that torrent of false Doctrine, that overflows not only the brains, but the pens of the Roman Divines. The Popes indeed do labour to give a remedy to these things, but how? by persecu∣ting and perplexing of such, as by their writings would remedy them: nevertheless that remedy they apply (which is neither Christian nor politick) instead of doing good, causes great hurt both to themselves, and to the Church; for the pens of the Censurists, are like the head of Hercules his Hidra; cut one off, and there will succeed seven in its place, and those much worse than the former. To take away this unhappy effect, the best way would be to remove the cause; The Theologist should be forbidden to write such Rodomontads, and not the Censurists to Censure. It were strange if things should by this course succeed as they desire and de∣sign! The Popes would suffer no body in Rome to write, but only such as write of their Holiness, their Majesty, their Authority, their Infallibility, and their Impeccability. Those on the other side, that write in defence of the Jurisdiction and Supremacy of Prin∣ces, must be banish'd, persecuted, and exterminated; but 'tis to small purpose in my judgement; for whilst the Pope incourages his party to write in his praise, the Princes
will not want Assertors of their prerogatives, and perhaps in greater numbers than his Holiness. If the Roman Theologists should go on as they have began, whether would things go? For these thirty years, they have added every day new Degrees, new Titles, new Autho∣rity, new Soveraignty to the Pope; now those that shall come after, observing the writings of their Predecessors, rewarded either with Abbeys, Bishopricks, Cardinalships, or good Pensions, will in all probability set their brains upon the tenters for an invention of en∣larging his authority, and not knowing any nearer way, will attempt to take the Sove∣raignty away from the Temporal Princes, and confer it on the Pope. A certain Confessor I met lately by the City, in a conference I had with him about the Authority of the Pope, told me in these very terms, Sir, I believe it as an Article of my Faith that a Pope cannot possibly be damned. I desir'd his reason, with as much respect as I could, but he gave me this answer only, That many Divines now adayes in Rome did assert and write so, and likewise many of the Faithfull began to believe it. For my part, I believ'd he said true; and would to God the Jesuits were not in the way of maintaining this Opinion publiquely every where, it being the highest comple∣ment they can use to him; for if he be not lyable to damnation, by consequence he is not subject to the sentence which God Almighty shall pass at the last day upon the Souls of Mankind. Which Opinion being receiv'd, the Pope is not only exempt from the Censures of Counsels, and of the Church, but from the Judgement of God himself; and in times to come having gain'd this point, they may perhaps perswade the people he is Eternal also; But I am confident if Princes will gainsay his other pretences, God Almighty will not grant him this of Eternity, reserv'd as a peculiar attribute, and pre∣rogative to himself. But I hope the prudence of the Popes will not suffer them to admit such Doctrine into the Church, and then whilst they are good and just to the People, the Princes, and the Church, I doubt not but they will be respected and reverenc'd by them all. Too great a wind bruises or breaks a Vessel to pieces, by a too hasty and violent con∣cussion against the Shore, though in the very Harbour it thought it self safe. If the Popes had been contented to carry themselves with mediocrity, they had never run that hazard of losing all, and Christendom had been of larger extent than it is. Whilst the Popes were satisfy'd within the limits of their Authority, the Church in∣creas'd to that wideness, that the most barbarous Nations from the remotest parts of the Earth, came to Rome to pay their Devotion to the Church. Since they found things al∣ter'd, and all tending either to vanity or pride, not only new accessions have ceas'd, but those have withdrawn themselves, who had been setled in the Church before. The Di∣vines are so insatiate to heap up honor upon honor upon the Pope, that I fear they will one day make him lose all. In short, let the Theologists say what they please, both Prince and people will always take the liberty  commend the good, and find fault with the bad actions of the Popes. But some will say perhaps, since they cannot regulate the Pope, it would be their best way to restrain the people, because 'tis more easie for a person to contain himself from upbraiding then from committing a Sin. In former times, the Popes serv'd for exam∣ples to draw people to works of piety and holiness, and the Saints in their private Assem∣blies and Conversations, took great pleasure to discourse of the charity of this Pope, and the Martyrdom, Zeal, and Goodness, of the other. Now they talk indeed of their Popes, but 'tis to their reproach and disparagement, not of their Sanctity, but of their zeal to the preferment of their Nephews. Formerly, their discourse was only of their Virtues, now it is only of their Errours. God Almighty put it into the Hearts of the Car∣dinals to create holy Popes, and into the hearts of the Popes to continue as the Cardi∣nals create them.
Il CARDINALISMO di Santa Chiesa, OR THE HISTORY OF CARDINALS. In III. Parts. PART I. BOOK II. The Contents. Wherein is discours'd of the place proportion'd to the Fabrick of Cardinalism. Of some particularities about the Essence of the Greek, the Roman, and the Jewish Churches. Of the obligations upon the Church of Rome to banish and persecute the Jewish Church with more severity than the Greek. Of the name of Church, and what it signifies. Of the distinctions in Rome betwixt the Catholick Church and the Roman. Of the infallibility of the Church. Of the Liberty of Conscience in their Divines. The reason why they are punish'd more strictly that offend against the Pope, than the Church. Of the coldness of the Popes in remunerating those that serve the Church, and their liberality to those that are serviceable to them. Of the true remedy to hinder the Divines from flattering the Popes. Of the Ecclesiastical charges, and by whom they are to be dispens'd. An efficacious way to prevent murmuring against the Pope. Of the way in which the Popes serv'd the Church in the primitive times, and of the honor they receiv'd by being call'd heads of the Christian Commonwealth. Of the great necessity of taking from the Popes il
motu Proprio, and of the way to effect it. Of the Election of Cardinals in the primitive times. Of the age of Poverty, and of the age of Riches. Of the submission wherewith the Popes now adayes are treated by the Cardinals. Of the great Errours into which the Church of Israel fell. Of a certain Fa∣ther that preach'd up the infallibility of the Pope. That the Church of Rome is subject to several Errors. Of a discourse betwixt a Priest and a Protestant. Of the difficulty of knowing the signs of the true Church, and that by reason of so many differences and disputes. Antiquity believ'd a true sign of the purity of the Church. Of the signs our Saviour left to distinguish the true Church from the false. Of a certain Protestant Prince that invited the Popes Nuntio to Supper in Paris. Of the great vanity in the Habits of the Cardinals, and Priests. Of a strange Sermon preach'd in the Church of Araceli in the presence of certain Cardinals. Of the answer the Catholick and Protestant give, when they are ask'd whether they shall be saved or no. Of the Confession of sins, and the manner how it is us'd in the Church by Christians. Discourses betwixt the Papist and the Protestant about the puri∣ty of the Church. How tedious afflictions are now to Christians. Of the great affluence in which the Popes and the Cardinals live. Of the quality of the sufferings of the Ecclesiasticks. Of the beggerlyness of certain poor Bi∣shops. Of a Bishop that complain'd of the great pride of the Cardinals. Of the great number of discontented Prelats in Rome, and for what they are so. Of the pernicious examples the Seculars take from the Clergy. Of the misery the Church is in. Of a Priest that desir'd to see the Riches of the Cardinals in∣creas'd. Of a Protestant that desir'd the power of working of Miracles, that he might turn water into wine. Of the Persecutions suffer'd by the Church. Of the number of Schismes, and the place where they happen'd. Of certain Schismaticks. Of Synods and Councels call'd for the suppression of Heresie that did dayly increase. Of the obligation that lies upon the Popes to acknowledge their Grandeur from the bounty of Charles the Great. Of the weight of the Ecclesiastical dignity, and of the honor. Of the difference be∣twixt Schisme and Heresie. Of the Schismes that are nourish'd in the Church by the Pastors thereof. Of the excuses the Ecclesiasticks do use to cover their faults. Of the difference betwixt the Dominicans and the Franciscans. Of the true way of converting of Hereticks. Of certain Hereticks that go to Rome to observe the conversations of the Catholicks. Of the great number of Murders committed in Rome, and of the trouble their Consciences receive thereby. Of the Divines and Confessors being call'd Domestick Enemies of the Church. Of the carelessness of the Bishops in making the Fryars Con∣fessors. Of a penance given by a Fryar to a Merchant. Of a Jesuits answer to a young man that had confess'd himself to him. Of the example of Judas perverted by the Ecclesiasticks to their own advantage. Of the Aristocrasie of the Church. Of the Evils of the Clergy compar'd to a Wart, which in∣creases the more, the more it is cut. Of the maxime among the Italians in disposing of their Children, and of their sending the most dissolute of them to the Cloysters. Of the orders of Religious that regard not quality, but quan∣tity in their Convents. Of the Picture of Saint Francis with a Church up∣on his shoulders, and the reason. Of a Vision Saint Francis is reported to have seen, very prejudicial to the Cardinals. Of the great honor they attri∣bute
to Saint Francis Saverius. Of the great number of persons he is said to have Baptiz'd with his own hands. That the Church ought to be sustein'd by the Zeal and good Government of the Cardinals and the Pope. Of the Liber∣ty that is given to the Jesuits to inrich themselves. Of Saint Francis Save∣rius that is believ'd to have gone to the Indies to bring the Indies back to the Jesuits. Of a Jew that was Baptiz'd in Rome. Of the way how Saints are to be Reverenc'd. Of the Scandals committed in the Church by the Fry∣ars, being so numerous; and many other particulars. THE Critiques of this Age being numerous, and most Writers under the Tyranny of their censures, I thought it but prudence to look about me, and for the security of this Fabrick, against such Storms, to choose a place for its foundation, as solid and suitable to the Nature of Cardinalism as was possible; for Cardinalism receiving its form and essence from the Power of the Pope, and the Grandeur of the Church (of which the Cardinals call themselves Princes (I thought it methodical to begin first with the Papal Power, and after that, to make some reflection upon the Nature and Grandeur of the Church. For as the quality of water is not to be known, but by discovery of the Fountain, so the true medium, and end of a thing, is not to be found, without some notion of the Principle. To me therefore it seems not improper to distinguish, not only the good Church from the false, but also the number of the Churches, which almost confound the good people of Christendom. Though there have been some Popes that have scarce known the nature of their own Church, yet there are others, or (more properly) their Theologists for them, that give us an accompt of three, viz. the Jewish, the Greek, and the Roman. The Jewish being permitted in most Ecclesiastick States to have their Temples and Synagogues open in the face of the strictest Christians. But the consequence of this liberty is not fore∣seen. The Jewish Church is dispers'd here and there thorough the whole Universe, and in Italy, is much more numerous than the Greek, though in other places the Greek has whole Provinces to its self: whereas the Jews are only permitted in some Cities only with free exercise of their Religion, as in Rome where they have their Rabines that preach to them, and many Christians to hear them, whose curiosity swayes more with them, than the express prohibition of the Inquisition. The Greek Church, on the other side, which is the elder Sister of the Roman, lyes weeping like a deflower'd Virgin, and afflicted like a disconsolate Widdow, to see her Birth-right, without knowing how, ravish'd from her by force, and that by her too, the foundation of whose present greatness she had lay'd: but by this, it is easily distin∣guish'd, which is the true Jacob, and which the counterfeit Esau. These two Churches, the Greek, and the Jewish, that had formerly flourish'd so much, are now to their no small sorrow, become Slaves to the Roman: for she having perver∣ted the natural course, ha's made her self first, that was last, and usurp'd a Soveraignty and Dominion over the rest, and has so well managed her affairs, that she has secluded the other two, who very hungry and distress'd, would fain be sucking of that Milk, which she unnaturally has ingross'd to her self. 'Tis against all Moral reason, all Order Ecclesiastick, all Humane and Divine Rules, that the Jewish Church should be permitted by the Roman, and the Greek Church per∣secuted: and the reasons are clear; in the Greek Church Christianity is profess'd, the Rules and Praecepts of the Gospel observ'd, the Mass celebrated, and (except some Ce∣remonies rejected as innovations by that Church) they conform in all things to the Pri∣mitive Practice both in the Eastern Church, and even that of Rome, where Christianity was at first in its greatest Purity, and would doubtless be again, had not the Corruption of the times brought a scandal upon it, even amongst Christians themselves: I call it mo∣destly
the corruption of the times, though I am sensible, the introduction of so many idle and Superfluous▪ Ceremonies into the Church, has been an occasion of corrupting the times, and with them, Christianity it self. The Jewish Church, as I have said, being a profess'd Enemy to Christ, Preaching and Blaspheming in their Synagogues against the Crucify'd Redeemer, and by their false Doctrine, debauching and perverting poor Christians from their Faith, ought in all equi∣ty to be banish'd from the Roman, for their perverseness or ignorance (be it which you will) being invincible. They are not to be satisfy'd of the coming of our Saviour, or the redemption of the World, the only point and ground of our Salvation, and there∣fore unfit not only for Protection at Rome, but for any Conversation in Christendom: it being nothing else, but to make a mixture of Gold and Durt, Glory and Blame, Praise and Blasphemy. The Christian Policy indeed (and I wish I could say, Humane also) of the Spaniards, is to be commended: in their Dominions, they will not allow any Religion, but the Ca∣tholick: it is a Principle with them, in a State should be but unus Dominus & una Fides, which is the reason that the Spaniards are not troubled with those Schisms and Factions in their Church, as they are in other States, to the confusion of the greatest Doctors, who are able to distinguish betwixt good and evil, much more of the poor ignorant peo∣ple, who are guided only by the outward appearances which they see in others. But because the Interests of Religion are oftentimes overpower'd in the minds of men, by sensual passions, and worldly interests, which should rather be subdu'd by them; hence things are brought to a contrary posture, and the Jews have greater liberty than the Greeks, not in Italy only, but in Rome it self, the Popes carrying a stricter eye over the Actions and Ceremonies of the Greek Church, than over the pernicious Doctrines of the Hebrews. For the Jews being of a perverse and refractory humour, in matters of Religion, are in Humane things so complacent and flexible, that by their Tributes and Insinuations, they have so wrought themselves into the conversation of the Christians, that they are treated by them as the nearest of their Kindred and Friends. And I could wish that this were the worst, but such is the force and incantation of their money, that the very Popes have been perswaded, not only to give them Protecti∣on in the Dominions of the Church, but to suffer them to erect their Temples and Al∣tars, to Preach, to Celebrate their Paschal with all possible Solemnity, and to hold their Synagogues in all places: whereas the Grecians wanting that Subtlety and Compliance, and not thinking it just to pay Tribute where they are Strangers, (though in other pla∣ces they have whole Provinces, enough to evince the antiquity of their Rights, which are in many things inconformable with the Roman) they are forc'd to be contented with the exercise of some small pittance of their Ceremonies, though under the eye of the Bi∣shop of Rome. But before we proceed any farther, in the particularities of the Church of Rome, from whence our Cardinalisme deduces its original, to satisfie the curiosity of the Reader, and to facilitate his understanding, it is fit to consider the Universality of the Church, which is particular in the Universal, although universal and particular too, as the Ecclesiasticks believe. The word Church (as it has been declar'd by several Learned men, and ought to be acknowledg'd by all Christians) signifies nothing but an Assembly of many persons; and the Scripture uses it in four principal senses. In the first, it signifies only the Elect, and those Blessed Souls that are separated from the Corruption of the world, and taken into the fruition of Eternal happiness, to wit the Glorify'd Saints, or the Church Triumphant (which is so much talk'd of in the world, and so much aspir'd to by the Righteous.) Secondly, it denotes in general the Universal visible Church, comprehending Pro∣testants (though the Pope calls them Hereticks) as well as the Catholicks; and of this Church St. Paul speaks, when he writes to Timothy, that in a great City there are not only vessels of Gold and of Silver, but of Wood also, and of Earth; by this Rhetorical and Figurative way of speaking, insinuating, that the Church is compos'd of bad, as well as good, of those predestinated to Damnation, as those decreed to be Saved. Yet so it is,
with the Roman Divines (as if they know not what St. Paul had writ, or pretended to know more) will admit into the Pale of their Church (which ought to be Universal) only such particulars as can truckle and condescend to the Kissing of the Priests Hand, and the Popes Toe. Thirdly, it signifies the Assembly and Congregation of the Pastors, and principal Go∣vernours of Christs Flock, and in this acceptation, it was our Saviour speaking of Bro∣therly correction, admonishes, that if the party offending be pertinacious in his fault, and worthy of reprehension, the party offended should apply himself for reparation to the Church. From whence it is plain, that our Saviour intended the Congregations and Synods of Bishops, and other Rulers in the Church, whose office it is to inspect the affairs thereof, and negotiate for its benefit and accommodation. Though some there are, that believe Christ meant by the Word; a Compleat and Universal Assembly of the Godly, which in my judgement is improbable, because the Gospel (our principal light) declares expresly, that the power of Correction was in the Rulers only, and not in them. By the fourth and last signification of the word Church, every particular Congregati∣on of Christians is intended; which though it seem in appearance to be separated, yet it is indeed a Member joyn'd and fasten'd by an indivisible knot to the intire and universal body of the visible Church. And in the Infancy of Christianity, when the Apostles writ their Epistles to Corinth, Ephesus, and Rome, those Churches were such. And I suppose our Saviour intended no otherwise in those words, Where two or three are met together in my name. I will be in the midst of them. And indeed, when two or three are met toge∣ther, either in the Church, in Prison, in the Streets, or elsewhere, if it be to read the Scriptures, to send up their Prayers to Heaven, or for any other action of devotion, whether Protestant or Papist, they are in my judgement a Church, and Christ is in the midst of them: for it is not the number of persons, but the intention of their meeting, which denominates them a Church. Otherwise an Assembly of Gamesters would have as much right to that honourable appellation as they. But there is one thing very necessary to be determined; the Romans, or the Churchmen of Rome, are accustom'd to call their Church, sometimes the Roman, and othertimes the Catholick Church, the greatest part of them being unable to show any reason at all for this distinction. Now the word Catholick importing universal, and Roman on the other side particular, it cannot be Catholick and Roman too; for if 'tis Roman, then 'tis par∣ticular, and if so, then not Catholick. To take away this Confusion therefore, and bring things to a consistence, one of the two names is to be laid aside, and the other re∣tain'd; and in my judgement, that of Universal Church will be best to be kept, and that of Roman left. The Roman Divines, are so troubled and perplex'd to find some new argument for proving the Popes Infallibility (which I have sufficiently discours'd in my first book) and have so twisted and intangled themselves in that opinion, that they have no time to consider, whether the Church it self be Infallible or not, which would be a great ease to the scruples of the Faithfull. If the Church were deriv'd from the Pope, it might with great reason be question'd whether the Pope be Infallible; but since the Pope hath his being and existence from the Church, the question must be concerning the Infallibility of the Church. There is a saying, so common amongst Christians, that it has past into a Proverb, I know not upon what reason: If a person at any time be of a lame Conscience, and in∣clin'd to some false belief, the common saying is▪ that he has the Conscience of a Divine, as if Divines had no Consciences at all: which I fear is too true, for they write as they think good, and teach what they please, but believe not themselves what they write or teach. And if there were not this latitude amongst them, 'tis not probable they would assert the Pope to be the Churches Elder Brother▪ and in respect of his primogeniture▪ to be the more venerable. A Prodigy I could not have believ'd, had I not known it by ex∣perience; for the irreverences committed against the Church, being punish'd with some ordinary Correction, and those against the Pope with death, it is plain his Authority is the greater, and he has been no ill husband of his Prerogative.
But this opinion is not only ridiculous (as several other of their tenents are) but so weak and unstable, that it threatens the whole Fabrick with destruction; true it is, they do fortifie themselves very much with that expression, which our Saviour us'd to Saint Peter, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church. From whence, they argue that the Church being built upon St. Peter, St. Peter (as its foundation) sup∣ported the Church, inferring, and upon pain of sinning mortally, injoyning the people to believe, that Christ by that expression had pronounc'd the Pope chief Shepherd of his Flock, and absolute Bishop of all Christian people; that from that time he began to build up his Church upon the Shoulders of St. Peter, and he might lawfully claim his prerogative; as if the rest of the Apostles had been laid aside, and had not unanimously cooperated to the common good. That St. Peter was the foundation of the Church, I can easily grant, nor do I think there is any will deny it, provided the same prerogative be allowed to the rest of the A∣postles (who were comprehended also in that expression) and to those other Pastors and Rulers that succeeded, and are still subservient in the Church. And to this our Savi∣our alludes, when he says, if the Shepherd be smitten, the Flock is dispers'd, intimating, that the care of the Church lyes upon the Ministers, without which, they would be but like a Flock without any body to look to them▪ But that the Pope should usurp to himself the Primogeniture, and instead of raising the Church upon himself, abase it: destroying the Apostolical manner of proceeding, and making for himself a particular Apostleship; and asserting the Church to be made for him, not he for the Church, is a subject worthy the consideration of all Christians, because it gives occasion of so many Scruples and Schisms. What should be the reason, that the Roman Divines find it much easier to prove the Popes infallibility, than the Churches, I cannot imagine, unless, that observing the difficulty of finding arguments for either, and yet being oblig'd to write something of Ecclesiastical matters, they choose rather to indulge that vanity in the Pope who is able to reward them, than to speak any thing of the Churches infallibility, which would conduce so much to the ed of the Faithfull who are ignorant of the matter. Now every good office requiring a reward, and every reward a publique acknow∣ledgement; the Divines therefore taking notice with what slowness and difficulty those that promote the interest of the Church (though with never so much zeal) are advanc'd, and on the other side, how free and prodigal the Popes are in their remunerations to such as drive on their designs; hence they choose not the Churches side which is poor, but the Popes who is rich, and hath the disposing of all Bishopricks, Abbeys, and Cardinal∣ships in his power. I am of opinion, (and I think no body but some Sycophant Friar will deny it) that if the Election into Ecclesiastical preferments depended upon the universal body of the Church, or else upon each particular Member of it; for example, the dignity of a Cardinal upon the Consistory of Cardinals, the Office of Bishops upon the Synod of Bi∣shops, and so thorough all Offices, and that with the order of the same secret votes, as is us'd in the Senate at Venice, I am confident there would be few Divines found, (even of those that now with so much vehemence exalt him) that would flatter the Pope, but apply themselves intirely to the service of the Church. And unless the antient zeal for Religion (which at present is not to be found in the breast of a Cardinal) do revive; or Secular Princes do suddenly apply themselves to the finding out a remedy; it is most certain, things can never proceed, but with great scandal to the Church, not only amongst Hereticks, who are alwayes prying and ob∣serving the actions of the Catholicks, but of the Heathens also, who as yet have but lit∣tle knowledge of the Roman transactions. Were the tongues of people restrain'd, were all innovations exploded, and things ho∣nestly restor'd to the Primitive way; that fugitive Flock that is dispers'd at present in the Wilderness of Heresie, would return to its Fold; Schismatical controversies would cease, the differences betwixt Christian Princes would be compos'd, and their united forces be directed against the Turk: In short, were that absolute and despotical power in the Pope restrain'd, or taken away, or at least, the right of Election (which for five
ages was observ'd constantly in the Church) restor'd to the Congregations, Synods, and Consistories, Christianity would be advanc'd, Heresie depress'd, and things reduc'd again to that Primitive Sanctity, when every mans whole business was the salvation of his Soul. In the Primitive Church, the Popes (as may be seen in their lives) did not intermed∣dle or pry into any bodies actions, but for the advantage of the Church, that the Bi∣shops might be holy in their conversations, as their function was holy, and the Sacra∣ments administred with decency. In those dayes, the Bishops made the Election to vacant Bishopricks, and by degrees came in Cardinals, who also had the creation of Cardinals. There was no discourse then, but of the miraculous Sanctity of the Popes. No importunity of their Kindred, pressing, and soliciting them, to turn out such a good man, and advance a much wickeder to his place. It was then the Glory of the Pope to be call'd the head of the Christian Common∣wealth, and indeed the Counsels, Consistories, and Synods, having the Election of all Officers, and the disposal of all Dignities, it was no other but a Commonwealth; but how the present Writers in their Volumes can call Christendom a Republick, I cannot understand, whilst it is enslay'd to his Holiness, and under the Tyranny of his Arms, Excommunications, and Inquisitions, and forc'd by the irrational opinions of Priests, to an adoration of the Pope in Rome, as if he were a God in Heaven. It were much to be desir'd, and would be much to the advantage of the Church, if that motu proprio, or Arbitrary power of the Pope were taken away, Christendome re∣duc'd again to a Republique, and the Church set once more at Liberty. I mean, if the Election of Cardinals were performed as secretly as possible in the Consistory, by the Cardinals themselves, and so that of Bishops by a Provincial Synod to be call'd upon the death or translation of any of them, or (if that should be too expensive) by the Con∣sistory of Cardinals, and not left to the single disposition of the Pope, who regards no∣thing but the interest and satisfaction of his Family. When Judas his place amongst the Apostles became void, St. Peter (from whom the Popes derive the power of the Keys) proceeded not to the nomination of another him∣self, or declar'd his Successor without more adoe, but he call'd the Colledge of Apo∣stles together, by whose Lots St. Mathew was chosen to succeed him, without any mention of St. Peter, or of any bodyes Preceedency there. The Apostles were all first, and all last, without any difference of priority. But this Chapter is left out of their Bi∣bles, they will read nothing but for their own advantage. And this is manifest, because when a Cardinal dyes, the Pope calls not the Colledge of Cardinals together, to create a Successor, but in spight of the example of the Apo∣stles, in spight of all Justice and Equity, he chooses one himself, and declares him Car∣dinal, usurping in this manner the right of the Cardinals, who are Successors to the Apo∣stles also, and to whom that right of Election doth belong. This inconvenience seems at first sight very hard to be remedyed, but upon serious con∣sideration it will be easie. For in the vacancy of the Chair, when they are Absolute and Supream, when the Church is a kind of Republick, and all the Jurisdiction is in their hands, what should hinder them (if they had any regard to their lawfull and just Privi∣leges) from resuming that power which they have been robb'd of, and constraining his Holiness to confirm it. Would the Cardinals but once undertake this, those Princes that have any zeal for the liberty of the Church, would not fail to undertake it too, and second them with Arms upon occasion, as the Emperours both of the East and West have formerly done; then they might new model the Laws, settle the preceedency of the Synods and Consistories before the Pope, as it was in the Primitive dayes, renounce the Popes Decrees, and esta∣blish their own, declare him as an Apostle indeed amongst the rest of the Apostles, but not as a God, and in short, clip the wings of his Authority, so as to leave him Head only of a Commonwealth. Nor indeed, were this well executed, would the Popes have any reason to complain, for what can they pretend, but that they be allow'd as much Authority as St. Peter had,
and why should not the Cardinals have as much as the rest of the Apostles, whose true Heirs they are; if the Pope therefore be as St. Peter, why should not they be as the rest of the Apostles. I have said before, that to fill up the vacancy that was made by the Treason of Judas, St. Peter did not by his Papal Authority make Election of another, but by the Prayers and Assembly of the rest of the Apostles, who were as it were the Pilots and Steers∣men in the Ship of the Church. Moreover Christ being dead, St. Peter could not hope for any greater Authority than he had left him in these words, What thou bindest on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, so as from that time he had power to exercise his authority, which (say they) was to preside in Elections, to command in their Assemblies, and to exercise over the Apostles, the same authority which the Popes do now over the Cardinals. But in those dayes things were well manag'd, however they go now. Then the Church was truly Apostolical, and obedient exactly to the Laws of the Apostles, now it is Roman, and conformable only to the Interest or Capriccio of the Pope. St. Peter then had no money to distribute, nor no offices to bestow, and therefore there were no books, nor no Authors to be found that flatter'd him, or attributed more to him, than Christ had given him; now they are so rich, and have so many preferments to bestow, that they can debauch their Divines, and make them write as they please. In that age there was nothing but poverty and piety; in this, there is nothing but craftiness and wealth; then there was nothing but Christ in the thoughts of St. Peter, and the Apostles, and now in the Popes minds, there is nothing but their Nephews. It is not to be found in any place of the Scripture, that St. Peter commanded the rest of the Apostles, or that they acknowledg'd him head of the Church, or Superior to themselves. Whereas on the contrary, 'tis to be seen in the Acts of the Apostles, that Peter was sent by the rest of the Apostles, in the company of St. John, to preach the Gospel in Samaria, and St. Paul not only writes, that he was not esteem'd inferiour to the best of the Apostles, but he went up and down ordering all things as he thought ne∣cessary for the advantage of the Church, without communicating any thing with St. Pe∣ter of what he judg'd convenient to do. Things being so, upon what grounds is it that the Popes keep the Cardinals at that distance? Christ recommended his Church to the Apostles in general, without any ex∣ception, as appears by those words in St. John, As my Father sent me, so have I also sent you; and whose sins soever you pardon, shall be pardon'd; and again in St. Mathew, Be not in any case called Masters, because there is one that is your Master, but be as if you were all Brothers. Can any thing be more clear? can any thing be of greater proof? When Christ spake these words to his Apostles, St. Peter was present, and therefore like, but not Superiour to the rest. So as, what authority is that the present Divines give to St. Peter over the Apostles, and by consequence to the Popes over the Cardinals? In my judgement, both sides are too blame, the Popes to usurp, and exalt themselves so much, and the Cardinals to prostitute and debase themselves. These are the errours that occasion, if not the greatest part of our Heresies, at least the most stubborn and perverse part of them, it being most certain, that a great part of their Passion and Acrimony against the Church would be taken away, could they but see things honestly administred by an equal concurrence both in Cardinals and Pope. But to return from this point (from which also we have in some measure been forc'd to digress) I will speak now of the infallibility of the Church. Let us first examine if there be, or ever was, such a Church in the world, to whom God had vouchsaf'd out of his profound Counsels to bestow any such privilege. There is no need of studying or using any long and elaborate arguments, to prove that all Churches whatsoever have been subject to Errour, dayly experience presenting us with continnal examples, that they have fallen into errour, as great as can be imagin'd by man. The Jewish Church, that flourish'd so long under their Patriarchs and Prophets, that before the coming of our Saviour had the honour to be call'd the only visible Church of God, though it was govern'd by pious and experienc'd Pastors, Err notwithstanding,
and was most miserably involv'd in the puddle of Idolatry, so as we read in the Chreni∣cles, That for many days together, the Israelites had neither God, nor Law, nor Priest, amongst them all to direct them. And the Prophet Esau with Tears in his Eyes, and Sor∣row in his Heart, complains, That all their Governors were blind: And the Prophet Ezechiel tells us, that this Idolatry over-spread the Church, as well in Egypt as in Israel. But we need not trouble our brains for an instance of their erring, the Golden Calf the people made to themselves, and worshipp'd as a God, in spight of Aaron and Moses, (who went up into the Mount to receive the Tables of the Law) is too sad an evi∣dence. Jeremiah complains with great anguish of the miseries of Juda, that was fallen into that profound and bottomless impiety, it was a question whether there were more Cities or Idols in her Dominions. And at the time of our Saviours coming into the world, he found the Church infected with an infinite number of Heresies and Innovations, intro∣duc'd by the false Doctrines disseminated by those very Scribes and Pharisees that go∣vern'd it. Let the Scriptures be look'd over never so seriously, let the Ecclesiastical Histories be examin'd never so strictly, I am sure there is not any particular Church to be found, since the time of the Apostles, that retains its proper and Primitive Purity, and has not devia∣ted by some corruption or other from its first method and form. So as St. Paul had very good reason, in the beginning of his Epistle to the Romans, to exhort them to have a care they did not wander from the truth. The Church of Rome (notwithstanding all this) believes her self infallible; or at least some Divines would perswade her so. In Genoa, there was a Priest called Father Zachary, as I remember, (I am sure he was a Dominican) that Preach'd upon that Subject; he was a great Orator, and had a vast memory, he us'd all the arguments were possible to prove it, and amongst the rest, this one in St. Mathew, And the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, which he urg'd with that vehemence, that he de∣clar'd, that as often, and every time the Church did err, so often should Christ himself break his promise with the Church. The Father being himself both Opponent and Respondent, there was no answer given to that position; yet it may be very well alleadg▪d, that Christ in those words spake not of any particular Church, but only of the Church of his Elect; and therefore, assures us also in other places, that all the Machinations, Persecutions, and Conspiracres, of the three implacable Enemies of mankind united, shall not be able to extinguish and irradi∣cate that Church, because Gods Foundations are firm and unmoveable, and he knows who are his own. As it is in the Apostle to Timothy, to which may be added those words of our Saviour, The Heaven and the Earth shall pass away, but my Word shall not fail; intending thereby, the Church where the word of God is preach'd. And if it happens at any time that any particular Church deviates from the right way, which is the way of truth, the only foundation of the Church, and upon which our Salvation is built, God of his mer∣cy will raise up another to convince that of the errour it is fallen into. Amongst all the Churches, since the beginning of the world, there has not been found that unconstancy and confusion as in the Church of Rome; so many Anti-Popes, Schisms, Heresies, Controversies, Confusions, Suspensions, Persecutions, so many false Opinions, Scandals, Tyrannies, and Intestine Quarrels, as there. Several times have they been known to adore two Popes, in the same Province, at once, at another time three, of several Nations; the very Colledge of Cardinals being divided, some of them favouring one side, some another, and some of them believing, neither of them lawfull. This I am sure, that at the Election of one Pope, there grew such Schism in the Church, the people were in great perplexity and confusion, and not knowing, by reason of the difference amongst the Cardinals, which was the true Christian Church they were to follow, they remain'd, not only months, but years, in that irre∣solution, as if they had belong'd neither to God nor the Devil. Is it not too true? Their Ecclesiasticks themselves, do not only dispute in their Councels, but fall out and quarrel with that vehemence and passion, they will sooner leave the Coun∣cel,
than their Opinions, so pertinaciously proud are they of any thing that is their own, though with the greatest scandal to the people, who in that uncertainty of the truth, for∣sake not only their fiery and unreasonable Opinions, but their Religion it self. But what shall I say? Are there not Bishops that Preach false Doctrine in their Diocess, chaulking out Rules of living to the people, contrary to the meaning of the Gospel, and what is taught in Rome? And have there not been Popes that have been disclaimed by their Clergy? From hence it may be easily concluded, that their Opinion that hold the Church in∣fallible, is false and erroneous, and if the Church be fallible, much more the Pope, who, though Governour of the Church, founded by our Saviour, and propagated by the Apo∣stles thorough the whole world in great Sanctity and Holiness, yet with a possibility of falling, otherwise, forasmuch as the Church consists of men only, it would have been necessary to have Sanctify'd them all both Ecclesiastick and Secular. In Rome they speak with great Reverence of the Councel of Trent, the Divines and Preachers crying it up as a thing absolutely infallible. Yet the Pope makes no bones to break and violate the Decrees establish'd by so many venerable men, and the unanimous consent of all the Churches in Christendom, dispensing with things at his own pleasure. It is not many years since, I obtain'd a dispensation for a friend of mine, in a thing forbidden expresly in two Sessions of that Councel, and all for the sum of ten Crowns, and some little bribe by the bye to a Clark in the Registers Office, a friend in Court be∣ing as necessary in Rome, as a penny in a mans purse. Those the Church of Rome call Hereticks, cannot hear with patience, that the Pope alone should have authority to defeat and invalidate in a moment, what a General Assembly of the Church has been so many years about. A certain Priest discoursing one day with a Protestant of France, with design to draw him over to the Church of Rome, he thought he had brought him into a very hopefull way, when the Protestant had told him that all the Protestants in France would submit themselves to the Pope, if the Pope would submit himself to the Councels; to which the Priest reply'd, it will be necessary then a Councel be call'd, and such rules establish'd by common consent, as shall be thought necessary for the Government of the Church; to which the Protestant reply'd a little fiercely, How a Devil will the Pope observe the Decrees of a Councel, that cannot be kept from violating the Praecepts of the Gospel, but if you will undertake to bring the Pope to a submission to them, I do not question to convert all of my Religion to the Pope, for to tell you the truth Sir, I hold one as feasible as the other. At first sight indeed it appears something probable, that though a particular Church may err, yet in respect that Christ has promised where two or three are met together in his name, he will be in the midst of them, and that in this case there are not only two or three, but two or three hundred, and those, choice men and select for their Piety and Learning; it seems not impossible, I say, but a Congregation Consistory, or Councel, compos'd of the chief Heads and Governours of all the Churches in general, may be in∣fallible. Were there a Councel call'd in the name of Christ only, and for the real interest of the Church, and did it consist of such Members, and no other, as had their eyes fix'd wholly upon Heaven, I could almost acknowledge that Councel infallible; but we know very well, and our constant experience confirms it, that passion, blood-thirstiness, inte∣rest, ambition, desire of dignity, capriciousness in the Prelats, Bishops, Cardinals, and Popes, are the principal things that sway in Councels, so as it is manifest, Christ is not in their hearts, and where he is not to direct them, there can be no infallibility. The Church of Israel was reputed even to the death of our Saviour, a good and a ho∣ly Church, for which reason Christ himself convers'd often with the Scribes and Phari∣sees, rebuking such as profan'd their Temples with their buying and selling, not with words only, but blows, declaiming against them, that they had made his Fathers house a Den of Thieves. His heart not being able to endure that they should use that place as a Market, where the Jews met dayly to sing praises to their God. The Scribes and Pharisees of the Jewish Church (when there was any tumult or di∣vision amongst the people, about the works our Saviour had wrought, some believing
them miraculous, and others not) they met in Councel with the Principal Rulers and Go∣vernours, and having debated upon all the works he had wrought in Judea, after long argu∣mentation and dispute, they concluded, and condemned him as a Seducer, and a Blasphemer, and that was the result of that Councel of the Jews. Many Councels there have been in the Christian Church, that have not only err'd, but undone and revoak'd what another had Decreed, so as several of them have been declar'd Null, though the Church had made use of their Statutes many years, as in the late Councel of Trent there were four others condemn'd, so as the Councel of the Apostles was the only infallible Councel that ever was in the Church, and that because it was ma∣nag'd and directed immediately by the Holy Ghost according to Christ's promise, as is recorded in the Gospel of St. John. But here is one question will arise, the solution of which, would be a great satisfaction to the Reader, and that is, whether Anabaptists, and others that have their several Re∣ligions and Sects apart, may in reason challenge the honourable Title of a Church, some of them conforming themselves to the documents of the Scripture, and drawing the rules of their conversations from thence, others (and the more wicked) spinning out their own methods and ordinances out of their own fancies, and yet not very dissimular to the direction of the Gospel, it being as it were proper to mankind to guild and colour over evil with pretences of good. Many there are, that believe that our Saviour in those words, In my Fathers House are many Mansions, intended to comprehend all the Church Militant, and that he did not mean it as a figure only of the Celestial Beatitude; for which cause, he drove the Buy∣ers and Sellers, as I have said before, out of the Temple, calling it his Fathers house, because in that, the Jews celebrated all their Holy and Divine Functions that were ne∣cessary to give the form to a true Church Militant. If it be so, it must needs be acknowledg'd there is but one true Church that can be call'd justly the house of God, though there may be several Chambers and Mansions divided from one another, that may pass under that name. The Church of Rome refuses to give the Title of Church to any but it self, as if there was no Church in being but that, cousening and deluding its self in the very Title they assume, for by calling themselves the Church of Rome, they do tacitely suppose there is some other Church, that is not of Rome. It is certain, and beyond all dispute, that all the Councels and Assemblies of Hereticks may be call'd Churches, but with the distinctions of corrupt and incorrupt, of sound and unsound, of polluted and pure; for a man, though afflicted with never so many diseases, back and blew with never so many stripes, eaten up as it were with worms and putri∣faction, ceases not notwithstanding to remain a man, till the Soul be separated from his Body, though otherwise he may have lost something of his shape. In like manner, the Title Cof hurch, cannot without violence or ignorance in Reli∣gion, be taken from those Churches, who are stragled out of the right way, and will not be subjected to their true Mother. Lucifers Pride was such, it tumbled him down headlong from Heaven into Hell, yet he retains the Title of Angel, with this difference only, that he was then call'd an Angel of Light, but now of Darkness. The Church of Israel, though over-whelm'd most miserably in Idolatry, had the Title of Church con∣tinued to them still by the Prophets themselves, but with the distinction of Good and Holy then, of Wicked and Idolatrous after. So as it ought to be sufficient for the Churchmen of Rome to allow them to be Churches, though they think them deprav'd▪ and though it be not impossible that those Churches they think so, may be most holy and sound. The matters of Religion appear so ordinary and low, the simplest Ideot thinks him∣self a Master in them, whereas indeed they are so deep and profound, they are enough almost to break the brain, as well as the sleep of the poor Christian, that confounded with this scruple, and that dispute, is oftentimes forc'd to go on in his ignorance, and precipitates himself into obscurities, by the very means he was searching after light. Every one believes his own Religion the best, and that he is predestinated to be saved, but his Neighbour to be damned. If you enquire of a Roman Catholick, he will assure
you with plenty of asseverations, that there is no Salvation out of that Pale. Ask a Lu∣theran of his, and he will tell you, the true way to Heaven is his way. And so the Cal∣venist, with great Learning, and no few Texts of Scripture, will perswade you his Doctrine comes nearest the Apostles. A certain Friend of mine, whose head is full of those niceties in Religion, being in a merry humour told me one day, if he might have his wish, he would wish himself in Paradice for one day, and in Hell for a moneth: I enquir'd of him the reason why his stay in Paradice should be so short; he reply'd, That he would fain be satisfy'd which Religion sent most souls to Heaven, and which most to Hell; that in Paradice he knew there were no throngs, and therefore he could dispatch there in a day; but that Hell was better planted, and would require a longer visit. I ask'd him why he would prophane his own Religion with such discourse; he answer'd, Dear Friend, to tell you the truth I am of opinion, that here below it is impossible to be satisfy'd who shall be saved, and who not; be∣cause for ought we know, they that appear most beautifull in this world, may be most de∣form'd in the next; and though we look upon blackness here as a defect, yet there as amongst the Moors it may be counted a perfection. He stopt there, and I made some reflections by the bye upon his railery; yet certainly that providence that governs the World, has reserv'd the knowledge of Salvation and Damnation as a secret to himself, to prevent those censures that are yet too frequent among Christians; some condemning this man, some saving of that, as if either of them were in the power of Man. I am of opinion, (by the leave of the Divines both Protestant and Papist)▪ that as to their Fundamentals all Religions are good; yet withall, I believe there is none of them without their defects and corruptions: The Catholick holds the Protestant Church for a Compendium of Hell; but for what reason? marry they cannot tell; and it is best of all that they cannot. But what follows? when any of those that are so much possess'd against it by the violence of their Preachers, (who cry out against them in their Pulpits, as if they had Horns upon their heads like the Devil) have occasion to travel and con∣verse amongst them, they are amaz'd and confounded to see there is no such things amongst them, that their practices are honest, their preaching against vice, the Psalms of David their musick; that for the better instruction of the people, they read the Scrip∣tures in their own tongue, and that swearing and blasphemy is punish'd severely. And this is that Church the Catholick calls the Epitome of Hell, and the wickedest Society amongst men. I will not say notwithstanding, but amongst them also there are some dissolute and prophane; it is enough that as to the Essence of their Church, and their Divine Service, they are assured that the Catholicks themselves, nay those very Priests that kindle and foment the differences betwixt them, cannot but commend them when they see them. The Protestant on the other side speaks against the Catholick, with as much passion and zeal as against the Jews. Though indeed for the most part, their indignation is ra∣ther directed against the Pope, than the Church, as believing him the occasion of all their corruption: But be it how it will, they also are to blame when they censure the Catho∣lick, without distinction made betwixt the Church and the Pope. The Church of Rome in respect of its original was good and holy, and therefore with good reason St. Paul directed his first Epistle to the Romans. The iniquity that is crept into it, proceeds from the corruption of those that have pol∣luted it. Under ashes that seem extinct, there many times lies fire conceal'd; the out∣ward appearance does not destroy the inward excellence. A Vizard may give a man the similitude of a Beast, but not the nature. Let the disguise of sin (which is that which makes Lucifer painted so deform'd) be taken away, and he will again become an Angel of Light. If those abuses that are daily introduc'd into the Church of Rome, sometimes by the Capriccio of the Pope, sometimes by the fallacy of the Priest, were but taken away, let the Adversary say what he pleases, I do not doubt but all the rest would be well. For my part I am of opinion, and will declare it, (let both Papist and Protestant take it never so ill) that there is Salvation to be found in any Christian Church whatsoever, pro∣vided
they live piously, according to the natural precepts of our consciences, and the ex∣press directions in the Old and New Testament. And on the other side, I believe as con∣fidently there is no Church but one may be damn'd in, if we suffer the contrary corrup∣tion to prevail▪ And this I write as an Historian, and not a Divine. About the beginning of May 1667. there was a Priest of the Countrey of the Grisons passing by this City, was very curious to know the state of the Protestants, en∣quiring of this man, and of that; and now and then having no capacity for greater, he would fall into some little arguments or disputes about it. A certain Advocate of Cri∣mona, a learned and exemplary man, to whom also he was recommended, gave him satis∣faction immediately in all his scruples, whether of curiosity or conscience; and indeed he could not have had better satisfaction from any body. From general and more common discourse, they came by degrees into some little dis∣pute, and after that into familiar. The Priest at last having his curiosity inflamed by the readiness of the Advocate, desir'd he would tell him what number he thought the Pro∣testants might be: The Advocate reply'd, that was impossible; but if one might judge by the Provinces and Dominions they were possess'd of, they could not be less than forty Millions. The Priest was amaz'd to hear them so numerous, for being not over-well skill'd in matters of Religion, no wonder if he could not see very far into business of State. However he return'd this answer to the Advocate, to his great satisfaction; Sir, the multitude of Protestants as you call them, and of Hereticks as we, proceeds not so much from any excellence in the Orders of their Church, as from the defect and iniquity in the Gover∣nours of ours, which is commonly too great; And the Protestants beholding the luxury and dissoluteness of our Prelates, but taking no notice of those blessed consequences that would follow, were it govern'd according to those Holy Rules that were given at its first institution, do upon this score grow numerous daily. Whereas if our Cardinals, Bishops, and Religious men, would like the Apostles, as much as in them lay, observe the Commandments of God, the number of Catholicks would quickly encrease, and the number of Protestants decline. I was present at this time, and surpriz'd to hear the Priest discourse in that manner; however his words (though spoke with some kind of hast and immaturity) gave me occasion to reflect upon these conferences and arguments, that happen'd daily betwixt the Protestant and Papist; it being no hard matter to find out the defects both of the one side and the other. Amongst these disputes both publick and private, it seems impossible to point out the true Church, every one boasting of his own, and proving it from Scripture. 'Tis not many years since I also had the same curiosity, breaking my brains as it were to inform my self in matters of Religion, conceiving by the instruction of Learned men, I might become a Master at length, of those things that confounded me whilst I was but a Scholar. But certainly I had better have been contented with my ignorance, my inquiry did but confound me the more. For the future I am resolv'd to leave all disputes, and to believe that Church the best, that is most conformable to the documents of the Gospel, and gives most obedience to the Word of God. When the Catholick is in combate with the Protestant in matters of Religion, the solidest argument they have against them, is to charge them as having imbrac'd a new and modern Religion and separated themselves from theirs that was more antient. The Pro∣testant returns his own argument upon him, and pronounces himself the antienter of the two, as retaining those Ceremonies and Orders only which the Apostles observ'd them∣selves, and left in writing to the Church; whereas the Catholick makes use of this Ceremony, and that Ordinance, brought in by this Pope, and by that. To which the Catholick replyes again, We can shew you in the Bible, in your own language and translation, where St. Paul makes mention of the Church of Rome, but you cannot shew us the least mention of the Church of Geneva, that you admire so much. The Protestant replyes to that; Shew us any thing in St. Paul to the Romans of your Purgatory, Mass, Invocation of Saints, or Adoration of the Pope? St. Paul writ indeed to the Romans, but not to the Pope; so as you can expect no priviledge from thence, because you obey
the commands of the Pope, sooner than the writings of St. Paul. Besides, St. Paul writ also to the Hebrews, and if a Letter from the Apostles was enough, they might as well plead it for their purity as you. True it is, Antiquity is a common sign, yet the Anabaptists themselves, and the most desperate Hereticks in the world, will assert with great confidence their Church to be the antientest, deducing its antiquity from our Saviour himself. To confound the Hereticks therefore in their disputations, one is not so much to insist upon the antiquity of his Church, for they commonly do urge that against their Adver∣saries too▪ besides such arguments, would prove the Church to be nothing but a Custome, which would be an errour disallow'd by our very Enemies, who indeavour to prove us alwayes, because Christ did not say, I am a Custome, but I am the truth. There are many antient Families, both in Italy, and other Countries, that derive themselves from Emperours, Kings, and Princes, and I believe them. Yet having lost those Kingdoms and Principalities, the memory of their greatness serves for nothing but to increase their sadness for the loss of it. What advantage is it to a Church to be admir'd for its antiquity, if its present Con∣dition does not correspond. To what purpose is it to say, I am descended from Christ, if I observe not his Commands, or to boast my self an Heir of the Apostles, and never follow their Examples. As often as I think of those Princes that intitle themselves to the Dominions that are in the possession of others, and though they have no more Power nor Jurisdiction there than I have, will by no means part with the Title: so often do I think of the several Churches and Religions in Christendom, that retain only the name, but are in other things corrupt, and abominable. For example, what other thing has the Church of Rome, more than the bare honour of being mentioned in the Epistle of St. Paul? As to other matters, the Epistle was not writ on purpose for them, though directed to them. So also, if the Protestant lives like a Devil, 'tis in vain to brag that he is descended from the Apostles. In short, we live in an age, in which, two Princes will contend perhaps for the Title of a Principality, that possibly is in the possession of neither of them. And the Catholick and Protestant will fall out, and quarrel in defence of their Religions, when there is nothing but name and title only in their possession. As if the habit of a Monk were sufficient to make one. But our Blessed Saviour (to prevent occasion of error in a thing so necessary, and that we might be able to distinguish betwixt the true Church and the false) left us a clear Character, as St. John testifies, My Sheep know my Voice, and follow me; and in another place, the same Evangelist, he says to the same purpose, If you abide my words, you shall be my Disciples indeed. That is the true Church, and that the true Religion, that with its whole heart and affe∣ction, makes use of Davids direction, Declina a malo, & fac bonum. For my part, I will not judge of the scruples of other Christians; but this I must say, I am glutted with the dayly controversies and disputes between the Protestant and Catholick Churches to no purpose, and so glutted, as to make sport of them. They will not make me a Saint, and I suffer them not to come near my heart, lest they should make me a Devil. Let the Catholick Divines write as they think good, and the Protestants do the same, I am resolv'd to be unconcern'd, and sit down with this Doctrine of St. Paul, Non plus sapere, quam oportet sapere, sed sapere ad Sobrietatem. And why should we go look for our Church in the Volumes of the Divines, whether Protestant or Papist, if we can find it out our selves in the Gospel of Christ. This is to condemn our selves by our own folly, to hire an other mans Horse to leap down a pre∣cipice withall, to borrow Spectacles that we may see more plainly the way to our dam∣nation, and in short, it is to believe our Divines have more Judgement than Christ, and more Holiness than the Apostles. The true Church of the Saints, according to the true Doctrine of the Apostles, con∣sists in doing good, and abstaining from evil, to imitate our Saviour in good works. And let the Divines alone with their new Opinions, to make the present time conform to the antient, and not suffer the modern to destroy the antient, for if we walk not in the
same way they did in the beginning, antiquity does but distract the present proceedings. And this puts me in mind of an Example, no less moral than curious, which I shall insert in this place. In the time of Henry the Great, a certain Protestant Prince, invited the Popes Nuntio, that was then in Paris, to Supper. The Nuntio refus'd the invitation, excusing himself with many pretences, but at last, overcome by the Civility of the Prince, he makes bold with his Ecclesiastical reasons that oblig'd him to the contrary, and went with his whole Court to visit him. In the Chamber they were to Sup, the Prince had caused on one side of the Wall the twelve Apostles to be hung in excellent Tapistry, and wrought with that Artifice, they seem'd to want nothing but words to be alive, but withall they were unshod, ungirt, ill habited, and in every thing conformable to the Poverty of the Apostles. On the other side, with the same exactness, he plac'd twelve Cardinals on Horse back, cloathed in Scarlet, their Trappings imbost very rich, their Foot-cloth of Silk, their Bridles of Gold, and their Spurs of the finest Silver. As soon as the Nuntio entred the Chamber, casting his eyes about, as one experienc'd in those things, he presently apprehended there was some mystery in the business. He was surpriz'd, and could not but show some confusion in his looks, however, he coun∣terfeited as much as he could, turning his eyes this way, and that way, and pretending to look on every thing but the Hangings, till at last having wash'd, as is usual amongst great Persons, the Prince observing he would needs set on the Apostles side, that he might have them on his back, and the Cardinals in his eye, the Prince, with no small Ceremo∣ny, would perswade him to the other side, telling him pleasantly in Italian, but with the grace of a true Frenchman, By your favour Sir, do me not that disgrace to turn your back upon my Religion, but turn it rather upon your own. The Nuntio observing the Prince to smile, he smil'd a little himself, but it was but from the teeth outward, however he reply'd immediately, Your Excellence believes me of a Religion, I am not of, and your self of another, you are not of neither. To which the Prince answer'd facetiously, Then there will be no difficulty in ending our Ceremonies, the difference will be decided, if every one takes which side he pleases. And with this they sate down, the Nuntio at the end of the Table, where he had the prospect both of the Apo∣stles and Cardinals too. But for the Readers better understanding, it will not be unnecessary to explain what the Nuntio meant, when he told the Prince, That his Excellence believ'd him to be of a Religion that he was not of, and that he himself was not of that Religion he did believe. I suppose he alluded thereby to the State of the Cardinalship, and the exemplary life of the Apostles. And therefore the Prince having desir'd him not to turn his back upon the Apostles, but upon the Cardinals, of whom he understood the Nuntio to be one▪ the Nuntio that was no Cardinal, reply'd, that he was not of the Religion his Excellence took him to be, and withall, added a little sharply, that the Prince himself was not of the Religion he suppos'd; though the Prince had signify'd to the Nuntio, that his Reli∣gion was Protestant, and founded upon the Example and Doctrine of the Apostles. The Princes words were smooth, and deliver'd with a good grace, yet no less pungent than the other; they troubl'd the Nuntio a little, but nothing so much as the unavoidable sight of those Hangings, which he conceiv'd, (as indeed they were) hung there in de∣sign. Had it been any Nuntio but he, they would have probably taken it so ill, as to have left the Princes Supper to himself; but this Nuntio being a prudent man, and con∣sidering how inconvenient it would be for his affairs to disgust the Prince at that time, he past away the Supper very well, with the variety of dishes, driving both the Pictures, and Expressions, out of his mind. At Rome however it was ill taken, and the Nuntio severely rebuk'd by the Pope, for supping with a Heretick; but he was so well acquaint∣ed in the Policies of the World, and the Intrigues of the Court of Rome, that he knew well enough how to excuse himself to his Holyness. The Cardinals truly, and the Prelates in the Church of Rome, are so exorbitant in their Expences, not only for their Cloaths and Liveries, but their Diet and Houses, that the Protestants who are alwayes prying, and making their observations, cannot believe
that Church to be good, in which they find such excess of Luxury and Pride. For it is most certain, (and most Catholicks will confess it) that it is not the outward Pomp and Splendor of a Church, that denotes it a true one, as some of their Divines would maintain. And indeed, Christ did not promise Pomp, Magnificence, Gold, Riches, or Honour to his Church, but Poverty, Affliction, and Persecution. For my part, I be∣lieve that the truest Church, in which the poor Members are the least bewitch'd and car∣ried away with the interest of the World, especially the Ecclesiasticks, who ought to give example: insomuch, as in my judgement, there are many Catholicks in Rome, of very good reason, that live there, and yet believe Rome to be the most polluted and defil'd Church in the Universe; and for what cause think you? Because they find the Prelates, and Popes themselves, so wedg'd and link'd to Secular advantages, they have not time to think upon God, nor Religion, nor Faith. In the year 1657. being by accident at Rome, to see the solemn Entry of the Queen of Sweedland, I heard an Expression of a Roman, that gave me so great scandal, that from my Cradle I was not in greater perplexity, than at that time, and all upon occasion of the Grandeur the Pope had usurp'd under pretence of Religion. Being one day in St. Peters Church, to see the aforesaid Queen Baptiz'd, and observing the Pope and Cardinals with most incredible Majesty, walking about in most sumptuous Habits, I turn'd about to my Camerade, and told him, in my judgement I did believe there could not be richer Cloaths seen in the whole World. The Roman heard me, and crowding himself towards us, gave me this answer, The Habits Sir of the Pope, Cardinals, and Prelats, are very rich indeed, but my Wife shews her bare breech for it. Neither my Camerade, nor I, gave him any answer, suspecting him for some Court Spye, that use to insinuate themselves as it were by accident into peoples company, and speak ill of the Pope to make discovery of what their affections are. But this poor Roman spake as he thought, by the rest of his discourse, making it plain, how miserable the people of Rome were, that were forc'd to deny themselves bread, to enable them to pay the Taxes, and Impositions, laid upon them by the Pope. So as the poor man concluded, that the Catholick Religion in the Ecclesiastick State, was the cause of the distress of the people, and of all the plea∣sures and extravagancies in the Ecclesiasticks. To this purpose, I remember a certain Sermon I heard in a Covent in Rome, and in the presence of two Cardinals, one of them Sacchetti, but the others name I have forgot. The Sermon, and the whole design of it, made such an impression in me, I think of it a hundred times a day, and shall in this place insert the most memorable part of it. The Preacher was a bare-footed Franciscan, he seem'd a poor pittiful creature to look on, but he was the more experienc'd in morality, and declaim'd with that zeal and vigor against vice, he rais'd devotion in the hearts of his whole Auditory. The first Sunday in Lent, this Holy Father being got into the Pulpit, in the presence of two Cardinals, and a very great Auditory besides, after an Ave Maria, and two or three cringes with his knee, as is usual, rising up again upon his feet, he put his Cappuce or Cowle upon his head, and pulling it down so low, that we could scarce see his eyes; in which posture, having paus'd a while without speaking a word, fixing his eyes upon the Cardinals that stood before him, without naming any Text at all, he breaks out ab∣ruptly into these words, St. Peter was a fool, St. Paul was a fool, all the Apostles were fools, the Martyrs were fools, and all the Primitive Saints of the Church of Jesus Christ our Redeemer, were fools. The Cardinals at these words, grew as insensible as Statues; the people on the other side, stood gaping in expectation of what would follow, most of us imagining there was some mystery in the business, and I among the rest admiring what freak this should be, was very well contented to attend, whilst the Father, after some moments of silence, which he had used, on purpose to observe the distraction of the people, began his dis∣course as followeth; You that are Prelats, do not you believe you shall be sav'd? Yes good Father we do, I know your answer. And you of the common sort of people, you are certain of Para∣dice? Without question you will say yes. Yes say I? By turning night into day, by feasting, sporting, and luxury? with travelling all day in your Coaches, and seeing
Comedyes at night? with wearing of Purple and Scarlet, Silver and Gold, and having your Silken trains carryed after you in the Street? yes, by spoyling the Walls of the Church, to adorn the Walls of your Chambers, and by taking from Christ, to bestow upon the World? is it in this manner O Romans you would be Saved? The Apostles certainly, and all the Saints of the Primitive Church, might have been Saved the same way, and then as certainly they were mad-men and fools, to wander up and down in solitude and misery, begging their bread for the love of God. They were out of their wits to run up and down bare-foot and bare-legg'd preaching of Repentance, and lying whole weeks together upon the ground, and at last indure Injuries, Imprison∣ments, Persecutions, and Death? you are mistaken, O Romans, the Apostles, and Pri∣mitive Saints, were full of Sanctity and Prudence? it is you are the fools to propose a new way of Salvation to your selves, invented by your own intemperance and vanity: you, you are the fools, you are the mad-men, that think to save your Souls by ways, not only contrary to the Precepts of the Gospel, but against all reason whatsoever. And these were the express words that he us'd, which as soon as I went home I set down in writing, lest I should forget them. After this the Father named this Text, Ductus est Jesus in Desertum, admiring his patience, which he apply'd with several places of Scripture, and arguments of his own (very proper for such select matter) to us with great fervour and zeal. I went home very well satisfi'd with the Preacher, but in great apprehension for him, believing as an Article of my Faith, he would have been burnt next day in the Inquisi∣tion. I was beginning a Psalm of Mercy for his Soul, but my memory was too weak to go thorow with it; but if I had, my labour had been but lost, the good Father had no need of it at all; for he continued his Preaching in the same Church, and with a greater concourse than before, to my no small admiration: for this I am certain of, a Heretick, nor the worst Enemy the Church of Rome had, not only durst not, but could not have found out more ignominious language against the City of Rome, when two Cardinals were present. To speak the truth, that Sermon put a thousand thoughts into my head about matters of Religion, which indeed are those I do most naturally apply my self to. I would wil∣lingly have given any thing I had been absent, and have repented me several times of go∣ing to Church that day; and not without reason, for from that day to this, it has still run in my thoughts with what difference and contrariety they live now, to the manner they lived in the minority of the Church, when this City flourish'd with Godly men and Martyrs. If a Heretick be ask'd, whether he thinks to be saved or not, I mean such a one as would cheat his own Father, minds nothing but Roguery, a continual Swearer and De∣baucher, one that goes to Church only for fear of the Magistrate; ask such a one what he thinks of his Salvation, and he will tell you, he is most certain of it; if you ask, by what means, he will answer with greater arrogance still, by vertue of the blood of our Saviour that was shed for us; as if Christs blood were shed for any but the penitent and virtuous. If a Catholick on the other side be ask'd the same question, one that is a Fornicator, a Murderer, a violater of all Law, a despiser of Ordinances, and one that has not God be∣fore his eyes, he will answer with the same security, That God had brought him forth within the Pale of the Church on purpose to save him, and that there is nothing more certain than that he shall be sav'd. If one pursues his curiosity, and inquires upon what grounds he believes it, he will tell you, by vertue of the many Indulgences his Holiness has granted him; as if Christ had given the Keyes of Heaven to St. Peter to let in Male∣factors only. To what a sad and deplorable condition is the Church of God reduc'd? All people would be saved, all people believe themselves Saints: but none of them will confess his iniquities, unless it be before the Confessors face only, and that more out of custome than contrition. The Protestant confesses his with his Hat before his eyes, lest any object un∣expected should draw aside his thoughts. The Catholick sayes his Confiteor Deo in Latin, (which he understands not one word of) with his eyes fix'd upon a wooden Grate;
both of them perhaps thinking more of what they are looking on, than what they are saying, or to whom. The Protestant will tell you with great reason of the purity of the Church, and the exact Rules of living in Christianity; but withall, that to live proportionably to those Rules, and according to the purity of the Church, is impossible, and beyond the efficacy of the most eloquent Preacher in the world. The Catholick understands not his own Religion, yet he is sure of his Salvation by the good Works he performs daily: Yet he is more delighted to discourse of his Pilgri∣mages, his Sack-cloth, Fastings, and such exterior Mortifications, than of the Fundamen∣tals of Christianity, or of the Church. There are a sort of blind and perverse Hereticks, that place the whole substance and energy of Religion in fair words. They will not speak but of the Scriptures, of Christ, and his most pretious blood that was shed for us; of the Psalms, Commandments, mercies of God, and light of the Gospel, when indeed there is nothing of all this in their heart; that is taken up with designs upon their Neighbours, and machinations of re∣venge, shutting up their breast against pity, at the same time they discourse most earnestly of the mercies of God. How many Catholicks are there that like Wolves in Sheeps clothing, will speak of nothing but the Priviledges of the priviledg'd Altar, of Saint Mary Maggiore, of the plenary Indulgence of Madona del Popolo, of the Disciplines of Good-Friday, of the Communion at Easter, of the abstinence of Saint Macario, the humility of Saint Francis, the Martyrdom of Saint Laurence, the Miracles of Saint Anthony of Lisbon, and in short, that talk more of the Sanctity, Authority, and Impeccability of the Pope, than of Christ himself: So sad a condition is the Church of God in in our times. I have been several times to see the Jews at their devotions in their Synagognes, and the Turks in their Mosques; and truly as to their exterior morality, I found great occa∣sion of satisfaction, observing so great exactness and reverence in their Service, as would draw tears from the eyes of a Christian: And for my part, by what I saw amongst them, I think I may boldly pronounce them the Devils Saints, and our selves Christs Devils; for to speak truth, they express more reverence to the Devil, than we do to Christ himself. A certain Turk that travelled for some time in Italy, and perhaps to make observation of the wayes of the Christians, being in the Church of St. Mark one day in Venice, in the company of several, and amongst the rest a Christian, who observing him to look with great intention on that marvellous structure, he had the curiosity to ask him, what he thought of it? To which the Turk return'd this answer, Sir, were I sure the Conscienoes of you Christians were as neat and as clean, as the Walls and Altars of this Church, I would turn Christian to morrow. To which the Christian reply'd, What need other peoples Con∣sciences concern you, so you accommodate your own to our Churches. All the Christians of this age could be contented to be glorify'd with St. Paul, but not a word of the afflictions or torments he endur'd for his love of Christ. I cannot but be much pleas'd to hear the Divines now a-dayes, both Papist and Protestant, arguing with great cunning, that in the infancy of the Church, indeed outward Penitence was necessary to provoke those poor sinners that were stragled to return, and to kindle such a flame in the heart of Christians, as might excite them to travel the World round for the propaga∣tion of the Gospel, in spight of the Persecution of Tyrants. But that the Gospel being now planted, it was sufficient if a Christian be holy in his heart, and had an intention to goodness; because in the Primitive time there was a necessity they should labour towards the planting of the Cross, which being planted now, we are only to enjoy. Should it please God to throw down riches and afflictions together from Heaven, the Christians would not so much as touch one of the afflictions in curiosity, but fall a scram∣bling for wealth, as if every one were desirous of the greatest share: and if by chance one drachme of affliction happen'd to be gather'd up with the riches, they would pre∣sently bestow that upon their Neighbours. So noble are we in that kind at this day. And this (if we except with the Popes themselves) is manifest in the Cardinals, who live in Rome in all affluence imaginable; they study nothing but erecting of Palaces,
that may contend with the Heavens in height, and making such Gardens as may outvie, if possible, that of Paradice that was made by God himself; and in the greatness and splendor of their Courts, out-braving the greatest Monarch in Christendom. Riches, Felicity, Plenty, and Magnificence▪ have in large showers been pour'd down upon the Church, that Christians perhaps might be the more confounded at their wickedness; but what follows? Why the Popes, the Cardinals, (and we may joyn their Nephews with them) they with m unreasonable avarice sweep up all, ingrossing what God meant for the whole Church to their own particulars: and if amongst this Treasure, there falls out any affliction, inconvenience, or trouble, to be found, they lay that a side as a present for the poor Priests and Capucins. But what are those incommodities the Ecclesiasticks do suffer in general? The Cure of Souls, rising at midnight to say Mass, and administer the Sacrament to the Sick, dis∣puting with Infidels, conversing with Hereticks, serving in the Hospitals, and celebra∣ting Divine Functions in the Quire, But to whom do these troubles belong? to the Car∣dinals? no, to certain poor Priests that can scarce keep themselves alive with their al∣lowance. These, these are they, that study all night, and labour all day for the Conver∣sion of a Soul, whilst the Cardinals swagger it up and down in their Coaches, play the Epicures with Musick as well as Meat, refreshing and recreating themselves with the ver∣dure of their Gardens in the Spring, and attended with the State and Magnificence of Princes. It is enough to move compassion in the heart of any man, to see so many poor drudge∣ing Bishops and Priests, that carp and moyl all day long, and are forc'd to go begging up and down to the Seculars gates for their Victuals, whilst the profits of their Bishopricks and Cures, are paid away in Pensions, that are sometimes greater than their very Reve∣nues. For which cause, many of them, for the quiet of their Consciences, will choose rather to resign them, than to have the smoak in their eyes, and none of the flesh in their stomach. In a Journey I took once from Rome to Naples, in the beginning of Alexander the seventh's Papacy, I over-took a Bishop upon the way, incognito, as it was, without Pages, or any kind of Attendance. I knew his Dignity by his Habit immediately, and gave him all the honor and respect that was due to him: we discours'd, as Travellers do, of seve∣ral things, and at last, about the present State of the Church, and the Government of the Chigi; but they being but new come to the Vatican, we had not many particulars against them. But the poor Bishop being much unsatisfy'd with the Court of Rome, and the Gover∣nours of the Church, he cry'd out with great sentiment, against the extravagant Gran∣deur of the Popes, and the intollerable Pride of the Cardinals; whilst I, suspecting him to be a Spy, and supposing it impossible he could speak with that liberty of the Church of Rome from his heart, I now and then would endeavour to excuse them, but he believ∣ing me to be otherwise than I was, reply'd still with more indignation than before, com∣plaining of the Management of the Church Revenues, and the Officers that dispos'd of them. That the Church having laid aside the Primitive rules of Sanctity, in which they lived without difference or exception of persons, was now become so partial, it allowed more for the fatning a Cardinals Horse in the Stable, than for the sustaining a poor Bi∣shop, or Curate, that pin'd and toyl'd themselves out for the preservation of Souls, it being most certain, that one Cardinal spent more on his Coach, than two Bishops re∣ceiv'd for their Revenues. It made me weep almost to hear those expressions from the poor Bishop. I endeavour'd what I could to comfort him, I told him that Christ would reward those that were ser∣viceable to the Church, before those that made the Church subservient to them; he re∣ply'd, the poor would hardly have patience, Despair assaulting them with most violence whose Poverty was greatest. This poor Bishop was not the only man in Rome, nor out of it neither, that had talk'd to me at that rate. There are many more of them in the Court of Rome, and it was well if they would keep there; the worst is, they run all Christendome over, crying out against Rome and the Vatican, finding no consolation, but in seeing misery multiply in
the Church, which of it self is not guilty at all; it not being her intention that one should be robb'd, for the inrichment of another; that of two Twins, one should be a Prince, and the other a Beggar; that the meat should be taken from his mouth that labours and sweats to bring Christs Flock to his Fold, and that he should go away with the wealth that imploys it only to the service of the world; that so many Abbeys should be dis∣pos'd to one Abbot, so many Revenues to one Cardinal, and the poor Bishops want wherewithall to subsist; that they should heap sorrow upon sorrow on the poor Prelate, and riches upon riches on the Cardinals; that they should have all that do nothing, and they should have nothing that do all. God knows what those hundreds, not poor only, but Mendicant Bishops, do say, when they find the Revenue of their Bishopricks (which is indeed but the sweat of their Brows, and the labour of their Brains) perverted and misapply'd. When they see the Horses, in the Cardinals, the Nephews, and the Popes Stables, kept by the hundreds, and bought with the money good Christians gave to ransome their poor Souls (as they thought) out of the torments in Purgatory, or to relieve the necessities of the poor. Nay which is more, the very Horses and Mules of the Pope and his Nephews, have more privilege in Rome, than they; the Prelates are not permitted to complain of their grie∣vances, of the insupportableness of their Pensions, and of the necessity that is upon them; whereas their Horses neigh, and domineer, and threaten with their noise, as it were their Keeper, if they want but their Oats; which perhaps was the occasion of that saying, 'Tis better to be the Popes Mule, than the Bishop of Orvietto. These miseries, to which the Pope and his Cardinals will by no means hearken, are of extraordinary prejudice to the Church; for the people framing their own lives generally by the comportment of others, taking example by the Ecclesiasticks, will practice the same among themselves, robbing and ruining one another as they do, and which is yet more lamentable, behave themselves with the same licentiousness and liberty, as if there was no Church upon Earth, nor no God in Heaven, to take notice of, and revenge the iniquities of mankind, who with their irreligious discourses, does many times profane that very Gospel, which they at other times pervert in the defence of their sensuality and looseness. A certain Neopolitan Priest being invited to Supper in Bolyna one night, and I, with several other strangers, being invited to the same place. The Priest being a facetious man, began to discourse at the Table of this thing, and of that, and by little and little, he fell upon the miseries of the poor Bishops and Curates; but that which was most remarkable, was his excellence of disguising his thoughts, and making black seem white; and the contrary, like the Bee, dispensing his sting and his honey together, smiling with his mouth, but weeping at his heart, in short, pretending to speak that in raillery, that he spake with indignation. Whilst he was entertaining the Company with this kind of dis∣course, there was one that told him, that all that he had said was very strange; to which the Priest reply'd, he wish'd with all his heart those dayes would return again in which our Saviour ed and satisfy'd so great a number with so little bread. The other desiring his reason, he answered, That I might pray to God Almighty that he would vouchsafe in like manner to multiply the riches of the Cardinals, as he had done the five barly Leaves, for I perceive we are not to have any thing but what the Cardinals leave. Another (but a Protestant) who was a pleasant Companion, would wish often he had the power of doing Miracles for one day, or (rather than fail) for a moment. Having occasion to talk with him one day, and by degrees, of the power of working Mi∣racles which he desir'd so earnestly, I had the curiosity to ask him, what he would do with that virtue if he had it, he answer'd me sodainly, He would turn water into wine, a Christ himself had done at the Marriage of Cana in Galilea; and he had reason for what he said, for at that time Wine was very dear in that Country, and he had a custom of be∣ing drunk once a year, but that fit lasted three hundred sixty five dayes together. And in this condition is the Church at that time, replete with a wicked and perverse Generation, and therefore no wonde if the faculty of working Miracles be ceas'd, that in the dayes of the Apostles was so frequent and conspicuous. Now adayes, every one drives at his own interest, and prefers his particular profit before the advantage of
the Church; so as I am perswaded, should God Almighty permit Miracles again, the people are so bewitch'd with their own interest, and so inveterated in iniquity, it would be of small benefit to the Church. I remember to this purpose what is recorded of Sextus the fifth, who being created Pope, would have a General Chapter of the Fathers of his Order celebrated at Rome, where several Religious men should be present, and he himself was present in some of the principal Transactions. The Convocation being met, and the General made, the Pope as a token of his affection, gave order that before their departure from Rome, the Fathers of the Chapter should attend his Holiness and kiss his Foot; and withall, that they should each of them have liberty to ask a Boon, and the said Sextus promis'd them it should be granted. The good Fryers were very punctual, coming in Procession one by one into the Popes presence in the Vatican. The Pope standing upon his Throne, they advanc'd to kiss his Toe, and when that was performed, every one a part demanded his Boon. There was three hundred and more Fryers that entred to kiss his Toe, three hundred and more Boons desired, and a Secretary stood by on purpose to register them as they were granted; but what was it they desir'd? one ask'd to be a Provincial, another a Vicar, another a Guardian, this a Bishop, this a Cardinal, this one thing, this another, but every one for their private advantage. At last comes in a poor Lay-Brother of a Religious Order, that had serv'd forty years in a Monastery, only to draw water from morning to night out of a very deep Well, for the use of the Kitchen, which had spoil'd the softness of his Palm: This poor over∣wrought creature (the Pope having made no exceptions of persons) comes in, and with great reverence desires in these words: Most Holy Father, if your Holiness shall please to vouchsafe me my request, it shall be that you would condescend to bring a Fountain into our Covent, for the benefit of our Fraternity, who are very much put to it for want of water, every Bucket full being to be drawn up from the bottom of a deep Well, from whence your Holiness for your own use drew your share, when you were formerly a Fryer in that Covent; and truly I am troubled for the poor man that succeeds me in my office, which I have executed this forty years, as your Holiness may most graciously remember, having often seen me at work from morning to night. The Pope smil'd, but mysteriously, and as if there was something more than ordinary in the matter; casting his eyes about, sometimes on this Brother, and sometimes on that; (for he had given order none should depart out of his presence till the whole business was concluded) at last he casts them up to Heaven, and cryes out, Blessed be Almighty God, that amongst so many Fryers that seek their own interest only, there is one found that suppli∣cates for the publick benefit of his Covent. And having with some vehemence for a time declaim'd against the Corruption in their Religion, he took his leave of the Fraternity in these words; We were very bountifull in promising you your demands, because we were of opinion you would be as zealous in desiring something for the publick advantage of your Or∣ders: But for as much as you have postpon'd the publick interest to your own, We cannot think it just to gratifie your particular requests, that are so remote from the benefit of the publick. And with this answer he return'd them to their Covents, full of indignation and wrath; but for the satisfaction of the other, he gave order immediately to have three or four Fountains made in the Apostles Monastery of the Order of St. Francis; and one of them particularly in the Kitchin, which he that is at Rome, and has as much curiosity as I had, may see at this day. And in this manner, in my judgement, it will alwayes happen, whilst those words of our Saviour, Ask and ye shall receive, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be open'd unto you, be apply'd by every one to his particular interest; every one petitioning for his private advantage only, without the least thought of the common good of Christendom. And if every one complains and repines that his prayer is not heard, the fault is in them∣selves, that they pray not for the Publick, whose interest is alwayes prae-consider'd by our Saviour. In the Primitive times the Saints understanding what was fit for them to ask, and seeking the common good of Christendom, were alwayes gratifi'd in what they did ask: but at present all the Cardinals desire is to be Popes; the Abbots, to be Bishops;
the simple Priests, Canons; the Gentlemen, Princes; the private Soulders, the Gover∣nours of Towns; the Merchants, success in their affairs, all riches and wealth; but of the prosperity of the Church, of the destruction of Heresie▪ of the propagation of the Gospel, not one word: So as it is no wonder if Christ deals with them after the same rate as Sextus the fifth did with his Fryers. But it is time to leave these commune considerations, and with brevity to fall upon the most remarkable occurrences in the Church, deducing them from its very Creation to this day; it being necessary for the comfort, and better information of the Reader, to premise some general proofs of what we say; and that because such discourses as are in∣terlarded as it were with matter of History, and examples drawn from certain Experience, (as mine I conceive are) do awaken, and with more efficacy excite the devotion of the Reader. Though by the impiety of the Tyrants in those dayes, the Church was bitterly per∣secuted in the persons of the Apostles; yet all their violence and barbarity could not hinder but they went on still, serving God with all sincerity of conscience, till at last they became forc'd to encounter the Heresies of Menander the Samaritan, Ebioni and Che∣rinthus, (obstinate Hereticks, and perverse Adversaries to the Apostles, and so popular they denominated their parties with their own several Names) and gave the Church great trouble and perplexity: But St. John (who writ his Epistles about that time) though he was at a great distance, by the assistance of some of his Disciples, refuted their false Doctrine, and silenc'd them. After them succeeded Carpocrates of Alexandria, and Epiphanes his son, the Authors of the damnable Heresie of the Gnosticks; and the Jews were about the same time routed out of Jerusalem, and St. Mark made Bishop thereof about the year 137. In the year 161. Marcion the Heretick gave great disturbance to the Church, but he was encounter'd, and partly convinc'd by Bardesanus and Rodosianus, two learned men, and well skill'd in the Holy Scriptures; but he was totally refuted by Musanus and Mo∣destus, who writ against Tatianus the Syrian, an impious Heretick, and a great sower of dissension amongst young Christians. In the year 174. there sprang up a new Heresie, by the means of Montanus Phrygius, which was afterwards call'd the Cataphrygian Heresie, and there were some worse Here∣ticks than himself joyn'd with him; but it pleas'd God by opposing the Learning and Sanctity of Irenaus Bishop of Lyons against it, to stop the violence of that torrent with the Books he writ in 184. Against which Artemonus, one of the greatest Hereticks of that age, writ also. And in the year 246. there were new Hereticks broach'd in Arabia, that were call'd Ara∣bians; but they were in a short time suppress'd by the industry of St. Origen. The Clergy being divided, Novatianus the Roman was by faction created Antipope, in opposition to Cornelius; which was the occasion of the first Schism in the Church, besides the fall of two Bishops, Basilides Astaniansis, and Martialis Emeritensis; and therefore to remedy and reconcile those disturbances, that gave great scandal to Christen∣dom, it was thought necessary a General Council should be call'd. In the year 258. Noetus and Sabellius appear'd, Hereticks both of them in their Doctrine, and arrogant in their Lives. In 270. Paulus Samosatenus discover'd himself, who was so much the more scandalous in his Heresie, by how much he had been formerly a stout propugnor of the Faith: But he was convinc'd by Machion a Priest of Antioch, a learned man, and one that writ several things with great judgement towards unity in the Church. The second Schism began in Africa, and was call'd the Schism of the Donatists. Antro a Priest of Alexandria, from whom the Heresie of the Arrians had its original began to preach it up in the year 324. and to prevent the spreading of those execrable blasphemies, a General Council was call'd, because this Heresie of the Arrians (allow∣ing I know not what liberty in their lives) had perverted and debauch'd several Bishops from the Church of Christ. And indeed the Church was never in that danger of being swallow'd up and submerg'd, as in the dayes of Arrius, in so much as there was nothing but tears to be seen in the eyes of the Saints that stood firm, according to that expression, Ingemiscens orbis terrarum Arrianum se esse miratus est.
The third Schism was betwixt Damasus and Ʋrsicinus in the year 366. and though that also had perverted the good orders in the Church, yet it was inconsiderable in com∣parison of what the Church suffered in the year 407. there being then Heresies on foot, and Rome sack'd at the same time by Alaricus King of the Goths, who gave shelter and protection to those Hereticks that afflicted the Church. About this time, Venice was begun to be built by those that fled from the fury of the Goths, and particularly of Attila, whose actions were so barbarous, he was call'd (and glory'd in it) Flagellum Dei; as if by laying the foundation of Venice, God Almighty intended to demonstrate the effect of his Divine Providence, raising up as it were by Mi∣racle, a Republique that should be a bulwork of defence, not to the liberties of Italy only, but of all the Church of Christ; and indeed her actions have express'd her so ever since, having been alwayes ready to spend the blood of her dearest Citizens in defence of Chri∣stendome. According as Heresie (protected by several Princes, and embrac'd by several great Cities) did propagate and increase; and according as any new and more dangerous sprung up, the Church apply'd all seasonable and miraculous remedies, to repell their au∣dacity, but in spight of all that could be done, they were forc'd to call a general Councel at Constantinople to suppress the Heresie of the Monothelites, which they condemn'd there, and made many good Laws for the better regiment of the Church. In short, 'tis not to be comprehended by humane imagination, with how many sorts of Heresies and Schisms, the Church of God in those dayes was afflicted and torn, being for eight hundred years together in perpetual perplexity; during which time, several Councels and Synods both general and particular were call'd, more especially two at Rome, one at Antioch, two at Carthage, one of them to determine, whether Hereticks that repented and would return again to the Church, were to be rebaptiz'd or not; the other, to conclude upon the manner of baptizing of Infants in cases of necessity: two more there were in Asia, one in Licaonia, the other in Phrygia, to consult upon the manner of receiving such Hereticks into the Church again as had a desire to return, which cost great argument and dispute before it could be concluded. During these eight hundred years, the Church was expos'd to several Persecutions, under the Tyranny of several Emperours; but nine of them were more bloody than the rest, for thrusting and tearing into the very bowels of the Church, the poor Saints were constrained either to lay themselves down as Sacrifices at the feet of their Persecutors, or to fly from their barbarity, to the protection of the Woods. But that just God (who had promis'd the Gates of Hell should never prevail against the Glory of his Church) sent Charles the Son of Pipin King of France, as a special gift from Heaven, to com∣mand the Empire of the West. Which being found and acknowledg'd by the Romans, they ordered these words to be publiquely Proclaim'd thorough all the Streets in Rome, To Charles the Great, the most Pious and Peaceful Emperour Created by God, be Life and Victory. The Church that for so many years had been afflicted with Heresies and Schisms, Wars both Intestine and Foreign, Ecclesiastick and Civil, found not only ease and pro∣tection under the Government of this great Emperour, but was propagated exceedingly; most of all the Cities of Europe, especially in Italy and France, abounding with multi∣tudes of new Christans won by the example of Charles, who thought the Christian Faith more glory to him than his Crown; by the force of his Arms, and the zeal of his Heart, profligating and confounding those Heresies that were over-running the Church; for which reason, the Popes of Rome are in gratitude oblig'd to acknowledge the greatest part of their Grandeur from the munificence of that Emperour. And indeed the Popes are bound in Conscience daily to pay their Tribute o respect to the memory of that Emperour that gave them their Grandeur, and to the present State of the Venetians, that with so much pains and expence has preserv'd it; and indeed, were the Popes obligations to both of them compar'd, I am of opinion (with Reverence be it spoken to the memory of so great a Monarch) they would appear greater to that Re∣publique, because though Charles indeed gave them their Grandeur and Wealth, yet they could not have injoy'd either without their Liberty, which Liberty they owe only to
that Commonwealth. All Christendome was in tears at the death of Charles the Great, but the Pope above all, who had lost, as he thought, whatever had been given him by the liberality of that Emperour: nor was it without reason he was lamented, for with∣in few years, the Enemies of the Church finding no impediment, and the Christians grown curious of novelties, there began new Heresies and Schisms to spread more fierce and dangerous than before, even the Popes differing and quarrelling among themselves for the Papacy; insomuch that the Church was constrained as it were to keep Councels constantly open, Leo the ninth having call'd four; one in Rome, call'd the Lateran Coun∣cel, the Councel of Pavia in Lombardy, of Reimes in France, and of Munster in Ger∣many. In Antioch (where by the pains and vigilance of St. Peter, and where he was Bishop for ten years together) the Cross of Christ was set up and flourish'd with so great a num∣ber of Christians, that they became emulated by their Neighbours; yet after the year 400. Christianity began to stagger, and the Flock of Christ to wander by degrees, so as where before it was a hard matter to find an Infidel, it was then much more difficult to meet a Christian, to so small a number were they reduc'd; and in this condition did they stand, till the Christians of the West put the Eastern Saracens to flight, and restor'd An∣tioch to her Primitive Liberty, and all this under the command of Godfrey of Bollen, (who refus'd to be Crown'd King with a Crown of Gold, where our Saviour had been Crown'd with Thorns) in the year 1098. Great was the Schism in the Church in the time of Alexander the third (as shall be more particularly and more properly express'd in my third Book) and all of them re∣concil'd either by Councels or Congregations, only that which gave him the greatest trouble, was an Assembly of Bishops at Pavia, congregated by orders from the Empe∣rour, but by the zeal and valour of the Venetian, that was dissolv'd, and Alexander re∣stor'd to the Chair, in despight of the Emperour, who having lost his Army, was con∣strain'd by the Venetian to come in Person to Venice to kiss the Popes Toe. So as God knows what condition the Church would have been in, had not the valour of the Vene∣tian interpos'd. It would not be an easie matter to make an end of this History, nor would it be easie for the best memory that is to retain them, should I enumerate every particular Schism, and Heresie, every Dispute, every Persecution, every piece of Cruelty, and every Muta∣tion in the Church, and the Remedies that were so seasonably and so miraculously apply'd, (as it were from Heaven) to her afflictions. And if it should be done, it would be only a renovation and revivement of the memory of the antient sorrows and afflictions of the Church: yet I am perswaded, that as the relation and repetition of their suffering, would inforce tears from the eyes of many a Christian; so am I satisfied on the other side, the remedies and deliverances sent down to them from Heaven, would be a great comfort and corroboration to the Godly. For which reason, I have in my third Book in larg'd upon the miseries of the Church; not so much to commemorate the unhappy and scandalous Schisms wherewith several Anti-Popes had infested it, as to evince and make the Divine Providence more conspicuous to the understanding of the Devout. The Clergy of Rome, as well the smaller, as those of greatest Dignity, do believe that they endure all the troubles and burthens of the Church, but those burthens, as they call it, are accompany'd with so much Honor and Grandeur, 'tis not possible to disco∣ver the trouble they pretend to lye under. And forasmuch as the Faithfull do suffer most commonly by the Churchmen, it may be said, it is the Clergy that enjoy, and the Laity that suffers; and indeed one of their greatest troubles is, that they are constrain'd to en∣dure silently the insolences of the Ecclesiasticks, which they commit with as much confi∣dence, and security, as if Honesty, and Justice, and Christianity, were intended for other people, and not for them. According to my natural inclination, I had the curiosity a while agoe to read over the Ecclesiastical History, and I made this observation, that all the Schisms and Heresies in the Church, arose either from some profound and undeterminable Disputes betwixt the Governours and Pastors in the Church, or from the Envy that is too frequent amongst
them, or from the Scandalousness of their Lives, or from the Exaltation of their Kin∣dred, or from some blind passion that precipitates the people in general, and the Clergy in particular, and reigns most especially in such persons as are dedicated to Divine Offices, not that the Priesthood communicates any such thing to the Priest, but that the Priest prophaning the Priesthood, lives as he were under no such charge. And this being the true Mother and Original of Schism, it behooves every good Chri∣stian to apply what remedy he is able, not of Councel and Admonition only (because so obstinate is the nature of the Ecclesiasticks, they will sooner adhere to their own wicked opinions, than be perswaded by the best advice in the world) but with Arms in their hands, to struggle and contend in preservation of the just prerogative of the Church. But since we have had occasion to speak so frequently of Schism and Heresie; to pre∣vent confusion in such as have not been well instructed, it will not be amiss in this place to give some description by the bye of the difference betwixt them; and not without rea∣son, for it is not two months since, that a certain Franciscan Preacher, a Missionary against Hereticks, being ask'd what the difference was, could not make him an answer. Schism it originally a Greek word, and signifies in our Tongue, a cutting separation, or division; and indeed, though there appears some little difference betwixt Heresie and that, it is not much; both of them importing such a division, as tares and distracts the Body and Members of the Church, that was formerly united with so much order and decorum. Notwithstanding all this, if we consider well the qualities of them both, we shall find some variety in their manner of Operation. By Heresie is meant, not only a difference in matters of Discipline, but of Faith also; and of this kind was the division introduc'd in the Primitive times by the Ebionites, Marcionites, and more particularly the Arri∣ans. Whereas by Schism, is meant a difference or disagreement in the Orders and Exteri∣or Policy of the Church, and such was the dis-union the Donatists occasion'd in the Church in Africa, by reason of Cecilianus his being chosen Bishop of Carthage, they pretending he was illegally advanc'd to that Bishoprick, and contrary to Ecclesiastical Rules, so as they began at that time to write against their proceedings in that Case, without medling at all with any principal of Religion. But this difference does not alwayes hold in the same manner as I have stated it; and the reason is, because as Faith and Charity (the two principal Theological virtues) are observ'd to go alwayes and inseperably together, so Schism and Heresie (the two profest diametrical Enemies of those virtues) go usually hand in hand; insomuch as he that has no Charity, will have but little Faith, and he that has no Faith, will have less Charity, and upon this score, St. Austin (with the greatest part of the Doctors of the Church) doubts not to pronounce Heresie nothing else but an old and inveterated Schism. Schismaticks commonly are Domestick Enemies, and by consequence more mischie∣vous than Heresie, which is as it were an open and declar'd Enemy. And this Schism is many times nourish'd in the Church by the very Pastors that govern it; so that Schism is often times the root from whence the Tree of Heresie grows to such a height, it becomes very difficult to pull it up, and hurts the hands of those that endeavour it. And certainly, he that has not the power or caution to suppress Schism, must with more difficulty at∣tempt the eradication of Heresie, because if Schism in its Infancy as it was, be found diffi∣cult to be suppress'd, Heresie (that is but Schism adult) will be more difficult. I have already declar'd, that the greatest Schism that at this time reigns in the Church, and insensibly tares the Bowels of it out, is the observation all good Christians make of the great Scandals and Impieties of the Clergy; and if any should be so far over-seen as to undertake their defence, I would ask them but these questions. To pass from the embraces of a wicked and meritricious woman, to the Sacred Duties of the Altar, is not that Schism? to see the Priest of God celebrate Mass with Daggers at their Girdles, and Pistols under their Vests, is it not Schism? To see (I speak it with horror) that Boy serving and attending the Priest as his Disciple in the Holiest part of his Office, with whom he lay the night before, and must again the next, is not that
Schism? To hear hourly of Murders, and other execrable Villanies committed in the very Cloisters, is not that Schism? To sell Benefices at a dear rate, to keep open shop to ne∣gotiate for Simoney, to take the Rings off the Virgin Maryes fingers, and to put them upon a Harlots, is not that Schism? to fatten up the Popes Nephews with the Wealth of the Church, is not that Schism? In short, what is this but a separation of themselves from the Rules and good Orders of the Church? Is it not a dis-uniting of Faith and Cha∣rity? a taring of the Church out of the Arms of our Saviour? and a practising of things contrary to the practise of the Apostles? And indeed, things may be as they will in other parts of Christendome, if we restrain them no better at Rome, in which place there are thousands of these Schisms that will ru∣ine the Church infallibly, without some speedy remedy be apply'd, their Corruption be∣ing at that height, it is almost impossible to look upon a Priest with patience. If the zeal of any good Christian carries him on so far, as to correct or reprehend any of them for their Exorbitancies, they will answer in their Excuse, that even among the Apostles there was a Judas, a Traytor, and therefore as they would have them believe, they ought not to be scandaliz'd at the ill example the Clergy gives to them. These kind of excuses may seem good to those that use them, but not to those that hear them. I would to God amongst twelve Ecclesiasticks, there was but one Judas to be found; but I am affraid, amongst a hundred of them that imitate Judas in their lives, there will be scarce one found that lives like the rest of the Apostles. Is it not Schism to hear a thousand of quarrels and disputes betwixt the Bishops and the Civil Magistrates, betwixt Princes and Cardinals, Priest and Priest, Order and Order, in the very Heart and Bosom of the Church! The Religion or Order of Dominicans contends very fiercely with the Franciscan about Original Sin, and will have the Virgin Mary as lyable to it, as any other Creature whatever, which they maintain very furiously in their Schools, but with more Arro∣gance than Argument. The Franciscan on the other side, with the same Ardor pro∣nouncing her immacculate. I my self have, upon several occasions, heard poor ignorant Dominicans discoursing with that Insolence, a poor Secular would have been burnt for half of it. But these good Fathers are exempt from all punishment because they can command the Inquisition as they please, chastising who they think fit, and passing by such as deserve it, being Judges to others, and Princes to themselves. Can there be greater Schism, than to hear them disputing dayly, and contending about the preceedence of one Order before another, and sometimes with such passion, that they fall together by the Ears, battering one another in their very processions with the Crosses they bear, to the no small Scandal of the Laity, that to prevent Homicide, and Blood-shed, are forc'd to interpose. Nor has this happen'd once or twice, but a thousand times, not in one City, but a hundred. I remember my self such a Combate one Corpus Christi day in the Lands of the Church, betwixt the Agustins, and another Order of Fryers, whose name I have forgot; as they were passing out of the Cathedral with their lighted Candles in their hands, and the Bishops Vicar carrying the Host, they fell into some difference about the preceedency, and at last (in spight of all exhortation to the contrary) to blows; striking one another with their Candles, and burning one anothers Beards, so as the Vicar had no other way, but to command them home again to their Covents, and adjourn the Procession a full hour. Nor is there any Schism, not only more scandalous, but ridiculous in the Church, than that betwixt the Conventual Fathers of the Order of St. Francis, and the Cappu∣chins, and for what great business? (I speak these things to Foreigners, for those that live in Italy, have them hourly before their Eyes) For I know not what Devil with a horn. The Cappuchins will needs have it that St. Francis wore a Cap with a horn upon his head; the Coventuals on the other side, will have it a Hood or Cappuce like theirs: in short, these Schismaticks are so Religious in these trifles, they Preach and Inculcate them into their Disciples, that they may be ready upon all occasion to rifle the Argu∣ments of the other; whilst the People, either out of ignorance or partiality, run up and down the Streets, sometimes crying up the Hood, and sometimes the Horn, as their affection to either side leads them.
The Popes by several Decrees, as their Conscience or Passion directed them, endea∣vour'd to reconcile them, but all to no purpose, they rather exasperated than appeas'd them. Ʋrban the eight, in compliance with his Brother Cardinal Saint Onofrius his humour, set forth several Bulls in favour of the Cappuchins, upon which the Franciscans took occasion to defend themselves in Print. And accordingly, a certain Father call'd Catalanus, writ a large Volume against the Cappuchins, that put all Italy into a Convul∣sion, so as it seem'd as if the dayes of the Guelphs and Ghebellis were return'd again, the Cardinals, as well as common People, falling into Parties. The Cappuchins also (though the book was prohibited to be bought or read under penalty of Excommunica∣tion) publish'd several Manifesto's against it, though it was Dedicated to a Cardinal. Now can there be a greater or vainer Schism in the Church? Yet these Venerable Schis∣matical Fathers of the Church, will perswade you that all this is no Schism, but a Vir∣tue, a laudible and necessary Vindication of their Rights, under which Title they com∣prehend all their Schisms and Heresies. The Hereticks that are now in Europe in such great numbers, or in any other part of the World, have not separated themselves from the Church out of any Fundamental Ex∣ception, as if the Foundation of that Building was not good, Oh no! They will not say so themselves; on the contrary, they acknowledg'd them Excellent, but observing Corruption and Scandal increasing dayly in the Church, they conclude the Edifice can∣not stand long, but by a precipitate destruction must of necessity fall, and bury its Foun∣dation in its own Ruines; thereby taking occasion to insinuate into the People, that God Almighty will prosper the Reformers, and make their Labour and Industry instrumental in re-clearing the Foundations, and re-establishing the Church. He that is so curious to trace out the Original of Heresie, especially those which abound in these dayes, he shall find, that from idle and impertinent Fewds and Disputes amongst the Ecclesiasticks (which nobody regarded, or if they did, they look'd upon them as inconsiderable) came Schism, and from Schism, Heresie, which has multiplyed like Corn. The least spark of fire, meeting matter proper for combustion, kindles immediate∣ly, and if not timely extinguish'd, will hazard the whole City. The Scandal the Eccle∣siasticks give; is like such a spark, it seems yet inconsiderable, but if not seasonably quench'd, for ought I know, it may put the whole Church into a Flame. One of the greatest miseries I have observ'd in the Church, is, that in spight of our own reason and judgement, we are forc'd and compell'd to applaud the Impieties of the Clergy; and if any persons Conscience be so tender, and so true to the Religion he pro∣fesses, as to refuse it, he is pronounc'd a Heretick immediately, and accordingly con∣demn'd to the Flames. The Popes think they do a great matter, when they raise three hundred thousand Crowns upon the people, under pretence of extirpating the Hereticks in Germany, and yet send the Emperour but thirty thousand of them; and in the mean time, they enter∣tain such multitudes of Schismaticks in Rome, whose scandalous lives disturb the peace of all Christendome. Would the Pope with his Authority, and the Cardinals with their Advice, instead of Persecuting the Hereticks, reform not only the general Abuses in the Church which are numerous, but the innumerable Scandals committed by the Prelats in their Pallaces, and the Fryers in their Cloisters, in the face and defiance as it were of all Christian people, the Church would be not only in a better condition, but the Hereticks that cannot now be reduc'd with force, nor perswasion, would humble themselves, come into the Church, and throw themselves into her Arms. Some Popes are zealous for the Persecution of Hereticks, but Hereticks do but sport themselves at the Persecution of the Popes; and indeed the Hereticks have more reason to jeast at it, than the Popes have to Persecute, for in the punishing of one, they do but raise up a thousand; if they burn one in some place that is remote from Rome, there will twenty turn Hereticks for it in Rome; in short, if they chastise one, a thousand will be awaken'd to inform themselves of the reason, and turn Hereticks too. This one thing I may say, that perhaps there is not a man in Christendome better ac∣quainted with the Juglings of the Roman Catholicks, or the Impieties of the Hereticks,
than I am. I have weigh'd and consider'd them both, and will boldly aver there is not any way more ready for the Conversion of Hereticks, than the good example of Catho∣licks, and especially the Churchmen; nor better means to restrain those that in Rome it self do write against the iniquities of Rome, than to take away those iniquities once for all. What I say, I can speak with confidence, my own experience having evinc'd it. Let Rome but Persecute one Tongue, and she shall raise up a hundred; let her but put one good Heretick to death, and she creates a hundred perverse Hereticks in his place. But some may ask me the difference betwixt a perverse Heretick, and a good one? I will declare my self; by a perverse Heretick, I mean those the Catholicks calls good; and by a good one, him that he thinks perverse. The perverse one praises, and flatters the Clergy in Rome, and Rome in the Clergy; the good Hereticks on the contrary, con∣demn the defects both in the one and the other, not out of malice, but zeal, not to fo∣ment wickedness, but to remove it. When the Ecclesiasticks do meet with any Treatise that checks and rebukes the Exor∣bitancy of their Lives, they think not of any Reformation of themselves, but cry out pre∣sently 'tis the invention of Hereticks; but the good Catholick, that with sorrow ob∣serves the Ecclesiasticks Conversations, know too well it is otherwise. The Hereticks abhor me to death, and why? Because with Gentleness and Charity, I rebuke the Extravaganes of the Churchmen of Rome; for they making their advantage of the disorders there, would be glad to have all things run to ruine: and indeed, had I any design to do Rome a prejudice, I would let them go on in their own wayes, without giving them any notice of the Precipice. A Chyrurgeon that hates his Patient, trou∣bles not himself about his recovery; but he which loves him, will put his Probe to the Wound, to remove the Corruption. I call God to witness, I speak not what I say out of passion; my desire is to see the Church in Charity and Union within it self, for this is certain that violence, and com∣mination, and force, have no other effect upon the Hereticks, than to exasperate and in∣cense them. All other applications are vain: to remove the crudeties and ill humours in the Sto∣mach, inward Medecines are to be taken, and those humours that tare and gnaw the ve∣ry Bowels of the Church, are to be removed, before that which corrupts the habit and outward parts only: if the Physician purges the body thoroughly within, he is assured the outward part cannot remain ill. The Governours of the Church, the Prelats, and the Priests, are the Vitals and Interior parts of that Body, let them be well purg'd of their Enormities, and the Exterior will soon recover. If Rome would Cure Rome, the Hereticks would be cur'd by their example. I have often said it, and will assert it again, that Hereticks do dayly repair from their several Countries to the City of Rome, to observe the Conversation of the Catholicks, and imbrace what they esteem most conducible. But with what success? They come forth Christians, they return Turks; they enter into Rome with a scrupulous and unset∣led Conscience, and they go out with a Diabolical; they come forth with a desire to be∣come Holy, and they go back with a resolution to become Devils; for in a word, the most part of those that come thither, return Atheists home again. And all by reason of the innumerable Scandals and Transgressions they observe in the Ecclesiasticks; so as there could be nothing more Charitable and Expedient for the Conversion of Hereticks, than for the Pope and Cardinals in their great Prudence, to begin and effect a thorough Reformation in their Clergy. A certain Protestant of Bearne, that had been long in Italy, and was my particular friend, would often tell me, He would sooner choose to be a Devil in Hell, than a Catho∣lick in Rome; and his reason was, Because the Devils believe and tremble, but the Ca∣tholicks did but laugh at it, committing greater faults in the Church than they. For my better satisfaction, I intreated him one day to give me a clearer prospect of his Judgement, which willingly he granted, and deliver'd it in this manner▪ Sir, Homi∣cide is forbidden in the Old Law by Gods express command, and by Christs particular Order in the new; in short, God as God, Christ as God and Christ, all Laws both
Divine and Humane, both Natural and Celestial, have forbidden Murther. Non Occides. Yet in Italy, nay in Rome it self, thousands of Murthers are committed, and which is worse, the Murderer has no more to do, than to betake himself to their Churches. I have seen my self, some of those Homicides walking in State for their Recreation in those very Churches, where but a while before, the dead body of him that they had murther'd, was bu∣ry'd, and can any thing be found more Diabolical than this? No, and without doubt I have good reason for my Resolution of being a ▪Devil, rather than a Catholick. I did not fail to suggest all the Arguments the Pope and the Church use for the defence of their Sanctuaries, but to no purpose, for he answer'd, and not without passion, That the Pope could not make the house of God a refuge for Murtherers, expresly against his commands without making the world believe Gods Commandements were false. And truly a good Conscience cannot be without some regret, as often as he thinks upon Gods ex∣press command, Thou shalt not kill; and on the other side, observes the Violators of that Law shelter'd and protected in his house, as if the presence of Christ serv'd only chiefly to secure Murtherers. I know there are many Divines, that with great zeal will endea∣vour to defend it; but I would to God there were fewer of them in the Church, perhaps things would be better manag'd in the Service of God with their native simplicity, whereas now the minds of poor Christians are confounded with the Opinion of this Di∣vine, and the Explication of the other. Schism, and Heresie, and Schismatical Con∣venticles, from whence had they their Original, but from the brains and niceties of the Theologists? But let them defend their Sanctuaries, and argue against the Precepts of God as they please, the Day of Judgement will come, and they will have their reward. Poor Princes, must it needs be that the Arms of your Justice must be held, and the safety of the people impugned, by an Opinion that is without doubt Diabolical. A certain friend of mine that had seen the world, did use to call the Divines and Con∣fessors, the two Domestick Enemies of the Church; and truly I cannot resolve my self, which of the two are the least necessary in the Service of God. Amongst scrupulous persons, I know these words will be thought Heretical; but certainly they are full of Pious Sentiment and Catholick. The Divines, that will be disputing beyond what the simplicity of Faith requires, are Devils, not Divines; and the Confessors that make Sport and Comedy with the Confessions of their Penitents, are the same. The Theolo∣gists with their Arguments, turn Unity into Schism, and the Confessors on the other side, turn the Confessions into Farces. Were the Government of the Church (instead of being Monarchical, and dependant only upon the Pope, as it is now) Aristocratical, and committed to the care and jurisdiction of such Cardinals, as would serve the Church, and not his Holiness, the Divines would not be so quarrelsome, nor the Confessors as prophane as the Divines. But Confession now adayes is nothing but derision, the Con∣fessors drolling only and playing upon their Penitents, and cheating both them and themselves. And all this evil proceeds from the carelessness of the Bishops, in Selecting fit persons for the taking Confessions, I am confident there are in Italy at this time, above two thousand Confessors that can neither read nor understand one verse in the Scriptures, and yet most of them Masters or Batchelors of Divinity; and God knows then how the poor Sinner is absolved. Two instances I can give of their Capacities, not Chosen, or Select, but taken up by chance out of a thousand more that I have heard. The first is of a cer∣tain Merchant of Parma that went to Confession to a Bare-footed Fryer of the Order of St. Francis, and had this Penance injoyn'd him, That he should eat three Ounces of Chaffe. To ease himself a little of the disgust he had taken at the indiscretion of his Penance, he comes to me and tells me the whole story; I had the curiosity to ask him what his sins were that he had confest, and he protested to me nothing but that he had had an intention to have kiss'd his Maid. Now I leave the Reader to be judge in this case, what proportion there was betwixt the Sin and the Penance. His heart should have been punish'd, not his mouth, because 'twas that, not this, had offended. But 'tis ignorance and indiscretion that causes all this, and should the like case happen to me, I could very well make the Father an an∣swer.
The other was of a certain young Student that went to a Jesuite to Confession; amongst other of his Confessions, he told him that he had lay'n a whole night with his Fatherships Neice, and began to faint almost under the shame and apprehension of his Sin, so that he had no mind to proceed, but the good Father to incourage him, told him, That it was no such great matter to lye a night with the Neice, for he had ly'n ten years to∣gether with the Mother. And with this good exhortation, he sent the young man back to his house. And this second Example I heard my self in a Sermon in a certain Town in the Territories of the Venetian, Preach'd by an Augustine Fryer, who by his face, look'd as like to do such a business as the Jesuite. And thousands of these instances may be heard dayly in their Pulpits; the Church of Rome, by reason of the licentiousness of its Ministers, being the laughing-stock of the Catholicks, and the obloquy of the Protestant. And truly 'tis sad, that those Confessi∣ons that were at first requir'd, as conducing to the Salvation of Souls, should be turn'd now (by the iniquity of the Confessors) into the scandal of the Church. The Bishops shut their eyes at every thing, because the Cardinals connive at them. The Cardinals commit all things to the Pope, contenting themselves with the magnificence of their Sta∣tion. The Pope (because they let him alone in a Pinnacle of Grandeur above all exha∣lation of scandal) leaves them to themselves, and retains his opinion of their Piety; not regarding what Heresies the Ignorance, Malice, or Lasciviousness of his Confessors, may create. To this the Ecclesiastick answers, that we ought not to look so severely to the faults of the scandalous, because they are but frailties, and so will be judged by the Divine Justice it self. And for instance they alledge the example of Judas, who was a Traytor even in the company of the Holy Apostles, so as our eye they say, ought not to be upon him, but upon the rest. To which I answer, that if there were indeed but one ill Churchman in twelve, all Hereticks both Jew and Gentile, would be converted to the Faith; but as the case stands, there is scarce one good to be found in ten thousand bad, and therefore how can they be converted, that have so many scandals in their prospect. But some will say perhaps, how can these things be redress'd? I answer, with the greatest facility in the world, if the Cardinals pleas'd. I speak not of the Pope, because (let the Divines say what they will for His absoluteness) to speak the truth, the Church of God is not a Monarchy, but a Republique, the Cardinals and Bishops being Supreme and Soveraign Senators, and the Pope, as Christs Vicar, President of the Senate; for though Christ created St. Peter his Vicar, he took not away the Authority from the rest of the Apostles, they alwayes with Supreme Authority in their Colledge, decreeing what ever they thought necessary for the benefit of the Church, St. Peter being allow'd no more than his single voice. So that the Care and Government of the Church, be∣longing by legal succession to the Cardinals, the right of appointing remedies against such scandals as do afflict us, belongs likewise to them. And indeed, whilst the Church was under a kind of Aristocrasie, Miracles, and Holiness, and Goodness, were observ'd to flourish. But since the Priests began to flatter the Popes, conceiving preferment and ad∣vantages easilier obtain'd by the adulation of one person, than a Senate, they put all into the hands of the Pope, and made him a Monarch; so that Miracles were lost immediate∣ly, Sanctity was banish'd, and a thousand wickednesses introduc'd, because that which was Monarchy in the hands of the Pope, became Tyranny in those of the Nephews. Insomuch that to reduce the Church to its Primitive Holiness, it will be necessary to re∣store it to its antient Aristocrasie. Since my being at Rome, I heard of hundreds of Decrees put out by the Congregation of Regolars, but I never heard of any of them put in Execution as they ought to have been, the Popes for the most part having dash'd them motu proprio; besides▪ the appli∣cation being superficial and only to the top branches of the Tree, it was impossible it should reach the Corruption that was in the Root. The wickedness of the Churchmen, is like a Wart upon a mans hand, the more you cut it, unless you cut it to the bottom, the greater it grows. To put out fire, it is necessary to remove that matter that sustains it; and if the Cardinals would apply any remedy to the scandals that throng dayly out of the Cloysters, to the detriment of the Church, they ought not to consider
the nature of the Fryers, after they are made Fryers, so much as the qualities of those who make themselves Fryers. The Method of the Italians in this age (I speak not of other Countreys) is good in∣deed for the advancement of their Arms, but not at all for the benefit of the Church, For example, an Italian that has three Sons, picks out the wisest and most gentile, and Marryes him to keep up his Family; him that is most sprightly and vigorous, he sends to the Wars; and if any be more foolish, or extravagant than other, he is sent to the Covent. In short, those Fathers whose Sons are given to Theft, to Drunkenness, Lust, Dissoluteness, or Prodigality; if they be Lyers, Swearers, Cheats, Blasphemers, &c. do presently devote them to the Cloyster, where putting on the Habit of a Fryer, they put them out of their sight indeed, but put them into a Religious house, where they be∣come Devils, because wickedness, or rather a heap of wickedness, cannot be taken away by fifteen yards of Cloth. Were these disorders but regulated, a great part of the scandal that lyes at present upon the Church, would be taken away. 'tis a shame the worst should be given to God, and the best to the Devil: 'twere better to suppress Cloysters and Fryers, than to suffer such Fryers to be made. In the Church of Rome, the quality of the persons that are to enter into Religious Habits, is not so much consider'd, as their quantity; so their num∣ber be great, no matter for the rest, Cheats, Back-biters, the Hunch-back'd, the Lame, and the Blind, are all admitted into the Cloysters, as if the number, not the qualities, made the Religion. O most diabolical policy, and fit to be exploded! Did it belong to me to supplicate the Pope, and the Colledge of Cardinals, I would do it upon my knees, because I observe goodness and piety declining in the Church, and all by reason of the multitudes of Priests, whose qualities ought to be more regarded, than their numbers. One truly Religious man, is worth a thousand wicked, and edifies the Church more with the explinariness of his life, than all the rest with their Religious formalities. When first I saw the picture of St. Francis, with a Church upon his Shoulders, and this Inscription about it, Vade Francisce repara domum meum quae labitur. I was amaz'd, especially when having the reason of it from a Father of that Order, he told me that St. Francis had seen our Saviour one night in a Dream, who admonish'd him, in the same words to go and repair his Church. And in this, the cunning of the Fryers wherewith they lull and cajole the Popes and the Cardinals, is seen. This I may boldly affirm, that that Inscription is a dishonor to them all; to what end serve the Pope, the Cardinals, and the Bishops? If this be true, the Pope cannot deny but his Government is naught, because he has suffer'd the Church to fall into those Errors. Upon the day that is dedica∣ted to St. Francis Saverius, in the presence of four or five Cardinals, and in Rome it self, I heard a Jesuite Preach in praise of that Saint, among the rest of his Elegies, this was one, That he had Baptiz'd a million, and a hundred, and eight thousand Souls in the Indies. I wonder'd not so much at the Priest that Preach'd this, as at the Cardinals that stood gaping to hear him. To believe that Saverius did not Baptize more into the Faith of Christ, than the whole Colledge of Apostles may, I hope is no Heresie; and indeed if I speak my judgement, I am of opinion he scarce Baptiz'd any, and my reason is, because at this time there is not a hundred thousand Christians in the whole Indies. So that had it been true, that St. Francis Saverius had Baptiz'd so many, the number would have been increas'd, especially the way having been open since that time to the Spaniard, Por∣tugal, English, Hollander, and all other Christians whatsoever. But for my part, I dare affirm 'tis but a politick Stratagem of the Fryers, to besot, and inveigle, the Pope and Cardinals into an opinion of their Piety, and to shut their ears against the report of their Wickedness. The Church is to be supported by the Zeal and good Government of the Popes and their Cardinals, who are absolute Governours of the Flock of Christ, and no others; the Saints are to honour and respect them as Servants of God: but the consequence will not hold, that out of respect to St. Francis, the Church should be fill'd up with thou∣sands of Franciscans, in which they do more mischief than good. And if it were true, that St. Francis Baptiz'd so many thousand Souls as they pretend, it would be unfit to
give the Jesuits that great liberty to inrich themselves, as if St. Francis his Voyage to the Indies, had been to have brought the Indies back to the Colledge of Jesuits. But why these multitudes of Religions? Why these numbers of Priests? Half a dozen good Christians, would do more towards the Conversion of Infidels, than thousands of such, as devour up the bread from the people, and impoverish Princes, for the inrichment of themselves. Pope Innocent the tenth, suspended the Superiours of all orders from investing of Fry∣ers, but the intention of that Pope not being seconded by his Successors, it was not exe∣cuted long before the Gate he had open'd was shut up again, and it may be it was out of fear of their railing, for being naturally vindicative, they have more sting than honey in their tongues. If the Cardinals Projectors of the several orders about Rome, would take the pains but to Visit the Covents under their Charge, in five and twenty Fryers, they would scarce find fifteen that could read, nor three amongst them that were fit to converse with an honest man. To what purpose then is this loss of bread upon an unprofitable Generation? To what purpose does the Church despoil her self of her own Garments, to cover the shoulders of a race of people that do nothing for her interest? It is the Pope is the greatest gainer by these multitudes of Clergy; the Princes in the mean time lose so many of their Subjects, and so much of their Revenue, giving out of their own Stock to the Church, whilst the Pope sucks up at long run whatsoever they give. I shall conclude this Book with a Jew that was baptiz'd in Rome; to whom I ask'd this Question, If there were many more of his Nation converted to the Faith; to which he re∣ply'd, The Jews might be easily made Christians, if the lives of the Churchmen were not so scandalous, I answer'd, If you that are now a Christian, do retain still such good thoughts of the Religious; 'tis a sign your Baptism has no profound root in your heart. The Jew smil'd, and leaving that discourse, it was all the answer he gave me. In the mean time, let him that pleases imagine the rest. I shall proceed to discourse more nearly of the Cardinals, who are the Legal Supporters of the Church of Christ.
Il CARDINALISMO di Santa Chiesa, OR THE HISTORY OF CARDINALS. In III. Parts. PART I. BOOK III. The Contents. Which is treated of the sweetness of that Fortune, that receives its original from the Riches of the Church. Of the contemptibleness of Ecclesiastical dignity in the Primitive times, the reason why the wealth of the Church is the sweeter now, for being bitter at first. That the Court of Rome is the most capable of inriching their Families, and by what means. Of the diversity of degrees in Rome. Of the Cardinalitial dignity, and its Grandeur. Of the immo∣derate desire of Prelats to become Cardinals. How much the Popes have ex∣ceeded in aggrandizing of Cardinals. Of the illustrious name of a Cardinal. Of the original of the Cardinalitial dignity, and the Etimology of the word. Of the Assistants Saint Peter had in the Execution of his Charge. Of the first Titles given and conserv'd to the Cardinals. Of the distribution of Orders and Degrees in the time of the Papacy of Higinus. Of the distinction at first betwixt Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. Of some reasons that prove there were Cardinals in the Infancy of the Church, and that in good veneration and esteem. Of the Opinion of those that would have Cardinals to be no
more than simple Curats in the beginning of the Church, That Religion is made by men and not by places. Of the Division of Offices in the Republiques of Greece. Of the manner in which the Ministers of the Church were formerly order'd. Of the name of Cardinal given first to the place where they serv'd, and afterwards to the person that serv'd. Of the Ecclesiastical Ministry exercis'd in Caves in the beginning of Christianity for fear of the Tyrants. Of the great esteem they had formerly of the Title of Brother, and the correspondence that past betwixt the Ministers of the Church. Of the strange Tragedies that fell often-times out, in the Councels, and in the Electi∣on of Bishops, and the cause. Of the number of persons kill'd in Rome, upon a difference at the Election of Damascus and Ursinus. Of the Persecutions of the Emperours overcome by the Church with the force of patience. Of the preceedency of the Bishops and Cardinals, and how the Cardinalship was a step to the degree of a Bishop. Of the effects that the blending and confusion of Temporal things with Spiritual brought into the Church. Of the Ecclesiasti∣cal Government, and its policies. Of the resemblance of the Church with the Galley of Salamin. How the Supreme Government of the Church was taken from the Bishops, and transferr'd to the Cardinals. How ambition first flourish'd in the Church. Of the Election of Cardinals, and the quality of their Electors. Of the great ardour with which the Italian Prelats negotiated the Cardinalitial Dignity. Of the Honours and Dignities invented by the World, and by fortune. Of the Titles the Cardinals enjoy at present. Of the number that forms the Colledge of Cardinals. Of the great Prerogative that follow the Majesty of Cardinals. Of the time the Popes create their Cardinals. Of the manner of their creation formerly, and of the way they are created at present. Of a certain example of a Catholick and a Protestant, about the manner of creating of Cardinals, Of Maldochino's promotion to the Cardinalship. Of the seven Offices in the persons of the Cardinals. Of the Pension and Jurisdiction of the Popes Vicar. Of the charge and antiquity of the Vice-chancellorship. Of the number of Congregations the Cardinals hold. Of the three Arch-Priestship in the persons of the Cardinals. Of the order observ'd at the death of a Cardinal, and of the ceremonies at their Fu∣nerals. Of the diminution of the Cardinalitian authority by the Popes. Of the manner in which they receive their Caps. Of the ceremony of stopping the mouths of the Cardinals. Of the Cardinalitial Habits. Of their Caval∣cades. Of the usual Function when the Pope sends a Cap to a Cardinal out of Rome. Of the visits the Cardinals receive and return. Of the manner how the Prelats of the Church are receiv'd by the Cardinal Padron. Of the scandal taken by the Protestants, by the irregular lives of some of the Cardi∣nals. Of the manner of their stopping their Coaches. Of the civility a∣mongst the Ecclesiasticks. Of the Cardinals courtesie to Strangers, when they are Legats of Provinces. Of the Presents the new Cardinals give to the Officers of the Popes Court, and the Cardinal Nephews Court, and to others. Of the manner observ'd by the Cardinal Legats, when they receive the rela∣tions of any Serene Prince. The manner how the Cardinals receive the great Ladies as they pass by their houses. Of the Popes Titles, resemblance with the Titles of Christ. Of the great contempt the Popes in the Primitive times had of Honors and Titles. Of the introduction of Titles amongst the Eccle∣siasticks,
according as Riches were introduc'd. Of the Titles the Popes us'd antiently. Of the Title of Servant of the Servants of God, introduc'd by Gregory. That Schism and Heresie were begot in the Church by the intro∣duction of so many several Titles. Of the variation of many Titles in the persons of the Cardinals. Of the Title of Eminence invented by Urban the eight, and upon what occasion. Of his first design to have conferr'd that Title upon his Nephews only. Of the troubles brought into the Church, by the assignation of the Title of Eminence to the Cardinals. Of the Title of Highness assum'd by the Princes, after the Cardinals had taken upon them the Title of Eminence. How common the Title of Excellence became after that time. Of a Princes Secretary that refus'd a Letter from a Cardinal to his Prince, because it was not directed with the Title of Highness. Of the Divines the Cardinals keep alwayes about them. Of the office of a Theologist, how honourable it is, when exercis'd by a person of Learning and Worth▪ Of a certain Divine, and his impious Services to his Cardinal. Of the ho∣nour good Servants bring to the persons of the Cardinals, and of the disho∣nour, if they be wicked; and of other particularities. THere are some Ages past already, since all Europe (not to restrain my self to Italy which has found the greatest sweetness of it) had had ex∣perience how pleasant that Fortune is, that receives its. Original from the Church. For from thence it is, that that which before was de∣spis'd by the most abject Citizens, is now eagerly aspir'd to by the most considerable Families in Europe. Some ten Ages past, there was not a Mendicant, or Artificer much more, that could be perswaded to leave his Cabane, or his Shop, to take upon him the Authority of a Prince, in the Territory of the Church. The Pastors in those dayes, choosing rather to sweat and toyl like a Husbandman at Plough, than like a Prince to command the Monarchy of Christ. At present (or for these two last Ages rather) the nature of things has been alter'd so much, there seems no Room left in the Ministry of the Church, but for the Richest, and most Illustrious Families that are, Princes themselves aspiring to those preferments, changing willingly their Sword, for a Gown, and their Mantle Royal, for a Fryers Cowle. Amongst the Protestants also, I observe no small alteration; in former Ages, one of the most able and eminent Ministers of the Gospel, could not without great difficulty get a Wife, even amongst the meanest people of the City. Now a dayes the Tables are turn'd, and the greatest Ladies are ambitious to marry themselves to the most abject and ignorant of that Ministry. To the Catholick and Protestant both, this matter appears wonderfull, yet if it be consider'd narrowly, the mystery is not impenetrable: the truth is, the Pay of the Church that before was bitter, is now sweet and easie A Preacher of the Gospel has now no more to do, than to furnish himself with a dozen Sermons afore-hand, and (ac∣cording to the revolution of the year) to beat them over and over again into the Ears of the People? whereas formerly it was their custom to study early and late, from morning to night, and be alwayes ready, not to expose only, but spend their blood in the Ser∣vice of the Church. Formerly, the Clergy thought of nothing but executing the duty of their Functions, taking no care nor pleasure in the world, and therefore the world de∣spis'd them. At present they are so farr inveighed and inamour'd with the world, they show but little affection to the Church, and the world respects them for it. Antiently they serv'd the Church for no other end, but to gain Souls to Heaven; but now they served it only to gain applause and riches to themselves; then they were  d despised, now they are rich and adored.
In those dayes the Popes were constrain'd with tears in their eyes to beseech such and such that they would vouchsafe to take the Ecclesiastical Habit upon them, because then their humility and meekness made them contemptible to the world. Now the Scene is chang'd, and people beg and intreat with their Memorials and Petitions (not to say Bribes) that his Holiness would graciously confer the Cassock of a Prelat upon them; their humility being turn'd into pride, and their meekness into magnificence. Oh how many Families of them would beg their bread of those very people they de∣spise, had not this great wealth been brought into the Church, and with suitable dignity been conferr'd upon the Clergy? There is not in the whole Universe, a Court more capable nor more likely to enable and enrich a mean family, than Rome, and all by its introducing so great a number of Prelats into the Church: for every man being by natural instinct desirous of the advance∣ment of his own family, betakes himself to Rome, with confidence he shall raise himself one day to some considerable dignity. There are several qualities and degrees in Rome; all of them together make up that Lather as it were, by which the Cardinalship is to be ascended to; there being none at present able to make one hope for a greater dignity. To aspire to so great an honour, is an argument of great ambition in the heart of that man; nor can any man of the Gown desire greater advancement in this Age, than to be made a Cardinal, because with the dignity he receives an immediate preheminence over all those that were his Companions before; is made a Brother of Gods Vicegerent upon the Earth, and ally's himself with what Kings or Princes he pleases, every one being am∣bitious to call a Cardinal his Couzen. Caesar for a long time had a desire to wear a perpetual Lawrell, but his desire is no∣thing to that ardor and fury wherewith the Prelats of Italy, and all Europe do aspire to so eminent a dignity. How deep a place this desire has got in the hearts of the Prelats, may be argued from hence, that they oftentimes dye with joy that they have arriv'd at such honor, that others dye for sorrow that they cannot attain it; and others think their labour well be∣stow'd, if by forty years fawning upon this Prelat and that, they can but reach it last. For prevention of contempt which usually accompanies common things, they have with good reason annex'd both to their Secular and Ecclesiastical Dignities, certain Ti∣tles of honour, not only that they might be known to the people, but to communicate and infuse into their hearts such an awe and respect as is due to their Majesty and Power. But the Popes have of late years, very much exceeded in aggrandizing the Cardinals, but the smoak is more than the meat, for the Popes incroaching hourly upon the real authority that belongs to the Cardinals, they have heap'd great Titles of Majesty upon them, that they might not at one time be cheated of both. Some there are, that believe the dignity of Cardinals had their beginning from the ve∣ry foundation of the Church, agreeable to what Eugenius quartus intimates in a Letter to Henry Arch-Bishop of Canterbury; besides whom a great number of Canonical Au∣thors have believ'd they were instituted by him, that irrigated the foundation of the Church with his own blood, that the Sacred Purple might flourish therein, as I have read and heard preach'd in St. Peters in Rome. But 'tis manifest all that is but flattery, for we know the Illustrious Title of Cardinal with which the Popes have invested the chief of the Church, was not in use till the time of Pope Silvester, who call'd them Cardinals as hinges upon which the Church Militant was to turn. The design of Silvester was good, intending thereby to put the Cardinals in mind, that if they would render themselves worthy of the esteem they expected, they ought as Se∣nators both Spiritual and Temporal of that Commonwealth, have the fear of God, and a zeal for the Flock of Christ in their minds, and by the piety and exemplariness of their Conversation, provoke, and excite other Christians to the reformation of theirs. St. Peter, 'tis true, had Linus, Cletus, Clement, Anacletus, Mark the Evangelist, and others, as his Assistants, and most Religiously executing the Offices they were under, bearing a great share in the Government and Superintendency over the whole
Church, but the name of Cardinals was not given them, nor as then known. There are furthermore divers antient Records that tell us, that Pope Cletus did insti∣tute five and twenty Titular Priests, and Anacletus seven Deacons, in commemoration of those instituted by the Apostles in the Infancy of the Church, which were without doubt the first Titles that were conferr'd, and since conserv'd by the Cardinals. Pope Evaristus who succeeded Anacletus, confirm'd that holy institution, and to ren∣der it the more compleat, he limited, and distinguish'd, the several places and Parishes that were assigned to the Government of those first Ministers of State in the Church. In the year 156. Saint Higinus being Pope, and desirous to give a greater and more august form to his Clergy, he divided them into orders and degrees, placing one under the other in a just rule of Inferiority and Superiority. The chief were call'd Cardinals, as principals at the first foundation of orders in the Church; the rest had only Priest and Deacon for their Titles. Some there were that have believ'd, and some there be that do think so still, that in the Primitive times, Bishops had the Title of Cardinals, but they do not assure us whe∣ther that name was given them in the Papacy of Higinus, or of some other Pope. How∣ever that shows the super-intendency they had over the rest of the Priests and Deacons of the Church, as they had over the rest that had the care of particular Parishes. They add also, that they were distinguish'd in that manner, by reason of their Titles; that the Cardinal Bishops had belonging to their Titles, the principal Churches both without and within Rome, to the number of eighteen, but they were afterwards reduc'd to six; that the Cardinals had assign'd to them the other Parochial Churches and Cime∣teries in Rome, where the Priests that were under them, did execute their several charges with great Decorum; their particular offices consisting in the care of Souls, in the ad∣mistration of the Sacraments of the Church, and in a charitable regard of the Burial of the Dead, and of Martyrs. The Cardinal Deacons had the Hospitals, and other Religi∣ous houses, assigned to them, whilst the simple Deacons under them, had the oversight of Orphans, Widows, and the Poor. The Chapels that were ordinarily united to these Religious houses, being called Deaconries, and in the beginning, exceeded not the num∣ber of seven, according to the number of the Cardinal Deacons, and the number of Pa∣rishes remaining in Rome after the dismal Conflagration caus'd by Nero the Tyrant. But it must needs be confess'd, that with the revolution of time, this first order and manner of Government founded principally upon actions and exercises of Piety, have been very much chang'd, so as by degrees, both Bishops, Priests, and Deacons (who compos'd the Sacred Colledge of the Church of Christ) began to be ambitious of the Title of Cardinals; and for this reason, Saint Silvester in the Councel held in Rome 324. call'd them so in common, discriminating them by that Title from the rest of the Faith∣full, who began now to look upon the Cardinals, as Cardinals indeed. And it is clearly demonstrable by all these reasons, that there were Cardinals in the very infancy of the Church, and that in good esteem, and veneration, because they were alwayes possest of the most eminent and conspicuous dignities. Their opinion does not please me at all, that hold the Cardinals were nothing else but simple Curats distinguish'd by Titles or Parishes of Rome, grounding that fancy upon an Epistle of Pope Gregory's, in which he speaks of them, as those that had the cure and in∣spection over the Parishes; as likewise upon an Expression of Platina, where he sayes, that Leo the fourth degraded and depos'd a Cardinal from the Title of St. Marcellus, for having been five years absent from his Parish. But this the Order and Chronology of the Church History will clearly refute, because in Saint Silvesters time they speak of the Grandeur of the Cardinals, and then how can Platina's opinion be true? How is it possible the Cardinals should be but simple Curats in the time of Pope Gregory, who was above three hundred years after Saint Silvester, and yet in Silvesters time be in great dignity and esteem. It will not therefore be improper to inlarge a little, and by an ampler description, to sa∣tisfie in some measure the curiosity of the Reader; for which reason, I will give an ac∣count of what ever I have collected out of the most eminent Authors. Religion truly was not made for places, but for men, however the Ministers of the
Church have been alwayes distinguish'd by the offices in which they exercis'd their Mini∣stry; upon which consideration, as they were more eminent or illustrious, they were ordain'd Bishops, or Priests, or at least Deacons, who were no more than Assistants and Coadjutors to the Bishops and Priests. And the fourteenth Canon of the Councel of Nio Caesaria, declares seven Deacons enough for the greatest City in Christendom. The Church never wanted orders and degrees of dignities, but had alwayes a distinction and separation of preferments in which every one co-operated according to his Know∣ledge or Zeal. In the Common-wealth of Greece, all offices were distinct, Epaminondas commanded the Armies Pitagoras, taught, Socrates argued, Lycurgus made Laws, and Trasibolus exe∣cuted without them; so in this visible Monarchy of the Church, some command, others obey, some pray, others teach, some sing, others watch. The Bishop Ordains, the Priest Baptizes; The Bishop Confirms, the Priest Consecrates; the Deacon distributes the Eucharist, inspects the Ceremonies, looks to the necessities of the Poor, and sees that all people approach the Communion with requisite devotion. In the Primitive times, the Ministers were ordain'd according to the quality of their Cures. Those in which the first Functions of Christianity were exercis'd, viz. where most Gentiles were converted, where the Word of God was Preach'd, or where the Sa∣crament was administred, were call'd by way of Excellence the Cardinal Churches. A word taken from a Latin word which signifies a Hinge upon which a door turns, import∣ing that upon the vigilance and conduct of the Cardinals the whole service of God and the Church moves as upon a Hinge. So that the Title of Cardinal was first given to the Places, that is, to the Cardinal Churches, but apply'd afterwards to the persons that Govern'd them; at first they were call'd The Holy Cardinal Churches, but now Cardinals of the Holy Church. And from hence was the original of Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and Cardinals; there being several Titles and Cardinal Churches in Rome. The Priests that were Rectors over them, were call'd Cardinal Priests, and some time there were two or three at a time with the same Title, as there are sometimes two or three together of principal dig∣nity in some Collegial Churches. In the like manner there were other Titles in several Quarters of the City of Rome, which were call'd Deaconries, where the Cardinals had their Residence, and those that had the charge in the principal Churches in this quality, were call'd Cardinal Deacons, because of their residence in the Deaconry. So also the six Bishops, chosen out of all the Bishops of Christendome for the Election of the Pope, were chosen in the same order, but with this condition, that the Election of the Pope should not be their only Province, but that they should be assistant to them in their private and general Councels, and be call'd Cardinal Bishops. In the Infancy of the Church, these Titles were not us'd notwithstanding; in the Apostles dayes, and for some Ages after, there was no mention of Cardinal Churches, nor Cardinal Ministers. The Priests and Deacons were then forc'd to exercise their Mi∣nistry in Caves, and the privatest places they could find, to evade the persecution of those times; so that there could be no such Titles allow'd, all of them living in unity, the chief being ambitious to show himself as the least, and every one congratulating the lowest as the first. And whilst the Church was under this form of administration, the Ministers having no other Titles amongst them, but Brothers, were assistant to one another in the distributi∣on of the Sacrament, and all other offices of the Church, the light of the Gospel, and the holiness of humility shin'd over all; and for what reason? Because there was not in those dayes the distinction of persons that there is now, to the great scandal and prejudice of the Church. Cornelius, who liv'd in the year 200. writing to the Clergy in Rome, he makes no mention but of Priests and Deacons; and though indeed there was some sort of difference and distinction in their offices, yet there was no disputes or emulations amongst them, all of them living with great unanimity, and all of them being Cardinals, all of them Dea∣cons, and all of them Priests.
In the Election of Bishops, and in their Councels, the Priests and Deacons only assem∣bled with the people, so that many times great quarrels happen'd betwixt them and the people; and in the year 356. there were six hundred slain in the City of Rome at the Election of Damascus, and Ʋrsinus; upon which it was forbidden by the general Coun∣cel at Laodicia, that the people should have any voices for the future in the Election of Ministers and Prelats of the Church. After the Church, by the virtue of a long patience, had overcome the persecutions of the Emperours, trod Paganism and Idolatry under her feet, and set up the Standards of Christianity upon the seven hills at Rome, the number of Ministers began to increase, out of which, in process of time, they chose the best and most learned for the Senate and Councel of the Church, and so the distinction of places began; they that had the greatest imployments were call'd Cardinals, and they that had the lesser, Priests and Deacons. Insomuch, that whereas heretofore the Priests and Deacons promiscuously, and with∣out any distinction, were admitted into their Ecclesiastical Assemblies, they were after this resolution excluded, and the greater and principal of the Clergy only receiv'd, to their no small dis-satisfaction, which they were forc'd to put up, let they should other∣wise disturb that repose they were in pursuit of amongst the sorrows and calamities of the Church. In those times the Bishops had the preceedence before the Priests, and Cardinal Dea∣cons, the Cardinalship being only a scale and step towards Episcopacy, conformable to what is mentioned in the life of St. Gregory, where it is said several Cardinal Priests were preferr'd to be Bishops. And because there was great difference betwixt their orders, there was great difference in their corrections also. For the conviction of a Bishop, there was seventy two witnesses requir'd, and if of that whole number, there wanted but one, the whole accusation was void: whereas for the conviction of a Cardinal Priest, forty was enough, and for a Deacon twenty seven. But the Ecclesiastical orders and degrees have chang'd dayly with the times, and their dignities have been more considered for their Titles, than any reality of advantage. The Cardinals since found means to advance themselves before the Bishops, and Epis∣copacy now is but a degree towards the Cardinalship, whereas formerly, for the space of eight hundred year they had (as principal Ministers of the Church) manag'd all her affairs. The chief causes of these changes and revolutions, was from the same mutations in the Monarchy of the Popes, and from the medly and confusion of Temporal affairs with Spi∣ritual, and of the Ecclesiastick Government with the Civil. For the Pope having larg'd his Dominions by the annection of several Provinces in the time of Pipin, and Charles the Great, his Successors found themselves forc'd upon another Model, because so many Se∣cular Principalities being added to the Church, several important affairs did dayly arise that could not be deferr'd to the next Councel of Bishops, which me not but every two or three years. The Church in its minority was like the Galley of Salamin, that by the appointment of the Athenians, was never to sayl but upon some Religious design, it being suffici∣ent now and then upon occasion to call their Councels, to negotiate and regulate the most important affairs of Christendome; but after the acquisition of so many States and Seig∣nories, they were forc'd upon new wayes for the conservation of their Temporals. For this reason, it was judged necessary to establish a Councel or Senate that should be al∣wayes near his Holiness, and that it should be compos'd of Cardinal Priests, and Dea∣cons, and Rectors of the principal Parishes of Rome, as those that were more capable to consult and determine in matters of greatest importance both in Spirituals and Tempo∣rals; which succeeded without much difficulty; the Ministers of Rome (to prevent any resentment in the Bishops that the administration of the affairs of the Church was taken out of their hands) endeavouring to perswade them, that what was done, was for the benefit of Christendome, that it was unfit the Bishops should leave their charges▪ with so much inconvenience to the people, and come so often to Rome to treat of affairs that more poperly belong'd to those who had no Cures to distract them; and thus were the poor Bishops constrain'd to truckle to the Cardinals, and become inferiour, that had been superiour so long.
The Cardinals being advanc'd in this manner, and the Bishops excluded from the Go∣vernment of the Church; they continu'd very dexterously to wrest the Election of their Popes out of the hands of the Emperours, the People, and the Bishops, and not conten∣ted with that, they presum'd to incroach also upon the Election of the Emperour, so as the authority of Electing the two principal dignities of the world being in their power, in spight of their former subordination, they advanc'd themselves so far above the Bi∣shops, that the Bishops are now but Slaves as it were to the Cardinals, and by some of them imploy'd with great arrogance in Mechanick affairs. Antiently there was no greater esteem of a Cardinal, than there is now of a Deacon, or Arch-Deacon, in comparison of a Prelate, because they had no other authority in the Election of Bishops (who were then the principal Ministers in the Church) than the common Clergy and People of Rome, without any difference or exception, bearing an equal share with the rest of the Clergy in the Service of the Church. But when the world began to take notice that they made and unmade Popes at their pleasure, choosing them alwayes out of the Colledge of Cardinals, they became so in∣cens'd in a short time, that the dignity of Cardinal grew the most envied, yet the most covered and ambition'd dignity in the world. And this ambition which was deriv'd from the exaltation of Cardinals in the Church, hath been the Parent and Hidra of all the mischiefs and calamities in the Church. And this ambition (that was so detestable even among the Pagans, that Lucian de∣sir'd that all they that aspir'd to any thing above their sphear, might perish before the year went about) is indeed the source and nourishment of all the Wars, Schisms, and Heresies that have sprang up in the bosome of the Church. At first the Cardinals were chosen out of such Priests and Ministers only, as serv'd in the particular Churches in Rome, and that custom lasted for about an Age and a half; that is to say, till the Bishops taking notice at last of the injury was done them, and that they were excluded from any concurrence in the Election of the Pope, they did very much insist that the Cardinals might not be chosen any longer out of the Romans only, but out of the number of all the Bishops of Italy, excluding Foreigners. The Church increasing after this manner extraordinarily, and the number of Bishops multiplying in all parts both of Europe and Asia, it was resolv'd that the Cardinals should be chosen out of all the Provinces in Europe and Asia, without exemption of any, it being but reasonable as St. Bernard sayes, That they who judge the whole world, should be chosen out of all parts thereof. In the same manner the Rules for Election of Popes were observ'd (as we shall relate in the third part of this Work) the Priest of Rome not permitting any stranger to be created Pope for the space of above nine hundred years, electing only such persons, as were benefic'd in some Church in Rome; till that in the year 891, there happen'd a great contest betwixt the Romans, and the Foreign Bishops, these last pretending to a concur∣rence in the Election of Popes; the other refusing as obstinately the infringement of so antient a custom; but at last, the Foreign Bishops prevail'd, and chose Formosus Bishop of Porto. For some years successively, the Italians that had a great part in the Election of the Pope, would by no means consent that any body should be Elected, but such as was either a Bishop in Italy, or a Priest in Rome, and the people joyn'd with them in it; but but the Emperour oppos'd it, who had also a great party in the Election. After this, the number of Bishops increasing in all quarters of the world, the Electors were constrain'd to recede from their obstinate resolution of having their Popes Italians, or at least such as had some Church to serve in Italy; they esteeming it but just to take the most worthy and meritorious person for their Pope where-ever he was to be found, with∣out any regard to the place where he was born; so that there were of all Nations ad∣vanc'd to the Papacy, now Germans, now French, Spaniards, English, and from all parts of the World. At length, the Italians who pass for the most quick witted people in the Universe, (to say no more of them) have known so well how to accomodate the Church to their own private interest, that for an Age last past, they have banish'd both French, English,
Spaniards, and Dutch, &c. out of the Vatican, reserving that bit of Electing of Popes to themselves; which though it does not absolutely satiate their appetites, yet it keeps them from needing or desiring any other meat for the nourishment or fattening of their Fa∣milies, to the shame and indignation of those Crowns that had given great riches to the Church for maintenance of their Popes, and stand now excluded from any possibility of creating one of their own Countries. Nor is it wonderfull to any body that the Italians have reserv'd the Election of Popes for the particular advantage of their own Families; seeing there is scarce a Citizen in Rome, nor a man in all Europe, but observes or understands that the Popedom is not so much aspir'd to for any zeal they have to the service of the Church, as for their designs of aggrandizing their Families; so that a Cardinal is no sooner chosen Pope, but the first thing he does, (before he begins in any kind to be beneficial to the Church) is to noble his own Kindred, as is amply declar'd in the Nipotismo of Rome. It is not therefore to be admir'd if the dignity of Cardinals be affected and pursued with that ardour as it is; if all the Princes of the Universe imploy all possible recommen∣dations, and the Popes themselves with so much care and dexterity advance the nearest of their Kindred thereunto; little regarding the incongruity of their age, or the dispropor∣tion of their deserts, as Julius the third did, who gave a Cardinals Cap to a little youth of his Kindred; and Clement the eight, to a son of his Nephew not above fourteen years of age; and Innocent the tenth, to that ignorant Maldachini: which fewness of years would have been more excusable to the rest of the Cardinals, had he brought any merit along with him. And indeed the dignity of a Cardinal is so great, it is no miracle if the chief Families of Christendom do account themselves much honour'd if they can obtain a Cap, and the chief Crowns in the Universe do rejoyce if their Heirs can adde a Red Cap to their Im∣perial Crown; there being many that do willingly resign their Temporal Principalities, to be made Cardinals. But what shall I say of these Italian Prelates, that are ambitious and drive at this dig∣nity with so much ardour and passion? to whom all their watching, and labour, and ex∣pence is but pleasant, when consider'd with the dignity they aim at? they can endure their Inferiours to go before them, in hopes it will come to their turn also to go before their Superiours; so that some of them are not concern'd with the loss of their Prelacy in other places, if they have but any voice left towards the Election of Cardinals, swal∣lowing as it were any injury so long as they have any possibility of a Cap; it being most certain, the desire of that dignity is more poteut upon them, than any danger of losing those preferments they already enjoy: And if I may speak my opinion, I believe con∣fidently that invention of Bishops and Prelates to wear Green Tufts in their Caps, was only a token of their ambition, intimating a desire in them to have them sometime or other exchang'd for a Red. But all this is but vanity, the shadow of the body is never the greater for having the head cover'd with Green Lawrel, or a Cardinals Cap. To see the Cardinals marching in great state through the Streets of Rome, with a train of Prelates at their heels, and their Robes of Scarlet, looks in my judgement as if the World were made only for them, and that there was no greater felicity in it, than that which they enjoy; and all is be∣cause they are not sensible of the vanity of that honour, which will prove at last but imaginary, and but outward appearance. They would not be worship'd and adored as they are, if they understood what great returns are expected for the disbursement of such profuse and extravagant venerations. They would not cloath themselves with that cu∣riosity in Scarlet, if they consider'd what that Cloth cost them by the yard; but they reckon the price of it according to what they pay to the Merchant only, and never think of the accompt they are to make to Heaven. But those that have made the best calcu∣lation, have had no desire to the purchase of a Cardinalship, no not if they might have it at the bare price of their merits, chosing oftentimes to leave Rome rather than to accept of a Cardinals Cap. Honours and Dignities are certain advantages invented by the World and Fortune, for which reason the same are charg'd with so many Taxes and Imposts, and with a
reserve of so many troubles, and solicitudes, that some times are more eligible to get rid of them. I could say something in this place of the Titles in the present possession of the Cardi∣nals, but I will not involve my self in a thing not altogether necessary to the principal drift of this History; it is enough to understand that every Cardinal receives his Title from some Church or other, though it affords him not a farthing of profit. There are six Cardinal Bishops, fifty Cardinal Priests, and fourteen Cardinal Dea∣cons, having fourteen Churches assign'd them to give them their Titles; fifty to the Priests, and six to the Bishops, every one of which may be a Bishop with a Cure, so that he be a Priest, and in that case he keeps the Title of the Church that is assign'd him with his Cardinals Cap: and these Titles do daily increase according to the number of Cardinals, who from six at first, came to be twelve, from twelve to thirty, so to fifty, and from thence to seventy, which number (in memory of the Seventy Disciples of Christ) Pope Sectus the fifth order'd should never be exceeded. But when the Pope pleases, they may be more, for there is no body can give him Laws, that dissolves Coun∣cels, repeals or destroys Laws, and makes new ones at his pleasure; but no Pope has at∣tempted it yet, neither is that number alwayes compleat, some vacancies being still left to recompence the deserts of some great man, or to gratifie the desires of some King. To enumerate the prerogative of the Cardinals exactly, it would be convenient to insert at large a letter written by Eugenius quarius, which places them in a Region so high, the Cardinals themselves cannot desire a higher. But I shall content my self to say only with him, that all the Cardinals, both Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, have the prehe∣minence over all Bishops, Arch-Bishops, Primats, and Patriarchs, who are all oblig'd to acknowledge them for their Supreme Judges, as Assistants to the Pope, as the Su∣preme Councel of the Church, and principal Citizens in the Christian Commonwealth, as parts and members of the Pontifical body; as Organs of their power, as Lieutenants to Gods Vicegerent, and Coadjutors in a Monarchy that is both Spiritual and Temporal. The greatest good fortune that can befall a man, is to be made a Cardinal, a dignity many aspire to, but obtain'd by few; and those commonly that think least of it. And what I have read and seen in several promotions in Rome, about those Creations, I shall set down in this place. The Popes are accustom'd to create their Cardinals four times a year, in imitation, as some think, of those antient Fathers that at those times did Order their Priests should be consecrated to the service of God, as they are at this day. I observ'd very great difference betwixt the Popes manner of creating Cardinals here∣tofore, and the way they use now. Formerly the Popes never created a Cardinal, but by the advice of his Consistory, and if the major part of the Cardinals concurred, they proceeded to nomination, otherwise the Pope was to have patience. But if the major voice was affirmative, the Pope declar'd the names of those he thought proper, displaying before them, the merits of their persons, and their recommendations from Foreign Princes, upon which the Cardinals consulted, and brought in their Votes privately. If the greater part consented, the persons nam'd were declar'd Cardinals by his Holiness, otherwise they were excluded, and the Pope constrain'd to begin again, and name new. At this present, things are carry'd in another way, the Cardinals taking no care of preserving their Authority, have lost a great share of it, and that of the Popes, by the same negligence, is so far increas'd, that the Cardinals cannot now hinder the Pope from making Cardinals as he pleases; the Popes at present making but a laughing-stock of the Consistory, and creating them often without their consent. I could instance in several examples for the proof of my assertion, but for brevity sake I shall speak only of one. When Innocent created Maldachino Cardinal, in a Congrega∣tion where there were but few Cardinals that were his Creatures, or Adherents, he spake something of it, but as it were by the bye, and without any expectation of their advice, he pronounc'd him Cardinal. The rest of their Eminencies were all astonish'd at the Electi∣on of such a person, and I know above forty of them were displeas'd, and would willing∣ly have gone out of Rome to have avoided the sight of him; but in spight of their indig∣nation,
they were forc'd to be content to visit him as the rest, and to swallow that bitter Pill in the Cup of Patience, without speaking one word to the Pope against it. And this is the manner of creating of Cardinals at present; this is that their Eminencies are come to, all the Liberty and Grandeur they formerly possess'd, being reduc'd to their bare wearing of Purple. Paul the fourth, was the first that incroach'd upon the Consistory of Cardinals, usurp∣ing the Authority they had formerly of Electing new persons into the Cardinalship, and creating some of them, without the least word of it to the Consistory; since that time, the other Popes successively have taken liberty to do the same, and with the more confi∣dence, because they had no obstruction; for the Cardinals apprehending to oppose themselves against their Usurpations (though they know very well it was their Interest) they chose rather to be deficient to that, and to prostitute the liberty of the Consistory, than to justifie the jurisdiction they had so long enjoy'd. But Sextus the fifth, more than all the rest, manag'd his affairs like an absolute Mo∣narch, sporting himself with the Consistory, and Cardinals, promoting whom he pleas'd, and forcing the Cardinals to a concurrence with what ever he propos'd to them, the sweetness of which, being found by his Successors, they resolv'd to follow his steps, so that to this very day, they promote, and determine, they nominate and elect, whom they think good themselves, without any impediment whatsoever. But some may interrupt me in this place, and affirm that the Consistory must of ne∣cessity have some share in the Election of Cardinals, because the Pope never creates a Cardinal, but in the Consistory, which is true indeed; but it is to be consider'd, that whereas formerly the Popes propos'd only such and such persons to the Consistory, leav∣ing the reception or rejection of them to the suffrage of the Cardinals; it is contrary now, and the Pope does not propound, but pronounces them Cardinals, so as they who were at first principal Electors, are become now but simple witnesses, having neither affirmative nor negative voice, and serving for no more than like witnesses call'd in by a Notary to attest the reading of some contract; the Popes troubling themselves no fur∣ther, than to advertise the Cardinals what they resolv'd in their Chambers, and there∣fore let it not seem so great a matter to declare a man Cardinal in the Consistory, for where would you have him declare it, in a Tavern? or the Piazza del Ponte? Five years together I was resident in Rome, in a time perhaps so proper for the obser∣vation of the Customs and Interest of that Court, that I may say without vanity, that I continu'd there with more profit (as to my inspection into those affairs) than another would have done in twenty, for my genius directing me, my whole prospect was that way: for whilst others were visiting the Gardens, and the Courtezans, I was at home still, making my Annotations of what I heard, or said, about the affairs of Court, whe∣ther Ecclesiastical or Civil. But amongst all, my observation was most curious about the promotion of Cardinals, which I took notice to be perform'd in two wayes, which I shall describe with as much brevity as I can. Those persons the Pope design'd to be Cardinals, if they be in Rome, are advertis'd by the Cardinal Nephew to be ready next morning at the wonted hour in the Palace. The Pope being entred privately into the secret Consistory at the same time, he imparts to the Cardinals his resolution of choosing such a number of New ones, and immediately, without attending any answer or advice from them, he pronounces them Cardinals, and calling them into the Consistory forthwith, they clap themselves down upon their knees, and his Holiness taking the red Cap into his Sacred hands, puts it upon their Heads with these words, Esto Cardinalis. But I cannot omit inserting an example that will be very proper in this place, there happen'd a great dispute one day betwixt a certain Picket-beard (as they call them in Italy) or Protestant, as they name them in other parts; or in the Ecclesiastick Style of Rome, Heretick, and a Catholick that had been many years in Rome, and in Orders. The dispute was (at Pignorole) about the great errour the Catholicks were in, in be∣lieving the Pope Christs Vicar upon Earth. The Protestant would allow it by no means; the Catholick asserted it, and would have him not only Christs Vicar, but like another Christ, absolute and uncontroulable in the Government of the Church.
The dispute lasted above half an hour, in which time, many fine things were spoke both of one side and t'other. The Catholick cited the Authority of several modern Di∣vines, as Bellarmine, Tolido, and I know not who; the Protestant quoted places of Scripture, backing his arguments with some expression or other in the Epistles of St. Paul, or St. Peter. At last, the Catholick turning to the Protestant, told him; now will I make you your self confess my proposition true, and give you so clear and perspi∣cuous a reason for it, as will leave you nothing to reply. I was present, and began to open my ears, the better to understand so efficacious a proof; I gave God thanks that I had found one at last that could satisfie me in a point that was alwayes running in my head, and of which I had seriously desir'd to be inform'd; and whilst with great attention I expected the result of the dispute, the Catholick (that was my Camerade in that Journey) told the Protestant, Sir, You know the Omnipo∣tent God, by the virtue of two words only, created out of nothing, the vast mass of the World which we enjoy: and with two words, his Holiness the Pope, like another Deity, creates Cardinals: God said Fiat Caelum only, and on sudden the Heavens were fram'd, and the Light, and all other, the works of his Divine hand: In like manner, the Pope by the power of two words, Esto Cardinalis, raises as one may say from nothing to the highest dignity in the Church, a person who perhaps had not so much as the least hopes or thoughts of it. Judge then if the Pope be not another God upon Earth, seeing in his admi∣rable administrations in the Church, he uses the same power and methods God Almighty observ'd in the Creation of the World. I do not remember in my whole life I was ever so surpris'd; instead of a solid and con∣vincing Argument, to be drawn out of the secrets of Theology as I imagin'd, to hear a thing that made me laugh not only then, but every time I have thought of it since. The Protestant had enough to burst himself also, and reply'd presently, You are in the right on't, I am satisfy'd, come let us go drink together. But the other, perceiving not only the Protestant, but all the rest of the Company to laugh, he pursu'd his discourse, recounting after what manner the Popes created Cardinals, and the great efficacy of those two words, Esto Cardinalis, comparing them in every thing with those words of God, Fiat Lux; as if God Almighty had left it as an Inheritance to the Popes, that they should have the power with those two words Esto Cardinalis, to work as miraculously as he did with his Fiat Lux. I have spoke this only by the bye, and the Reader may make appli∣cation as he pleases. But to return to our business; it is already understood, that let the difference of the persons be what they will, they all of them, without distinction, kneel down in the pre∣sence of the Pope, when he gives them the Cap: which when he has receiv'd, the new Cardinal takes it gently off of his head, and kisses the Popes feet; and having done that, he rises to go and embrace, and acknowledge, all the rest of the Cardinals for his Brothers, one by one, as they are then present in the Consistory. The second way of creating of Cardinals is this; the Pope having nominated the per∣sons he intended to create in the Consistory, in the manner abovesaid, he gives a List of their Names to the Cardinal Nephew, who sends immediately the first Gentleman of his Bed-Chamber with his own Coach, to search thorough the whole City for the persons nam'd, (but there is no great pains to be taken in the search, for they know well enough where to find them) having found them, he brings them away to his Eminencies Cham∣ber, where the Nephews Barber gives them the Cardinals cut, for which, each of them gives him 25 Crowns as a Fee; after which, the Chamber-men of the said Nephew put on their Cardinalitial habits, their other habits remaining with the Chamber-men for their Fees. This done, the Cardinal Nephew treats them; and after Dinner (in which they drink the Popes health and his Nephews) he conducts them to his Holiness; being come into his presence, having been thrice upon their knees, they advance to kiss his foot, whilst he puts on the red Cap upon their heads one after another with these words, Esto Cardina∣lis. Some Popes did use to inform them with great gravity, not only of the dignity they were promoted to, but of their excellence and preheminence, exhorting them very ear∣nestly, that they would render themselves worthy thereof: and so after an humble reply
and acknowledgement, they depart in the same habits of Cardinals, to make their visits to his Holinesses kindred, as well Ladies, as men; that visit being over, they return to their houses, and remain there till the next publick Consistory; to which they much with very great Trains, to receive the red Cap from the hands of his Holiness. If in the time of their retirement in expectation of a publick Consistory, any Cardi∣nal, Ambassador, or other Minister, sends, or comes himself, to give him a visit, they are receiv'd with as much kindness as may be, but they stir not out of the Chamber he gives them their Audience in, neither to meet them, nor to accompany them back. 'Tis a good Rule therefore the Cardinals observe, not to make any visit to new ones, till they have appear'd in the publick Consistory; and if by reason of their Alliance, or any such occasion, they do visit them, 'tis commonly in the night, and free from the discovery of the People. To those that are absent from Rome, after they have been declar'd in the Consistory, the Cardinal Nephew dispatches a Messenger immediately with the news of their promo∣tion, and afterwards, one of the Popes Chamberlains of honour is sent to them with the red Cap, and a Breve from the Pope, to which Chamberlain, such honour is to be given, as befits the quality both of the sender and receiver, and a good Present to boot. As soon as they have advice by the first Messenger aforesaid, they cause their Barbers to shave them as aforesaid, and put themselves into the habit of Cardinals, and subscribe themselves so; but they put not on their Scarlet Robes, nor their red Caps, till they be brought them by the Chamberlain, and then they may habit themselves in Scarlet; but the red Pontifical Cap, if they have not receiv'd it from the Popes own hands, or from some other person sent by his particular favour with a special Breve, they cannot use. His Holiness sometimes commits this Ceremony of putting the Cap upon his head to the Nuntio, or Bishop of the place, or some secular Prince, as he pleases, in whose pre∣sence the Cardinal kneels down, and receives the Cap with these words, Esto Cardinalis, but kisses not their feet; and this Ceremony is usually perform'd in the Church after a simple or a solemn Mass. In the first private Consistory after the publick, the Pope did use to stop up the mouths as it were of the new Cardinals, by putting his finger upon them; by that Ce∣remony, forbidding them to speak their opinions in the Consistories or Congregations for some time, and depriving them both of their active and passive voices. Before the Papacy of Pius the fifth, the Popes did use to leave some Cardinals from time to time in this manner to take their voices from them in the Election of the Popes, but they were mistaken, for the Colledge of Cardinals, as soon as the Pope was dead, discharg'd them. Pius quintus notwithstanding, by a Decree made in the year 1571. declar'd, that by the said shutting of their mouths, it was not intended to take away the voices of those Cardinals, but only a simple Ceremony and no more. So that in the next Consistory, the Pope open'd their mouths, put the Ring upon their fingers, and declar'd their Titles, as he declar'd theirs that were absent. But as the Popes had then found out a good way of stopping the mouths of the Cardi∣nals, so we may say still, that though their mouths are open'd by the Popes, yet they do shut them as they think good, for they dare not oppose themselves to the ill Govern∣ment either of the Pope or his Nephews, but choose rather to expose, or ruine the Church, than according to their duty and obligation, to make any defence. But of this in its proper place; we will say something now of the preceedence and habits of the new Cardinals, and of their gratuities to the Popes Court, and the Cardinal Nepews. As to their Fees, it is to be understood, that as soon as the new Cardinals are created, and receiv'd into the publick Consistory, they are oblig'd by antient custom, to give to the Popes Vestry-keeper, or rather to his Vestry, five and twenty Ducats; to the Ma∣ster of the Ceremonies in waiting, a hundred Ducats; to them out of waiting, thirity six; to the Secretary, Clerk, and Computist of the Sacred Colledge, each of them twenty five; to the Popes Domestick Chaplains, twenty Ducats; to the Keeper General of the Pontifical Robes, ten Ducats; to the Popes Chaunters or Singing-men, thirty Ducats; to the two Clerks of the Popes private Chapel, six; to the inferiour Officers of the Popes Chamber, six; to the Deans, and Sub-Deans of the Popes Chapel, four; to the
Clerk of the Chapel, two; to his Grooms, five and twenty; to his Mace-bearers, fifteen; to his Messengers, ten; to the Keeper of the Iron Gate, six; to the Keeper of his Privy Garden, four; to the Keeper of the Chains, three; to the Harbinger, five; to the four private Sweepers, each of them one; To the Musicians of the Castle of St. An∣gelo, six; to the Masters of the Ceremonies for their Mantelets in the publick Consisto∣ry, twelve; to the Officers of the Popes Privy Chamber, the least they give at their Creation in Rome is, five hundred Ducats; to them that deliver them the Cap, out of Rome (besides a thousand they pay for that) three hundred Ducats. And the Cardinal Princes give much more, to four and sometimes six thousand Ducats; but beside the Du∣cats aforesaid, which are all in Gold, the new Cardinals are oblig'd to be as noble to the Officers of the Cardinal Nephews Chamber, who receive no share of this, and are there∣fore to have a proportion of their own. The aforesaid New Cardinals, to prevent the trouble of distributing them themselves, do usually give their presents to the Master of the Ceremonies, to be dispos'd according to just order. But one Author that writ of the State of the Court of Rome, did advise, that the Pope would do well to oblige every new Cardinal, besides the presents afore∣said, to give a piece of Ordanance to the State, to furnish it with those Arms, that as then they were very much unprovided with, though Ʋrban the eighth, had made a hundred pieces of the brass Pillars taken out of the Church Rotonda. Alexander the seventh, seem'd to be of the same opinion, when he order'd the Arse∣nal di Tivoli for the making of Arms and Ammunition of War, and accordingly intima∣ted his judgement to the present Pope, who was then Cardinal Rospigliosi, and Secretary of State. But that design vanish'd I know not which way, perhaps because Alexander was unwilling to lay the first charge of that nature, upon the many Cardinals he resolv'd to put into the Consistory; but it is certain it would be very well if other Popes that are to succeed him, would injoyn it, because it appears unreasonable, so many particular persons should receive advantage by the Creation of Cardinals, and the Universal Church get nothing. I am satisfy'd the Cardinals would give a hundred Ducats or more, for the making of such a thing as should remain in some Arsenal o Fort, as a perpetual monu∣ment of their Families, it being but reasonable to cast them with the Arms of those Car∣dinals that gave them, which without doubt would create an affection in the people to∣wards the Cardinals; whereas now they have too great reason to complain, to see the Church its self receive no benefit by their creations. There are other little gifts also distributed here and there, as I suppose, for dispatch of their Bulls, every Cardinal having his Bull for his Cardinalship, subscrib'd by the Pope, and all the Cardinals then present in Rome, and Seal'd with the usual impression of the Piscatory Ring; so that the Bulls that are design'd for the Cardinal Princes, or other of greatest quality, have their impressions in gold, and to all those that are con∣cern'd in that trouble, there are some small distributions, but to the publick nothing at all. I have already mention'd, that the Sacred Colledge, which is as much as to say, the whose University of Cardinals, is divided into three Orders, of Bishops, of Priests, and of Deacons; amongst them, those Bishops precede, that are of longest standing in the Episcopal Order, and amongst the Priests and Deacons, those that are first promoted to the Cardinalship; and because it falls out sometimes, that there are several made at one promotion, in that case, they have the preceedence that are first nam'd. But when it happens that he that was but a Cardinal Deacon, becomes a Priest, he passes presently in∣to the place of his promotion, above all the Cardinal Priests that shall be promoted after him, but not above those that were created before him. The consequence is not the same amongst the Cardinal Bishops, for if they from Deacons are advanc'd to be Bishops, they take place according to the date of their orders, or promotion. As to the Cardinals habits, which are altogether Majestick, they have been pre∣scrib'd them at several times, by several Popes. For a long tract of time, they went ha∣bited like simple Priests or Monks, till at last Innocent the fourth, in the year 1250. order'd them to wear the red Cap, in token of their readiness to spend their blood for the service of Christ the head of the Church; a while after him, succeeded Boniface the
ninth, who enjoyn'd them to wear Red and Purple habits, in the fashion they wear them now, saving that they are a little larger than formerly: Paulus the second a Venetian, that took great care of the Pontifical habits, to make them the more splendid, he added the Silken Mitre, the Red Bonnet, the Red Cloath for their Mules, and the Gilt Staff; Gregory the fourteenth gave the Red Bonnet to the Regular Cardinals, allowing them as to the rest to go habited in the same colour as others of their Order did, but as to the fashion and matter, they were constrain'd to go like the rest of the Cardinals, that is, without Rochets, or Cassocks of Cloath, and when others had their Caps of Red, they had theirs of water'd Chamblet, and when others wore their Purple, theirs was without watering, but their Cap and Bonnet both of a fashion. There are three colours the Cardinals make use of; Purple, Red, and Murrey, but of this last they make use but two dayes in a year, which are the fourth Sunday in Lent, and the third of Advent. The substance commonly is wav'd Chamblet, or Wool, ac∣cording to the season of the year; they wear Cassocks also, but very light alwayes, and either of Taffaty or Sarcenet. I could set down the times also the Cardinals wear Purple, and Scarlet, but I look upon it as superfluous, and not much material to the Reader. Only this I shall mention, that though the Cardinals be in Mourning, they leave not off notwithstanding their Scarlet habits, or Red Cap in the exercise of all those Functions that others do wear them in; with this difference only, that whereas others wear Purple Chamblet, they wear Purple Say's. But upon their solemn Festivals they are constantly in Red, unless they be in very deep Mourning, walking up and down the City, or making their Visits in that habit, though there are several Visits they are oblig'd to make in their Scarlet Robes. The same measures they observe in their Cavalcades, or solemn Ridings; they affect much to have the Trappings of their Mules of the same colour with their Clothes. They use not to wear Black upon any occasion of Mourning, either in their Clothes, Coaches, or Furniture of their Houses; nor do the New Cardinals wear Mourning often, and if they should, they must pull them off till they have made, receiv'd, and return'd their Visits. The Cardinals have commonly a Silver or Gilt Mace carried before them, not so much to signifie the greatness of their Dignity, as the excellence of it. The Barber of the house, or some other Assistant of the Chamber, do carry it ordinarily, as often as the Red Cloak is carried abroad; unless it be when they go to preach in the Palace, or upon Good Friday, then a Groom carries it cover'd to the place where he goes; and when the Cardinal takes his Cloak, the Barber takes the Mace. Their Cavalcades, whether Pontifical or private, are pompous and magnificent; when they ride in their Pontificalibus, they have their Mantles, and Red Caps upon their heads, and their Foot-cloaths and Trappings of their Mules suitable with their Clothes, the splendor and magnificence of which sight, puts the poor Prelate (that has not ne∣cessary accoutrements perhaps) out of his wits. A certain Bishop of Naples, that happen'd upon such a solemn occasion to be a spectator with me, observing some of their Mules to be furnish'd so richly, he turn'd to me and told me, that In Rome it is better to be a Cardinals Mule, than a Prelate of the Church. And the times of these Pontifical Ridings are not seldom; every time his Holiness rides with any solemnity, they are oblig'd to attend him in their Robes; on the Annun∣tiation day they do the same; the day the Pope is invested they do so too; upon occa∣sion of any publick Consistory, if a Cap be given to any Cardinal, when they accom∣pany any Cardinal that goes Legat a latere to any Foreign State, and when he returns; when they are to meet any King or Queen; and lastly, when they go to any Chappel, or particular Consistory, they march with the same magnificence and decorum. They ride privately, when they accompany his Holiness either out or into the City; if the Pope be a Horse-back, or in his Litter, the Cardinals ride in colours suitable to the season, and the garniture of the Mules are but ordinary. The Ceremony of sending the Cap to such Cardinals as are absent from Rome, is very curious, and happens but rarely; because for the most part the Popes will have them to
receive them from their own hands; not that it is necessary to the Orders of the Church; but out of an ambition they have to receive their thanks and acknowledgements from the new Cardinals from their own mouths, and to treat with them about the interest of their Families, and the obligations they have to their Kindred; for which reason, some Popes do give the new Cardinals to understand, that they took the resolution of creating them Cardinals upon several considerations, but especially at the instant request of their Ne∣phews, though indeed there was no such matter. But when by the incessant importunity of some King, the Pope is constrain'd to send a Cap to some Cardinal out of Rome, he sends it by one of his Chamber, or some other Gentleman express, with a Breve directed to the Nuntio, Bishop, or other Prelat of that place where the Cardinal is that is to receive it; who is oblig'd to go forth to meet it with all his Family and Friends, as not regarding the person that brings it, but the qua∣lity of him that sends it; and entring the City again, the Cap is carry'd before him upon a Mace, expos'd to the sight of all people, as it is usually done, when the Pope makes his Cavalcade to take possession in Saint John de Lateran the day of the Annuntiation. Being entred into the City in this manner, and lodg'd at the expence of the Cardinal, the first Festival day that happens, they come all to the Cardinals house, as well he that brought the Cap, as he that is to give it him; and in short, all such as are desirous to serve the Cardinal in the performance of that ceremony. The Cardinal, in the mean time, riding with his Cappuchins hood, and a black Cap upon his head, with all his Train, and the Mace before (by express order from his Holiness) to Church; where being arriv'd, he makes a short prayer at the Altar, and hears Mass. That done, the Prelat design'd for that office, dresses him in his Robes very solemnly, and then disposes him into some eminent place where all the people may see him. Then he that carryes the Mace (who is the same that brought it from Rome) puts it upon the Altar, and pre∣sents the Prelat with the Bull, who receiving it with great reverence, and ordering it to be read by one of his Familiars, he makes an Oration in praise of his Holiness, and of his own readiness to execute his commands. That Oration being ended, which must be short, if it be thought good, the Cardinal advances to the Altar, and falling down upon his knees, he swears to all the particulars contain'd in the Popes Bull in manner and form as is ordained at Rome. The Prelat orders the Miter to be taken out upon this, and says some prayers over the Cardinal, which are to be found in the Ritual for that purpose; that done, the Cardinal puts off his hood, and the Prelat the Miter; and then he that brought the Cap, delivers it to the Prelat, who receives it, and puts it upon the Cardinals head, and gives him an Osculum Pacis; which Cap is presently taken off again, and given to him that brought it. After which, they sing a Te Deum, and blesses the people; and then all of them accompany him back to his house, he riding with his red Cap upon his head, and shewing all cour∣tesie imaginable to such as have favour'd him in that ceremony, feasting and entertaining them within, whilst the Conduits run with Wine at his Gate. The Cardinals receive and make visits with the greatest circumspection in the world; their Masters of Ceremonies studying and contriving from morning to night, after what manner it is to be done, lest they should be any way defective in their office. Those who go to Audience of the Pope, wear the same habits they do when they go to any Congre∣gation held in the presence of the Pope; at which times they kiss not his feet, unless at their first Audience only; or when they have been six months at least out of Rome; or when they take their leaves, and are sent Legats into any place; or when they return. The Pope gives them the privilege of setting before him upon a back'd chair, he makes them be cover'd, and uses them as Brethren; whereas the Ambassadors of Princes do commonly stand bare, and if at any time they be permitted to sit down, it is upon a chair without a back. Many do much admire the manner of receiving Ambassadors at Rome, and I much more, that Kings should be oblig'd to receive and treat his Nuntio's like their equals al∣mosts, suffering them to be cover'd in their presence alwayes, and placing them in the most honourable seats; whilst the good Pope, without any reflection upon the Majesty of a King, entertains their Ambassadors with so little Decorum, that one would in his
presence believe them some inferiour Officers of the Kings Chamber, rather than the Re∣presentatives of the Majesty of a King. In my judgement, it was sufficient if the Ambassadors look'd upon them as Gods Vice-Gerents upon Earth, whilst they are upon matters of Religion, or dress'd up in their Pontificalibus, and performing some Ecclesiastical duty; at such times, I could allow them to advance themselves above other people. But that as a Temporal Prince he should receive Ambassadors, and negotiate with them of matters of Policy and State only, without paying them that honour one Prince does usually to the Ministers of another, in my opinion is not suitable to the dignity of a King; for what greater indecency can there be, than to see a Cardinal, the most wretched and despicable creature perhaps that is to be seen, standing with his Cap on his head, or else sitting on his back'd Chair, cheek by jole with his Holiness; and the Ambassador of a King, and one of the greatest Lords of his Kingdom, to stand sneaking at a distance, and uncover'd, or else setting on a a stool like a School-boy. But I shall leave the care of these things to themselves, who if they saw the difference that is made, they would doubtless find out some way to redress it; and proceed to the ceremonies the Cardinals use commonly in their visits. If at any time the Cardinals be ill, they receive no visits, unless their distempers be such, as will permit them to receive their Visitants in habits suitable to such visits; and 'tis the same case at the death of any of their kindred, though never so near, they seldom give audience to any body; for which reason, some of them (to avoid the importunity of such as will visit them, though they know the custom to the contrary) do retire in∣to some private place either within the City or without. I speak this of the generality of Cardinals, for there are some of them, in spight of all customs will be visited, in case of sickness, or condoling; and without any great absurdity, it being at their choise to receive them or not; though others with good reason forbear it. If they that make the visit be Cardinals, the Cardinal meets them in the waiting Chamber, or perhaps a little further; but no further to be sure than the top of the Stairs: if they be Princes, with the Title of Serenissimo, they are receiv'd as the Cardinals: if they be Ambassadors of some King, two or three Chambers off, if there be so many, if less, they go but to the first, which is that that is next the Chamber of his Audience: if they be Brothers or Nephews of the Pope that is living, they receive them as they do the Ambassadors of Kings: if they be Ambassadors from Savoy, Tuscany, Dukes and Peers of France, Grandees of Spain, Nephews to preceedent Popes, Generals for the Church, or Heads of some of the most eminent Families in Rome; they meet them a Chamber and a half, and no more. The Agents of Serene Princes, the Ambassadors of Malta, Bologna, and Ferara, have half a Stanza, or a little more; but the Malta Ambassador has usually some paces more, than those of Bologna, and Ferara, and not without reason All these are permitted to sit down, and be cover'd without any distinction; yet the Cardinals, and Serene Princes, set alwayes right against the Cardinal that they visit, both of them with their sides towards the door; but the rest sit a little of one side, and not directly over against the Cardinal. For the Bishops, Arch-Bishops, and Prelats, he receives them as he pleases himself; for some of them, he stirs not out of his own Cham∣ber; for others, he goes as far as the Anti-chamber, according to the quality of the Prelat; but he gives them all liberty indifferently to set down. The Cardinal Nephew of the then living Pope, suffers not any Prelat to set before him, but treats them as his Subjects, which savours too much of Tyranny, for the Church is a Republique, and not a Monarchy, and the Prelats are Ministers of the Church, and no Slaves to any body. 'Tis a fine sight, is it not? to fee a grave Prelat with his beard as white as snow, after forty years spent in the service of Christ in his Church, to be forc'd to stand in the presence of an ignorant young Nephew of the Popes? But if they would use persons of worth with more respect than they do, the Church would be better served, and Gods Service not so slighted as it is. But that which is most considerable is, that the Cardinal Nephews have no reason at all to treat them of the Clergy so ill, since the Office of the Cardinal Nephew, whom they call Padrone, (and indeed he has too much of the Master) extends no further than
to the Civil Government. His principal business is to assist the Pope His Uncle in Tempo∣ral things, and he is therefore call'd Patrone, for in Spirituals they have no greater au∣thority than other Cardinals have; so that those Cardinals that were created before them, have the preceedence, to signifie that the Popes Nephew let him be Nephew as much as he can, ceases not to be equal, and sometimes inferiour, to their Seniors in all things re∣lating to the Ecclesiastical administrations of the Church. Things being so, what is the reason the Cardinal Nephews use not the Prelats of the Church with the same respect as other Cardinals do? What pretence can there be, that a Cardinal that has preceedence of the Popes Nephew, should give a Prelat liberty to sit in his presence, and the Nephew that is preceeded, and is by consequence inferior to the other, will make him stand like his Servant? This is no other; than to advance a younger Brother before an elder. If a Prince that is the first born, should permit a Ba∣ron of his Realm to stand cover'd before him, and his second Brother make him stand bare, would it not be undecent, and ridiculous? It is the same case with the Prelats in Rome, whilst they receive more honour from the greater Cardinals, than from the lesser. If the Pope be Gods Vice-gerent, he cannot create another Vice-gerent, and if his Ne∣phew be not his Vice-gerent, how comes he to slight and despise the true Ministers of God? But things are now at that pass, those Prelats are contemn'd that are Servants and Friends to the Church, and by those very persons that are her greatest Enemies; so that it is believ'd, there is more to be got at present, by perplexing and persecuting of the Church, than by serving it never so faithfully. But I will return now to speak of the Ceremony when they take their leaves. If they be Cardinals or Serene Princes, the Cardinal attends them to their Coaches, but with this difference; if they be Cardinals, he suffers their Coaches to be gone, before he offers to return to his Chamber; but if Princes, he turns about, and goes back before the Coach be gone. The Ambassadors of Kings, and the living Popes Nephews, he accom∣panies to the top of the Stairs, leaves them there, and returns first towards his Cham∣ber; and the same custom he uses to all that visit him, especially to those whose en∣trances I have mention'd, of whom it is not necessary I should speak again; it is suffici∣ent to know the Cardinals do ordinarily accompany them at their departure, some Cham∣bers or Paces further than he met them at their entrance: that is, those that were re∣ceiv'd in the first Chamber, are accompany'd to the second when they go away; and so forward according to the quality of their reception. The Cardinals do usually accompany the ordinary Prelats one Chamber, the Bishops two, the Arch-Bishops, Patriarchs, Treasurers, and Auditors of the Chamber, three, and the Governour of Rome more; and all this is to be understood of Rome, or in some place out of the Jurisdiction of the Bishops, or Arch-Bishops; for if a Cardinal hap∣pens to be within the Diocess of a Bishop, Arch-Bishop, or Patriarch, and is visited by them, he receives them with greater civility, as being in their Jurisdiction; in the Cere∣mony of meeting or accompanying back, the Cardinals do regulate themselves according to the number of Rooms that there are. In a house therefore where there are many, they meet and accompany them a little farther than ordinary; and where there be but few, he accompanies them the less, for fear of being driven into a necessity of going with them into their outward Room. The Gentlemen and Servants of the Cardinal that is visited, do alwayes attend the person that is accompany'd by their Master. For example, those that are brought by the Cardinal to the top of the Stairs, are by them waited upon to their Coach; those that he brings to the waiting Chamber, they attend to the bottom of the Stairs; and in short, they alwayes go two or three Rooms further than the Cardinals do. And if it happens at any time one be visited by several Cardinals at a time, and one or more of them will not go with the rest, the Cardinal that is visited, leaves some of his Gentlemen or Prelats to entertain those that stay, and goes himself with him, that is going to his Coach. As to their manner of returning of visits, you must know the new Cardinals return their visits in their habits, with a great train of several Coaches, to the Ambassadors of Kings; and to the Ambassadors of Savoy, and Tuscany, they make their visits
in Cassocks, Rochets, and riding Cloaks, as they usually do. The other Cardinals make their visits indifferently to those Royal Embassadors that are Resident in Rome, as to extraordinary Ambassadors, and that is, in their habits; they do the same also to all Ambassadors of Princes, that are admitted at any time into the Consistory, as likewise to the Republique Ambassadors, not taking off their Mantels in their houses. They render their visits likewise to the Ambassadors of Princes that have the Title of Highness, although they are not admitted into a publique Consistory, with this difference only, that they visit them in their Cassacks and long Cloaks. Those Cardinals that are return'd from some Legation de latere ultra montes, and do make a visit, they do it in the same manner as they have been receiv'd by other Cardi∣nals, that is, with as great a train of Coaches as they can possibly make. To those Barons or persons of quality, that the Cardinals cannot without too great condescention make a visit to, they find out some other way of signifying an amicable cor∣respondence, taking some opportunity or other to congratulate them, or if that be not to be found, they can vouchsafe a visit to their wives, or what other Ladies of their Fami∣ly are nearest in relation to them. The Cardinals (if not all of them) for the most part are very liberal in their visits to Ladies, giving them extraordinary honours, both at their coming in, and going out. But those Cardinals that have the Papcy in their pro∣spect, live a little more recluse, receiving no visits from the Ladies, nor making any to them, supposing thereby to gain an applause among the people, and a reputation in the Church. But those that never aim at any such thing, do but laugh at, and deride that outward formality, passing away their time with all pleasures imaginable, making their visits not only to Ladies of nobler extraction, but receiving ordinary persons into their houses, and using them with great familiarity, as if the honour and reputation of the Church consist∣ed in such things as those. But that which scandaliseth the Protestant most, is the small Edification they find amongst the Catholicks, and the Conversation of some Cardinals, not at all agreeable with the Habits they wear. I say some Cardinals, because there are some in the Sacred College that live good lives, serve the Church with great zeal, or devotion at least, ab∣staining from the Commission of any sin that may become scandalous to their Neighbours. But the Romans being well insinuated by the examples of their Hypocrisie, that have liv'd with all the pretence of severity imaginable for several years, with design to come at last to the triple Crown; whether being arriv'd, instead of professing of Holiness, they be∣come Devils; will no more believe the outward appearance or hypocrisie they use to de∣lude the world withall, in order to make themselves Popes; whilst every body knows, that at the Election of Popes, 'tis interest and passion only that bears the sway. Many Cardinals therefore, either because they will not change their own natures to satisfie the world, or because they think by maintaining the same to satisfie the world, or because they abhor Hypocrisie, or have not judgement proportionable to the dignity they possess, or because they would make use of the Majesty of a Cardinal to gratifie the liberty of their own humours, run into extravagant courses, and think themselves honou∣rable in their Luxury, great in their Pleasures, and majestick in their Excesses; in short, they believe they batten in their Scandals, and they do grow fat because they believe it. They have the chief places at a Play, and they are the first that laugh and applaud any Buffonry. They are not the last at your Balls, and to any kind of play they need not a second invitation. But that which is most to be lamented is, that some of them do consume the greatest part of their Revenues to have Comedyes in their houses, as if the Decorum of the Church, consisted in the neatness of their Plays, and if in Carnival time they forbear having troops of Players in their Chambers, they do but reserve their mo∣ney for some more scandalous use. How many are there of them, that spend the whole night with a pack of Cards in their hands? that from morning to night play at any Profane Sport, but forget the Di∣vine Office of a Cardinal? Oh that it pleas'd Heaven that they had but any considera∣tion of place or time! But they give themselves over to their sensualities without any such
thought, accommodating those circumstances to their pleasures; and this I can affirm, because I my self saw a Cardinal now living, play a whole night together with a Lady, and suffer'd her willingly to win, that she might be induc'd to play the oftner with him. The Apostles of Christ were not such men, nor were his Disciples like them at all; nor can I tell why they that pretend to that Title, and to be included in the Apostolick College, should do so. But we must not therefore seem to be scandaliz'd at that, which is look'd upon as an ornament by the Ecclesiasticks of Rome. But it concerns us to turn away our eyes from such as those, and fix them upon them that refrain from those scandals, making it their care, that the people be edified by their ex∣amples, the Church well serv'd by their practices, and all Ecclesiasticks satisfy'd with the sincerity of the Conversations; amongst which number of Cardinals, I am sure some of them are good, if not at the heart (which God only knows) at least in appearance, and in the judgement of man. And now it is convenient to say something about the stopping of their Coaches, and the Customs they observe when they are Legats of some City or Province, or when they do enter with, or accompany any Prince either Ecclesiastical or Civil. I shall tell you in brief, that a Cardinal stops his Coach to another that is his Senior; for it is to be taken notice of, that the most antient Cardinal is the last alwayes that stops, and the first that goes forward. To the Ladies, they are the first that stop, and the last that go, it being but civil to give the preceedence to the Ladies; but to all other per∣sons, under the quality of a Crown'd head, they are the last that stop, and the first that depart. It many times falls out, that they meet the Sacrament or Host as they pass along the Streets in their Coaches, if they do so, they come out immediately, and accompany the Priest that carries it to the very Altar, where they fall down upon their knees, make a short Prayer, and return to their Coaches. And if the Priest by accident goes to the house of any sick person, they bear him company to the Gate, where they fall down up∣on their knees, till the Priest be entred, and then they come back to their Coaches. The same Custome the Cardinals observe when it is carry'd in any Procession, or other So∣lemnity. If a Cardinal, as he passes in or out of the City, sees another Cardinal on foot, he dismounts immediately to make the usual Complements; and being parted, he mounts not into his Coach, till he has gone some certain Paces on foot. To other persons, he seldome lights out of his Coach, unless upon some particular business. But when there is any malice or animosity betwixt Cardinals, as it happens too often, they express it by passing whole years by one another without saluting or speaking a word, so as that Rule has this exception, for if one Cardinal meets another that he has a Piqueto, he not only will not alight from his Coach, but lets him go by, and pretends not to see him, and this is nothing but what I have seen; but the more prudent avoid all occasions of meeting their Enemies. There is great civility to be found amongst the Ecclesiasticks of the Church of Rome, as to their entertainment of Strangers, and Humane Conversation, I speak in general; as to particulars, there are some will shrug up their shoulders to their greatest Bene∣factors, that they may not be constrain'd to make them some sort of Complement against their wills. It is sufficient, that amongst all the Christian Clergy, the Church of Rome does far exceed the Protestants in their entertainment of Strangers, though they force themselves as much as is possible to satisfie them. The reason is, the Protestant has a heart good enough, but his purse is too weak, and that little he gets by the sweat (as it were) of his brows, must of necessity be apply'd to the maintenance of his Familie, not to the acquiring the applause of Travellers, to the nourishment of his Children, and not to the entertainment of Strangers: but those of the Church of Rome have that plen∣ty of riches, it would be a miracle if they should not gain themselves some friends by their superfluity; though they have Nephews and—to inrich instead of Children, yet they may do all that without any inconvenience, for they knew well enough out of what Trea∣sury to take money to create themselves friends, and to shew themselves Courteous; besides from their Civility and Gentileness they express to Strangers, they draw no small profit in Almes; it being more than true, that the Ecclesiasticks are in that point like the Bell of
Manfridonia, which when it sounds, makes this Eccho, by common report, Dammi e dotti, &c. Give me and Ile give thee, Give me and Ile give thee, Give me and Ile give thee. Great is the Civility the Cardinals use to any Ambassador they find in any City or State of the Church, receiving strangers with all possible courtesie; insomuch that some Pro∣testants themselves have gone away very well satisfy'd with their humanity. I will not say much of their comportment to Serene Princes who have their Orders from Rome, to the end they may be entertain'd at his Holiness his charge, and are therefore receiv'd by the Cardinal Legats with the greatest honour imaginable. And by this extraordinary courtesie, the State of the Church feels no small inconvenience, because they take occa∣sion upon any pretence whatsoever to lay new imposts upon the people, as they did up∣on the arrival of the Queen of Sweden, which remains (as a perpetual memorial of Alexander the seventh) upon their shoulders to this day; and I have heard some people exclaim, 'Tis we that suffer for the Generosity of the Popes. To meet the eldest son of any Prince, any Royal Ambassadors, or the Ambassadors of the Dukes of Savoy or Tuscany, the Cardinals are wont to go as far as the Gates of the City, with as great a Train of Coaches as they can possibly get, or the largeness of the place will bear. They first send one of the chief of their Families to meet them, and with a fine Summer Coach to invite them from their own. After that they send a com∣pany of Lances half a dayes journey more or less; and a mile or two out of the City, they send their Vice-Legats with some small number of Coaches. But this common Rule has its exceptions likewise; for there are some Cardinals that treat and caress such persons according to the animosity or inclination they have for their Masters. For example, a Cardinal of the French faction will receive an Ambassador from France, with greater Pomp than an Ambassador from Spain, and it is the same on the other side. But those that are indifferent, observe their Rules, and measure their Paces exactly, both for the one and the other, having a care alwayes to express some∣thing more of honor to the Royal Ambassadors, than to the Ambassadors from Savoy and Tuscany, nor indeed without reason. Sometimes the Cardinals will pretend I know not what excuses, sending great Trains to meet them, but staying themselves at home, where they receive them at the top of the Stairs without their Rochets. Which custom is never us'd to the eldest Son of any Serene Prince, they receiving them alwayes at the Gate of the Town, unless the Legat be sick in Bed. In the same manner they receive their Brother Cardinals as they pass by. The Relations of Serene Princes, and some principal Barons, are receiv'd some few miles off (by the Cardinal Legats appointment.) by the Master of his Chamber, and sometimes by his Vice-Legat, who conducts them to the bottom of the Stairs, where they are receiv'd by his Eminence; sometimes he pretends for their greater honour to walk out into the City, and as soon as he has notice that the Prince is near at hand, he marches into the Street by which he is to pass, and (pretending to have met him by accident) takes him up into his Coach, and conducts him to the Pallace prepar'd for him. Neither the Cardinal Legats, nor any other Cardinal in Rome, does use to make any invitation to Marquesses, Counts, or other persons of quality, that are passing about their own particular affairs. Yet the Cardinal Legat, if they make him a visit (to return them some expressions of favour) will invite them to Dinner or Supper, and appoint some of his Gentlemen afterward to accompany him, and show him what is most consi∣derable in the Town. The principal Ladies, as Ambassadors Wives and the like, the Cardinals do alwayes invite, and send the meanest of their Relations to meet them, if they have any (which they seldome want) or at least their Major Domo, some miles out of the Town, and that more or less, according to the design they have to do them honour; besides which, they do usually intreat some of the principal Ladies of the City to go and receive them, and accompany them to the Palace, where the Cardinal receives them at the Stairs head, and conveys them to the appartment ordain'd them. The particularities of their Visits, and Receptions, I have thought good to insert in this Cardinalism, for the satisfaction of some Outlandish Gentlemen that did earnestly desire it. For my own part, I had no other design, but to speak of matters appertaining to
their politicks: however it seems not improper, seeing in these times the policy of the Cardinals run so much into Ceremony. I shall now speak of the eight Offices that are peculiar to the persons of the Cardinals, which are the Popes Vicar; The chief Penitentiarie; The Vice-Chancellor; The Chamber∣lain; The Prefect of the Signature di Justitia; The Prefect of the Signature di Gratia; The Prefect of the Breves; The Bibliothecary. And first I shall begin with the Popes Vicar, which office is the most antient of all, and was for a long time executed by Bishops, and other Prelats. But Pius the fourth, transferr'd that dignity upon the Sacred Colledge, declaring the Cardinal Giacomo Savelli Vicar, about the year 1565. after which time it was alwayes conferr'd upon Cardinals. The jurisdiction of this Vicar, is over the Priests and Regulars in Rome, and the Territories belonging to it. He has au∣thority also over Societies of Laicks, Religious Houses, Hospitals, Jews, and Courte∣zans, besides I know not what power over the concourses of Curats for Benefices in Rome, which are not in partibus; and this Office affords the Cardinal Vicar for his Pen∣sion, a hundred Ducats of Gold a month, paid him out of the Chamber. This Vicar has in his Court two Deputies, one for Civil Causes, the other for Criminal, and a Vice∣gerent who is a Titulary Bishop, and can exercise all the Episcopal Functions in Rome; and he has the Superintendancy, and Care of the Monasteries and Nuns; he has his Provost Marshal, and a certain number of Serjeants, and comes with the rest of his Offi∣cials into the Congregations held before the Vicar about matters belonging to his Court. Besides these, there are four Notaries belonging to that Office, each of which executes his charge apart, and has eight or ten Clerks under him perpetually. The office of chief Penitentiary is given by the Pope to a Cardinal alwayes, and yeilds him that has it, a yearly Rent of about five thousand Ducats of Gold. His jurisdiction lyes in cases reserv'd for the Pope, in giving absolution gratis ubique, and giving faculty to absolve in Parchment Seal'd with the Penitentiary Seal, to such Confessors as he ap∣proves. This Penetentiary has a Prelat under him, that is call'd the Regent of the Peni∣tentiary office, to whom the Confessors repair upon occasion, if they cannot have imme∣diate dispach from the Cardinal. And here it is to be advertis'd, that this Penitentiary assigns penance according to the quality of the offence, though the Confessor perhaps conceals the person. This Penitentiary sits in great state, sometimes in the Cathedral of Saint John de Lateran, sometimes of St Peter in the Vatican, and sometimes in the Church of Sancta Maria Maggiore, upon a kind Throne or Tribunal four or five steps high, with a wand in his hand, to hear the Confessions of reserv'd Cases. I had once occasion to make use of him, but I would not go to Cardinal Francisco that was chief Penitentiary to confess my self, lest all that were present in the Church, should understand the quali∣ty of my Conscience; for as soon as they observe any body at the feet of the Cardinal, they imagine immediately he has some great load upon his Conscience, which makes ma∣ny people forbear going thither. This Penitentiary can call a Congregation, and (by the assistance and intervention of his Regent (who keeps the Seal) two or three Jesuit Priests, and some few Canonists) deliberate about the interest and affairs of the office, the History of whose Original follows. About two hundred years after Christs Incarnation, Saint Cornelius being Pope, and many Christians having Sacrificed to Idols, there was a great controversie, whether those that were laps'd might be reconcil'd, and re-admitted again, which was the Foundation of the Novatian Schism. After long dispute, it was concluded by the major part, that they might; but because some were less Sinners than others, some had not Sacrificed, others had indured Persecution, but were not able to persevere. There were certain Priests deputed, who, Pro modo culpae admissam Paenitentiam indulgerent; That is, Pro∣portion the Penance to the quality of the Crime. And from hence sprang the Penitentiaries, who after the Church was in peace, and tranquility, extended their jurisdiction by de∣grees, to other delinquents; for which reason it was establish'd, that in every Patriar∣chical Church in Rome, there should be two Priests, who should have the care of impo∣sing of Penances according to the Penitential Canons, which are very antient, by the testimony of the Keeper of the Library. And this is all is written, or recorded in the case; from whence they argue, that in probability these Priests had a head or chief to
whom they repair'd to communicate their business of importance to the Pope, and this they would have to be their chief Penitentiary; who if so, must be very antient, though there be no Records of it, as Pauvinus sayes, before Gregory the tenth. The antientest memorial of the Office of the Vice-Chancellor, is to be found in an Epi∣stle about Monarchy written by Saint Jerome, who was then Chancellor, ad Gerontiam: It is most certain the Pope is the only Chancellor of the Church, so as the other are call'd Vice-Chancellors only; yet there are some that believe it is only out of respect to Saint Lawrence, that was formerly Chancellor, that they suffer not his Successors to enjoy the same title that he did. Antiently the Chancellor writ whatever belong'd to the Pope to write, and sometimes he answer'd those quaeries and scruples in matters of Faith, as were made him by the Bishops and others; he writ also of the Spiritual Dominion of the Pope, and had the same Authority the Secretary of the Breves, or the Secretary ab intimis, have now. Besides which he had the same Jurisdiction the Chancellors have now in France, or any other Principality, as Luca de Penna affirms in an Epistle of his to Isidore, in which he sets down distinctly the particular faculties of this Office. He had under him twelve Scrineraries, and one Proto-Scrinerary, all of them assisting him to undergo the weight of his Charge according to orders: others were to have a care of the draughts, and others to transcribe them. This Office till the time of Gregory the 7th. which was in the year 1187. was ordinarily conferr'd upon Bishops, or Cardinals; and in the year 1100. the Cardinal Bishop of Saint Ruffina was Chancellor, by concession of Benedict the eight; during the Papacy of Alexander the second, it came to be disused, which was in the year 1071. and so it continued to Gregory the eights time, being frequently given to Cardinal Priests, or Cardinal Deacons. The said Gregory having that Office, as soon as he was made Pope, took it away from the Colledge of Cardinals, and put into it a Canon of Lateran, who because he was no Cardinal, was called Cancellarii vicem agens; and so it continued for a hundred years, out of the hands of the Colledge of Cardinals; the Ministers instead of vicem agens, calling him that executed it Vice-Chancellor, by degrees, as a more commodious name. Under Boniface the eight this Office return'd to the Sacred Colledge again, being given to Richardo Padroni a Noble man of Siena, who afterwards was made Cardinal as some think, but forgetting the antient institution, he continued Vice-Chancellor, by inadvertency taking the name of the Office upon him. They that had this Office call'd themselves either Chancellors, or Library-keepers, as they pleas'd, because Praeerat Bibliothecae. Whilst the Emperor had the nomination of the Popes, the keeper of the Records was call'd Archicancellarius Imperii pro Italia, & Apostolicae sedis Bibliothecarius, vel Cancellarius, vel Archicancellarins; and they that were in Rome said, Datum Romae per manum N. Diaconi Cardinalis, Vicecancellarii, Archiepiscopi Coloniensis, Apostolica sedis Bibliothecarii seu Cancellarii. Where is to be noted, the Date was made by the same Chancellor at that time the Vice-Chancellorship was executed by a Cardinal, who got at least nine thousand Ducats of Gold by it. Its Jurisdiction is principally about the dispatch of all the Apostolical Letters, which are all sign'd by the Pope, except such as pass by Brief sub annulo Piscatoris. Three times a Week, viz. Tuesday, Thursday, and Sunday, there meet in his Palace all the Officers of the Apostolical Chancery, that is, the Regent, and the Abbreviatori di Parco Maggiore, which are twelve in number, besides the Regent in his Purple habit like a Prelate; all which Offices are sold, the Regents for twelve thousand Ducats of Gold and more; and the Abbreviatori di Parco for six thousand at least; which money yields the purchaser eight or ten per Cent. six of the Abbreviators places are in the Gift of the Cardinal Vice-Chancellor, and the Regents is in his Eminencies. These thirteen Prelates have their places in his Holiness his Chappel: But the Regent comes seldom thither, in respect of his precedente before other Prelates. These thirteen Prelates are called Refe∣rendaries, or Remembrancers of the one and the other Court, and the Regent has power to referr all Causes of Appeal to Rome, which he referrs to the Auditors of the Rota and Referendaries, distributing their Orders with great equality, that every one might have his part. The Office of Chamberlain yields one year with another six thousand Crowns of Gold; the Jurisdiction is to take cognisance of all Causes, that fall under the discussion
of the Apostolick Chamber and their Clerks, being present at all transactions in that Chamber, unless he be hinder'd by the Consistory, passing the greatest part of the dis∣patches under his own Name, though examin'd and subscrib'd by the Clerks. It is observable also in the Apostolick Chamber, that the Cardinal Chamberlain, and all the other Prelates, do come thither with their Purple Pontifical Cloaks over their Rochets, and the other Officers with habits different from what they ordinarily do wear. Besides, the Chamberlain is Judge of Appeals, as likewise of the Judgements pass'd of the Surveyors of the Streets, and with those Surveyors he takes cognisance of Cauyes, Buildings, Bridges, Streets, and other things. Furthermore, in the vacancy of the Chair, he resides in the Palace in the Popes apartment, walks up and down Rome with his Guard of Swisses, who are alwayes attending his person; he coins money also with his own Armes and Impression upon it: It being his charge to see the Conclave made, it remains at his disposing afterwards; he has a Key to the Treasury in Sainct Angelo, of which there are but three, one for the Pope, an other for him, and the third for the Cardinal Deacon. Some few Ages since the head of the Deacons was the Arch-Deacon, who was a Cardinal, and had the eare of the Revenue; his dignity was very Noble, and continued till the year 1100. about which time for the excess of his Greatness, that dignity was taken away, and another instituted in its room, which is the Chamberlainship, upon con∣dition it should be conferr'd upon Cardinals only; and they had their Coadjutors assign∣ed them, who are Clerks in the Apostolick Chamber, and whose Office in the first insti∣tution was the same with the Chamberlains. Now they have the Treasurer joyn'd to them, and the President, in respect of some late difference betwixt the Pope and his Chamberlains. The office of the Prefect of the Signature of Justice, is executed by a Cardinal also, who receives out of the Chamber, for his Pension, a hundred Ducats a Month. His bu∣siness is to under-write answers to all Petitions and References, and every Thursday, ex∣cept in Vacations, the Signature of Justice is held before the Prefect in his own Pallace, for determining references; where also twelve Prelats assist with Votes, and besides them, all other Prelats that are Referendaries. Moreover, there are present, but with∣out power of Voting, the Auditor of the Rota and the Lieutenant Civil of the Cardinal Vicar, to the end, no thing to prejudice the jurisdiction of their Tribunals. The Prefect of the Signature di Gratia, is a Cardinal likewise, who has a hundred Ducats a month for his Pension also. His office is to be present alwayes at the Signature di Gratia, which is constantly held before his Holiness, and it is he that seals all the Pe∣titions and Pardons that pass there. There are twelve Prelats also that have their votes there, which use to be the same that were present at the Signature of Justice; as like∣wise the Cardinal Vicar, the Cardinal Prefect of the Breves, the Datarie, and more or fewer of the Cardinals, according as more or fewer of them are deputed by the Pope; however, they are never fewer than twelve. There are present also at that Seal, the Auditor of the Chamber, the Lieutenant Civil of the Cardinal Vicar, the Treasurer General, one of the Auditors di Rota, a Protono∣tary, one of the Clerks of the Chamber, one of the Abbreviatori del Parco Maggiore, and the Regent of the Chancery, all of them appearing for the defence of their particular jurisdictions and offices. This Seal is kept constantly once a week before his Holiness, on Sunday, or Tuesday, if it falls not on a Holy day. The Cardinals likewise are Prefects of the Breves, and the Library Keepers; the Pre∣fect has an allowance out of the Chamber for his Pension of a hundeed Ducats a Month; and his office is to over-look and sign all the draughts of the Briefs that go under a Tax. The business of the keeper of the Library (that has his hundred Ducats a month out of the Chamber likewise) is to superintend the Press, and the Library in the Vatican, and the people that work there, in Printing Classick writings in the Oriental Tongues. Out of this Colledge of Cardinals, there are several Congregations formed, that are call'd for that reason, the Congregations of Cardinals. and are fifteen in number, viz. of the Holy Office, of the affairs of the Bishops and Regulars of the Councel, of the immunities of the Church, of the State, de propaganda Fide, of Rights, of Water, of Streets, of the Index, of Consultation for the Government of the Church, of good Re∣giment,
and of easing of grievances, of the Mint, of examination of such as are de∣sign'd to be Bishops, and of the affairs of the Consistory; but for these Congregations, the Cardinals have only their labour for their pains, and some little honour that signifies nothing. The Congregation of the Holy Office, meet twice a week, on Tuesday in the Covent of Minerva, where the Inquisition is kept by the Father Dominicans, and on Thursday before his Holiness, where causes of Heresie are heard before twelve Cardinals at the least, deputed according to the pleasure of the Pope, and a good number of Divines of several Religious Orders. The Congregation of the affairs of the Bishops and Regulars, has a particular jurisdiction over the differences which arise betwixt the Bishops, and their Subjects, and betwixt the Bishops, and the Regulars. This Congregation meets the Friday in every week, in the Cardinals house that is head of that Congregation, and that with no small trouble, for they have so many Letters of complaints sometimes, it is scarce possible to read them. The Congregation of the Councel, has the power of interpreting the Orders and De∣crees of the Councel of Trent, so that if any difference happens in Christendome about that, they apply themselves to this Congregation, which gives them all seasonable reso∣lution. It is held in the antientest Cardinals house, though the head be another Cardi∣nal, and that he has the power of assembling them: they meet ordinarily once a week, that is on Sunday, or Thursday, if it be no Holyday. The Congregation of the Ecclesiastical immunities, was instituted by Ʋrban the eight, who having had many controversies of that nature whilst he was Nuntio, and before he was Pope, he took an Oath as soon he was created, to erect this Court, to prevent those inconveniences for the future. Which Congregation has power to resolve such doubts as happen in the confusion and diversity of offences, and to determine who are, and who are not to enjoy the privileges of the Church. This Congregation meets every Tuesday, in the eldest Cardinals house, in which there are present, several Cardinals, one Auditor di Rota, one Clerk of the Chamber, one out of each Signature, and a Secretary that uses to be a Referendary to one Signature or the other. The Prefect of this Congregation has for his Pension about seven hundred Ducats a year, and the keeping of those Seals that are necessary. In the Congregation of State, all those Cardinals that have been Apostolical Nuntioes are present, and the Secretary of State to his Holiness with them, and it is generally held before the Pope, or the Cardinal Nephew. The Congregation de propaganda fide, was erected by Gregory the fifteenth of happy memory, to investigate and find out all possible wayes for the propagating the Catholick Faith in all parts of the World, and to advise what may be conducible to so profitable a work. It uses to meet on Mundays once a moneth before the Pope, and many times in the Palace de propaganda fide. There are present several Cardinals, the Apostolick Proto∣notary, his Holiness, his Secretary of State, one Judge that uses to be Referendary of one of the Signatures, the Assessor of the Holy Office, the Secretary of the same Congrega∣tion, who has built a Palace of no ordinary greatness in the Piazza della Santissima Tri∣nita di monti, for the entertainment of all those that have receiv'd the Catholick Faith, and come to see Rome; besides that they lodge several poor Bishops there, and provide them with all things necessary for a livelihood. There is a Press in this Congregation also, for all Foreign Languages, where they print daily their Missals, Breviaries, and such other Books. The Jurisdiction of the Congregation of Rights, respects the differences in Rights, Ceremonies, Preceedencies, Canonization of Saints, and such like affairs. The anti∣entest of the deputed Cardinals, is head of this Congregation, and has power to con∣vene them in his own house once a month, or oftner as he pleases; and it is to be obser∣ved, that all Congregations are conve'd by their Heads. The Congregation del Acque, has the care of all Rivers, Bridges, and such things. The antientest Cardinal is head of it, and calls it upon occasion at his own house, there being no precise or determinate day appointed. The Cardinal Chamberlain is head of the Congregations di fonte & di strade, and there
being no fix'd day, he calls them too as he thinks it convenient; but they meet in the antientest deputed Cardinals house alwayes, and being assembled, they consider of the Aquaducts and Conveyances of water into Rome, and the manner of distributing it tho∣rough the whole City, as also the Commodities of the Streets. The Congregation del Judices, hath Jurisdiction in over-seeing the Press, in printing and correcting of books; it has a Cardinal to its head, who assembles them at his own house as occasion requires, though there be a day appointed. There is the Congregation della Consulta, for the Government of the Church, and the head of that is the Cardinal Nephew of the present Pope, they meet twice a week in his house, viz. Tuesdays, and Fridays. There are present, six Cardinals, six Prelats, a Se∣cretary that uses to be a great Confident of the Nephews; in this Congregation they consult of the Government of the Church, all Deputies, Prefects, Governours, Pro∣vosts, and other Officers whatever, directing their accounts thither, of any thing consi∣derable that happens in their Governments, and this Congregation deliberates and decrees what is to be done in the case: The Secretary draws up the Order, and the Cardinal that is head, subscribes it first, and then the rest of the Prelats that are present. The se∣veral Provinces are divided amongst them, and every one reads the Letters in the Coun∣cel that come out of their particular Provinces; but it is to be understood, the Legat of Avignon, the Governour of Benevento in the Kingdom of Naples, and of the City of Ce∣neda, in the Dominions of the Venetian, being all free Governments, are not subject to the Decrees of this Councel; the Governour di Fermo, and that State, and the Governour of Spoleti, are exempt likwise. The Prelats of this Congregation have three parts of the Palace, and each of them a thousand crowns a year entertainment, and the Secretary two thousand, that is Roman crowns. The Cardinal Nephew to the Pope is head also of the Congregation of Grace, and good Government; the Communities upon any grievance or oppression, repair thither for remedy with other Subjects for present relief, and determinations in writing manu Regia. This Congregation meets on Sundays (at the same place where the Congrega∣tion della Consulta meets) by turns, that is, the Congregation for good Government one Sunday, and the Congregation for Relief another. There are five or six Cardinals pre∣sent alwayes, seven or eight Prelats, one Secretary; (which is alwayes the same with the Secretary in the other Congregation) all the Letters or Orders that pass in this Con∣gregation, are sign'd by the Cardinal Nephew; all the Prelats have the same Emolu∣ment the Prelats of the Congregation della Consulta have; they are habited in Purple, and have the Title of his Holinesses familiar and Domestick Congregation. The Congregation of the Treasury have a particular Jurisdiction over all Moneys to be coyn'd in that State, as likewise of Foreign Moneys, to observe which way they may be spent in the Territories of the Church. There are present four Cardinals, chosen all of them at the discretion of the Pope, and some Officers of his Chamber. The head of them is he the Pope thinks good to depute, and that head has power to assemble them at his own house as oft as he pleases, for there is no set day appointed. The Congregation for the examination of New Bishops, was instituted by Clement the eight of happy memory, who examin'd several persons himself, especially if they were towards the Law; for the Professors of Divinity were examin'd by Bellarmine only. This Congregation is held alwayes before the Pope, in the presence of eight or ten Car∣dinals, a certain number of Prelates, and some Theologists of several Opinions; in which all persons the Pope intends to promote to Bishopricks are examin'd; but it is to be un∣derstood the Bishopricks belonging to the Church in Italy, for the rest are not subject to the jurisdiction of that Court. The Person examin'd kneels upon a Cushion before the Pope, and all that are present in the Congregation have power to examine him; af∣ter he is examin'd and approv'd, it is entred into a Book that the Secretary of that Con∣gregation keeps, that that person has been examin'd, and if it happens he be remov'd to any other Church, he need not be examin'd again. If one has been Bishop in some Fo∣reign Province never so long, and by accident is translated to some Bishoprick in Italy, he must submit to the examination of that Congregation, except he be a Cardinal, for they are exempt from all examination when they are admitted to any Church. But here
it is to be understood, that though they be examin'd and approv'd, they are not imme∣diately Bishops. The person design'd, makes profession first of the Catholick Faith be∣fore the Cardinal chosen by his Holiness, to propose him to the rest of the Cardinals: that done, they give an Oath to the Witnesses that are to be examin'd about the State of that Church, and about the quality, extraction, and custom of the person design'd to be Bishop of that Church: that past, the Cardinal gives order to his Auditor to make Pro∣tess, which is presently drawn up, either by the Cardinal Vicars Notary, or the Auditor of that Chamber; whilst they are drawing the Process, the person recommended is to produce the Testimonies of his Doctorship, and after that, what other privileges he has, as Patents, Depositions, or Testimonials from him that Ordain'd him, which are very proper, and will much facilitate his dispatch. After the Testimonies, they are to swear they were born in lawful Marriage, and that their Parents were not suspected for Hereticks, and that he is above thirty years of age, according to the Canons of the Councel of Trent. After this, there are other Wit∣nesses examin'd about the State, Revenue, and quality of the Sea, in what Province the City is, whether it be immediately subject to the Apostolick Sea, or the Suffragan of some Arch-bishoprick, what Lands or owns there are within its Diocess, how many thousand Souls, how many Monasteries there are, how many Reliques of Saints, how much the Church yeilds yearly, how many Clerks, how many Canons, how many Col∣ledges or Schools, how many Covents of Monk, how many Priests, how many Stee∣ples, Bells, and such like things. The Presentation being finish'd, the Cardinal Ponente (which is he the Pope chose to present the person) subscribes it, and then gives it to the three principal Cardinals of that Order, who having perus'd it, subscribe it in like manner, and return it to the Cardinal Fonente, where it remains. In the next private Consistory he publishes it, and in the next, he presents him, and recites in a short Latin Speech the whole contents of the Process, but before the Cardinal Ponente assigns his Church, the Provost gives two blanck Schedules to the Auditor of the Sacred Colledge at the instance of the person Elected, in which he promises to pay the Cardinal Ponente, the Sacred Colledge, the Reverend Chamber, and all the Officers of the Chancery, all that is due to them for the dispatch of that business. The day before the Consistory for determining, the Cardinal Ponente sends a memorial to all the rest of the Cardinals, in which, he succinctly recites the manner of the whole Process, to the end, that if any Cardinal could make any exception, he knew against whom he was to speak, and as soon as the Presentation is over by the Cardinal Ponente, the Pope turns to the Cardinal Deacon, and demands if he has any thing to say to the contrary, if he has any, he declares it, if not, he rises up, sayes no, and approves what the Cardinal Ponente has done, and so his Holiness decrees, and gives the person that Church, which is enter'd immediately into a Note by the Cardinal Vice-Chancellor, and Seal'd with his Seal. Upon this Decree, the Cardinal Ponente draws up a Schedule, Subscribes it with his own Hand, and Seals it with his own Seal; and by virtue of this Schedule, and another which they call the Counter-part under the Hand and Seal of the Cardinal Vice-Chancellor, the Bull is immediately dispatch'd: The Cardinal Ponente receives ordinarily as his Right, fifteen Ducats per Cent. out of the Chamber of all the Revenues of that Church, that per∣son is recommended to: if he be presented by the Pope himself, the said sum is to be paid to the Colledge of the Apostolick Secretaries: if one be presented by a Cardinal that has not been formerly in Rome, the Cardinal is to pay the fifteen per Cent, but if the Cardinal be present, or has been in Rome, he is freed from that payment. The person presented, stirs not out of his house that morning, but shaves his head, and after Dinner puts himself into his Pontifical Habit like a Bishop, with his black Hat, Hat-band, and a green welt about the brims. After this, he is to go into the Popes Pallace, where (introduc'd by the Master of the Chamber) he is to kiss the Popes foot, who with his own hands puts his Rochet over him, such a one as the Bishops are wont to wear of their own. The new Bi∣shop is then to visit the whole Colledge of Cardinals, and without any order or prece∣dence, he may visit them next he thinks most convenient, provided he begins with the Cardinal Deacon. Those that are presented to any See out of Italia, are oblig'd to all these things but examination, and if they be absent, they do all per procuratorem.
The Cardinal Deacon is head of the Congregation de negotii Consistoriali, but having no particular business, only such things as his Holiness particularly refers to them, which are usually, renuntiations of Bishopricks, the Taxes of the Church, and such things; they meet but seldome. This Congregation is call'd by the Cardinal its head, and held in his house. In all the aforementioned Congregations, there are several Cardinals, sometime more, sometime fewer, as we have said, but the greatest number of all is in the Congregation of Bishops and Regulars, where there are sometime four and wenty present. Every Con∣gregation has its particular Secretary, whose care it is to draw up the Orders exactly to the Decrees that are made in full Congregations, every Cardinal Subscribing them, and Sealing them with his own Seal. But it is to be understood, that when there is a Con∣sistory, there is never any Congregation, for upon any intimation from the Pope that he would have a Consistory, they leave the Congregation and repair thither. The three Arch-Priestships of the three Cathedrals in Rome, that is of Saint John de Lateran, of Saint Peter, and of Santa Maria Maggiore, are alwayes in the persons of the Cardinals. And of the dignity of these three Offices we may judge, if we consi∣der that there is not any of them falls, but the present Pope bestows it immediately upon one of his Cardinal Nephews, and the Popes do seldome confer any thing upon them, but the best and most profitable offices in the Church. Each of these Arch-Priests has his Deputy, and he assigns him what profit he pleases, which for the most part is the Reve∣nue of a Canon. They have each of them power indulg'd them to dispose of what Bene∣fices, Clerkships, Chaplainships, and other things that fall within their several Churches. Every Pope also does usually allow each of them a Canonship. The Arch-Priest of Saint John de Lateran administers Justice both in cases Criminal and Civil, to all such persons that live within a certain distance from his Cathedral ac∣cording to his Jurisdiction. In the year of Jubily, the Arch-Priest goes in his Pontifica∣libus, with a great train on horse-back to his own Church to open the Holy Gate. The Cardinal Deacon observes the same order in the Church of Saint Paul, and the same Ce∣remony is us'd when the Holy Gate is shut again. This is to be understood of the two Arch-Priests of St. John de Lateran, and of Santa Maria Maggiore, for the Pope in St. Peters Church, opens and shuts the Holy Gate himself, and no he Arch-Priest. In all these great Churches, there are Penitentiaries, that is to say, the Jesuits in the Church of St. Peter, the Franciscans in the Church of S▪ John de Lateran, and the Dominicans in the Church di Santa Maria Maggiore. The Penitentiaries have good Lodgings and accommodations in each of thee places; where they live comfortably at the charge of the Pope, or rather of the Church, being oblig'd to be constantly in the Church to re∣ceive the Confessions of all that come thither to confess themselves. Amongst these Fa∣thers, there are some that confess people in divers Languages, and one of them in each Church has the Title of Rector. All these Offices and Dignities that belong to the Cardinals only, besides honor, they bring great advantages to them; but the Congregations have nothing but trouble, and if they have any profit at all, it is accompany'd with so many inconveniences, that many had rather be without it, for those incommodities would be more tollerable, were they not joyn'd with something that is incompatible, by the communication of continual dis∣gusts and peevishness into the Breasts of those Cardinals that are deputed thither by his Holiness; there being some of them of two or three several Congregations, as if it were on purpose to multiply the inconveniences that do follow that appearance of honour. Let it not seem strange if I say the Cardinals are sometime transported with rage in their Congregations, because the Popes give them but too much occasion, in not suffer∣ing any thing but their profit and advantage to be consulted, and which is worse, the Popes Nephews do spoil all their Politicks, and after they are tyr'd and lost in the busi∣ness, they turn it over upon the mature prudence, as they call it, of the Congregations and Consistory; as if the Cardinals, like Taylors, were only to patch up what the Ne∣phews had torn in the Church. The business of Castro has been so sifted and bandied about in the Congregations
and Consistories, that some of the Cardinals (as is writ to me from Rome) have it ringing perpetually in their ears, so as they cannot sleep in their beds for it. Others there are, whose minds and imaginations are so full of it, they run from one thing to another in their discourse, and talk of Castro, when they would have talk'd of Constanti∣nople. But some will ask me from whence comes this delay, perhaps from the irresolution of the Cardinals? No Sir, from the irregular authority of the Popes, who will do things in spight of the advice of the Cardinals; but of that we have said enough already, and shall not by a superfluous repetition rub up those old Sores that afflict the Church, as well as the hearts of the Cardinals. It is sufficient, if I say his Holiness erected so many Congregations to conceal the infinite Enormities committed by the Nephews in the Go∣vernment of the Church: And these are the Congregation at Rome. The Popes pre∣tend, and indeed will do all things; and if the Cardinals know how to comply with the Wills of the Popes, all is well, otherwise he turns and winds them, till at last they come about to the humour of the Pope and his Nephews. In short, the Cardinals con∣sult in Rome, and the Pope decrees according as he is advis'd by his Councel. But the Cardinals do not so much as consult about any thing that is propos'd by the Pope, and which he is resolv'd to decree. I was ask'd lately by a friend that was an outlandish man, what share the Cardinals had in the Canonization of a Saint; to which I reply'd, that they had a great deal of trouble by reason of the many Consistories that were held, of which it will not be amiss to speak something by the bye. The Popes before they proceeded to Canonization, are wont to have four Consistories of Cardinals, the two first are in private, the third pub∣lick, and the fourth betwixt both; in the first, the Pope gives answer to such Petitions as they have receiv'd from some Prince, Province, or City, and refers it to three Audi∣tors di Rota to examine the Process diligently, who having made their report that it was well, his Holiness recommends it again to three Cardinals to be re-examin'd whether it be agreeable to the Auditors report. In the second Consistory, the Cardinals to whom it is referr'd, do declare that they have seen and consider'd the Process, and that they find the report of the Auditors to be true. The third Consistory (which is publick) is in the Sala Reggia, where the Cardinals render their obedience, and where the Advocate of the Consistory makes an Harangue of the Life and Miracles of the Saint. In the fourth Consistory that is but half publick, and held in the Sala Ducale, the Pope comes with his Miter upon his head, and his single Rochet upon his shoulders, and there are present, not only the Cardinals, but the Patriarchs, Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Auditors di Rota, and Protonotaries. The Pope inquires after every mans opinion whether that Canonization be to be made or not, and if the Major part say yes, he degrees him esse Canonizandum, and appoints the day for his Canonization, on which there are many Ceremonies us'd. The Pope, and the Cardinals, are all in their Surplices, with every one a lighted Torch in his hand, in which posture they go in Procession through the Piazza, where the Guards of light Horse are drawn up, as soon as they are come into the Church, the Cardinals pay their Reverences, and then there is a Hymn sung in the Quire; that done, three Instances are made by the Procurator of that Prince, Province, or City, upon whose request the Ca∣nonization is made, a Mass is sung, and his Holiness presented with two young Turtles, and other little Birds, in two Silver Baskets, many of which Birds are let go. Mass be∣ing ended, the Cardinals put off their Habits, and attend his Holiness back again. We have spoken thus far of what is done whilst the Cardinals are living; it will not be amiss to observe something now that passes at their death. A Cardinal being dead, he is carried to the next Church to the place where he dy'd; his body is laid upon a high Scaffold built on purpose, on a quilt of Cloth of Gold, dress'd in the same Habit he wore when he was admitted into that Order, that is, if he was a Bishop, in his Rocher, if he was a Priest, in his Choppines, if a Deacon, in his Cassock, with his wonted Mitre at his head, and two Pontifical red Caps at his feet. After Dinner, all the Fryeries go to that Church, and there say the Offices for the dead, and cause a Nocturral to be rehear∣sed, during which, the Cardinals are in their Purple Habits, and entring into the Church,
they put on their Copes of the same colour; and that done, they go and pray to the Host, after that, they advance to the feet of the Corps, where saying a Pater Noster, they sprinkle the Carcass with Holy water, repeating some usual Vers and Prayers for the dead, and then they return to their places, and this is perform'd by every Cardinal that is present; but if there come more Cardinals than ordinary, the anuentest performs the Ceremony for the rest, they sitting still in their orders in the Church till the service is done. The four Masters of the Ceremonies are assisting in like manner with their upper Garment of Purple Serge, the Sergeants also in their long Purple Gowns, with their Sil∣ver Maces in their hands, with every one of them a Priests Cap given them for a present. There are also two of the dead Cardinals Crowns standing by in mourning, with two Bannerols of black Taffaty, with his Arms painted upon them, in their hands; the Church is hung also with black, with the Cardinals Scutchions fasten'd upon them, and such Trophyes as are usual at the Funerals of great Persons. They are buried for the most part in the Churches of their Titles, with great Pomp, the Fryers marching with great Tapers in their hands, and after them the Major Domo, the Bishops, the Apostolical Protonatories on Mules pontifically, with the Masters of the Ceremonies, and his Holinesses Family in long red Robes; and this Ceremony is al∣wayes perform'd about the four and twentieth hour. But those that desire to be buried without any Pomp, are carry'd privately in a Coach about two a Clock in the morning to the place where they are to be interr'd. Those Cardinals that are descended from great Families, and have rich Relations, have their Exchequer in the Church where they are buried, with noble Herses, where the whole Colledge of Cardinals are assistant at the singing of Mass, making Orations in praise of the Cardinal departed, and perform∣ing other Ceremonies not unlike those before mentioned. It is now time I return, and say something to the general satisfaction; and indeed, though I may wander a little in some particulars, my chief design is common satisfacti∣on; above all things else, I think convenient to touch something in this place upon the Original of the Title of Eminence, which is of that value now adayes amongst the Car∣dinals, they would think him almost a Heretick, that should deprive them of it. But before we pass to the Titles of the Cardinals, it will be requisite to say somewhat of the Titles of the Popes, which are as great, if not greater, than the Titles of our Savi∣our, differing only in point of duration, ur Saviours being Eternal, and the Popes but Mo∣mentary. By the Law of Nature, the Popes must leave their Title of Holiness taken up in the Vatican, and dye like a corruptible worm, whereas our Saviour, whose Holiness is natural to him, remains to all Eternity: for what cause is it then, that the Popes take such pains themselves, and their flatterers also lay about them, to heap Title upon Title upon them; seeing in spight of all they can do, they must dye, and return to their first principals of dust and vanity. The Holy Scripture pronounces Christ Impeccable, the Books and Theologists of Rome, do the same for the Pope; Christ was call'd Holy, so is his Holiness, Blessed, and so is he. In the infancy of Christianity, the light of Holiness shin'd out in the Consci∣ences of Christians, blessedness in their minds, and their Impeccability in their Zeal and Ardour for the service of the Church, which rewarded their labours with a Crown of Martyrdome. Those Titles that are now in such esteem, were not only undervalu'd then, but with a Pious Zeal despised and abhorred, the Popes and the Ecclesiasticks taking more glory in the humility of their Lives, than in all the variety of Titles could be given them; and upon what grounds? Because being instructed by the Celestial love of the Holy Spirit, they understood very well, that giving way to the outward applause of the people, it could not but communicate something of the venome of Ambition within, which is the Harbinger of all the mischiefs in the Church. Had any one in those dayes gone into the Popes presence with those Titles that are in such request at this present in Rome, and the Vatican, that is, with the Titles of Blessed, or Holy; he would have been look'd upon as a most pestilent flatterer, and have been banish'd the Vatican, and made uncapable of any part of the benignity of the Pope, or of any preferment in the Apostolick Sea; and for what reason? Because the Popes had then no need of begging those Titles from man, when by their Repentance, and Sackcloth,
their Fasting and Prayers, their Mortifications and good Works that over-flow'd, like a River the banks of the Church, they both challeng'd and deserv'd them. The good Popes did then labour from morning to night by their good works, to demonstrate that they were bless'd already by that God that can alone give blessedness to man; and there∣fore they despised that happiness that was got by ambition, which make people happy only in the sight of the world. They abominated as a Serpent that Holiness was given them by the Priests, because they knew that that Holiness in the Tongue, would be a pernicious Poyson in their Hearts. Many there are, as well devote as ingenious, that have broke their brains almost to find out the reason for the introduction of such throngs of Titles into the Church, and after no small toyl, they observed that the Pope and the Ecclesiasticks have scram∣bled as it were for them, since there was brought in so much Riches to the Church; so that the Wealth being increas'd, their Ambition and Vanity is increas'd with it; the lustre of Gold, and the splendor of Silver, do illustrate the Majesty of the Popes, and gild over the comliness of the Ecclesiastick. And this Mettal, that with so much labour both of Prince and People, is drawn out of the Bowels of the Earth where it was buried, as if it had been asham'd to appear before the face of the Church, as conscious of corrupt∣ing it at the very first sight, and being enter'd. of making such a noise in the breasts of those Ecclesiasticks that embrace it so greedily, that in a short time there should be no∣thing but Ecchoes of flatrery heard in the Church, every one striving with emulation to tickle the ears of the Pope; who, lull'd as it were with the Harmony, delighted him∣self in that imaginary glory, which by degrees rais'd up a whole Army of Vices to be∣leaguer the Rock of the Holy Church, labouring by all means possible, to banish Piety and Holiness of life, from the Sanctuary of the Church. For four Ages together, the Popes liv'd without the least tincture of Vanity or Pride, Humility and Modesty was all their practice, whereby they kindled and excited Devotion in the hearts of the Faithful, who had the good fortune to see the Church Govern'd by Pastors, whose thoughts were humble, and whose actions were modest. The Titles the Popes then chose to distinguish themselves from the people, were so poor and abject, it inflam'd them with Obedience, and communicated a Zeal to the most obstinate Sinners, who could not but triumph in their Obedience to such Superiours, as took more pleasure to serve, than to command the Church. What Heart of Stone, what Conscience of Flint, what Rock of Pride or Obstinacy, would not have been reduc'd to powder, to hear the Popes, Christs Vicars, Gods Vice∣gerents upon Earth, Heads of the Church, Supreme Ministers of Christianity, and Pa∣stors of the Flock of Christ, call themselves with so much humility, Poor Sinners, Hum∣ble Servants of God, and Servants of his Servants? These were the Titles of Honour the Holy Popes in the blessed time of the Churches Infancy, did so much glory in; with these Titles (which our present Ecclesiasticks do so much abominate) did those Primitive Pastors draw millions of Sinners to repentance: whereas now in this Age, that abounds with so many Ecclesiastical Titles, there is scarce one Proselite made after several months pains, with all the Menaces of their Arms, nor all the power of their whole Troops of Apostolical Missionaries; but who could have been able to have resisted the Tears of those Popes that humbled themselves to all men? Who would not willingly have turn'd to the Church of Christ, to see the Governours of it so Humble, Holy, Devout, and Pious? Pope Gregory (who was the first that took upon him the Title of Servant to the Ser∣vants of God) presag'd very well when he gave this answer to a Cardinal that advis'd him against speaking so humbly of himself, That there was not a more efficacious way to be found out to call sinners to Repentance, than the humility in the Ecclesiasticks that had the care of them; and another time, it being told him by a Bishop, that it was a prejudice to the Majesty of the Vicarship of Christ, to debase himself as he did, his thoughts being fix'd wholly upon humility, he return'd this answer, And how? Christ our King saved the World by his Humiliation, and shall we that are but his Servants, govern it with Pride? Experience teaches us, so that we cannot pretend ignorance in this case; and I know
the Prelats that are enemies to flattery, and zealous in the Service of God, will not ob∣lige me to lye, they understanding very well the detriment the Church has receiv'd by the introduction of ambition into the hearts of the Ecclesiasticks, and if they be silent, it is because they are fearful of disgusting those that command in Rome. Every one knows, that whilst the Popes lived with their low and humble, their abject and contemptible Titles, Holiness of life did blaze as it were in the Lap of the Church; the Christians living with a certain devout simplicity, and glorying with just reason to acknowledge them for true and lawful Vicars of Christ, and for worthy Successors to St. Peter, those Popes that aspir'd not to the Papacy for the augmentation of the wealth of their Families, or for multiplying worldly honours upon their own persons; but as Ser∣vants of God, to be serviceable to his Flock. Those Popes I say that sought the Pope∣dome, not to domineer or insult to the prejudice of Princes, but to humble themselves in favour of the people. Who is it that is ignorant of the great miseries the poor Church has suffer'd? Who is it that is not sensible of the dangers with which it has been many times overwhelm'd, since that time in which the Popes began with so much vanity to dis∣dain those low and humble, those holy and devout Titles; and to take upon them the most arrogant and lofty ones imaginable, passing from Modesty, to Pride, from Humi∣lity to Haughtiness, and from Ecclesiastical simplicity, to the vanity of the World, which at this present is too predominant. Schisms, Heresies, and the destruction of Kingdoms, from whence had they their original, but from the invention and vanity of so many Titles that seem'd to be invented on purpose to disturb the peace of the Church? Many do observe, and that with no small displeasure, that the Christian Church began to abate and fall off from its original splendour, from that very time the Popes began to usurp the Titles of Holiness, and Blessedness; with these Titles were scruples brought amongst Christians, so that what the faithfull did before affectionately, and with all their hearts, worshipping and owning the Popes to be Christs true Vicar upon Earth, they could not afterwards be brought to, by all their promises, intreaties or threats; being fearful they should err, in calling the Pope Holy, that had no Holiness, and Blessed, that had no Blessedness; but what the Commodities of the world do usually afford. The same thing (or very like it) is happen'd in the person of the Cardinals, by the introduction and heaping of Titles upon Titles. In the first Ages of the Churches Infan∣cy, the Cardinals were so humble and modest, they thought the Title of Fratello nel Sig∣nore observandissimo, most observant Brother in the Lord, too high, too great, too emi∣nent and faigus for them; yet the same Title that the Cardinals took so much glory in then, is now despis'd as too low, by the vilest of the Clergy, and the most abject Cook, or Butler of the Cloyster. The first Ebullitions of humility being over, and the Rays of modesty that glitter'd formerly in the persons of the Cardinals, beginning to decay, they look'd out for Titles correspondent to the ambition of their hearts, with which they studied to advance them∣selves to the degrees and honours of this world; and therefore laying aside the Title (which was ordinary to the Cardinals) of Reverendo, they took that of Reverendissimo, upon them, which they kept for the space of eight inre Ages, till at length the simple Prelats growing ambitious (for they had already usurp'd the Title of Reverend, which the Cardinals had rejected) they gave them occasion to take the Title of Illustrissimo in exchange, which was very well lik'd of by the Cardinals, they believing that Title suf∣ficient to illustrate the actions of a Cardinal, whether good or bad. And so the Cardi∣nals having rejected the Title of Reverendissimo, and assum'd that of Illustrissimo, all the Abbots and Prelats began to make bold with the Title of Reverendissimo, which is grown at present so common amongst the Ecclesiasticks, the Canonists themselves disdain it, and the most vile and inconsiderable little Priests, will challenge and expect it. The Cardinals were contented with the Title of Illustrissimo, and they show it by ex∣perience; living for much above two Ages in that manner, not regarding the acquisition of greater Titles and Prerogatives, they chang'd as it were a little smoak, for a great piece of meat. But if the Cardinals were contented, Pope Ʋrban the eight was not; who in the beginning of his Papacy, not being satisfy'd to pervert and misapply the riches of
the Church, to the advancing the Fortunes of his languishing Family, he would go further yet, and upon the Anvil of Ambition forge a higher and more sublime Title, than that with which the Cardinals were contented; and which is worse, not moved by any respect to the Decorum of the Church, or the Majesty of the Cardinalship, but for the greater honour of his own Nephews only. Many and various were the thoughts of Pope Ʋrban about this matter, troubling and distracting himself (as is reported) several hours in the night, to find out greater Titles and Prerogatives. At first he thought to have given the Title of Highness to the Car∣dinals, as knowing he could not ennoble his Nephews with a greater Title than the rest, so that under pretence of advancing them all, he engrandiz'd his own Nephews amongst them. But desirous to give the Cardinals some Title that might be peculiar to their Dignity, it was some trouble to his spirits to consider that Title was common to other Princes; at last after much watching, and ambitious study, he found out the Title of Eminence, which was receiv'd with great applause by all the Cardinals, who gave the Pope solemn thanks that they were made Eminentissimi in his Papacy; and to take away all suspicion of ingratitude, they suffer'd him to dispose of the Treasure of the Church at his pleasure, of which price of gratitude the Church is sensible at this day. The improvident and capricious introduction of the Title of Eminence in the persons of the Cardinals, gave not only occasion of argument and dispute amongst the People, but discompos'd and sbverted (as one may say) the repose of all the Princes of Chri∣stendom, and especially of Italy; for they being jealous to see the Cardinals so exalted in their Titles, that they might not become their Inferiours that had been their Supe∣riours so long, especially in the excellence of their Titles, they began to hold conferences, and to consider of wayes to restrain the pride of the Cardinals' and at last after several debates, they resolv'd to leave the Title of Excellence, and take up the Title of Highness, which is us'd at this day in Christendom as the Highest of Titles, and assum'd by many Princes without State, or Principality, or merit, or money, who are transported to hear themselves call'd by the Title of Highness; as if the ambition of a bare Title were suffi∣cient to maintain that grandeur they aspir'd to; and which is worse, those persons are more ambitious of those Titles that enjoy them by force, than those that are possess'd of them by their merit. Of the Title of Excellence I say nothing, holding my peace for my reputation sake, because 'tis become now so common, I will not say in all Europe, but in all Italy, that 'tis usurp'd by Marquisses, or rather Counts, that have nothing else to Count (I speak it with reverence to their Dignity) but Lice; and I can speak it with good reason, that I have heard in the State of Saint Mark only (for I will not restrain my self to the City of Venice) the Title of Excellence given to above six hundred persons, (if I should say eight I should not exceed;) yet fifty years since there were not a hundred in all Italy, men and women and all, that carried the Title of Excellence: And the reason was, because that Title was then in so great esteem, it was given only to Princes, whereas now a-dayes it is given even to the Staffieri; besides the Doctors, those especially that have least Learning, will not give you an answer if you call them not Excellentissimi Signori. And from whence is this unmeasurable inundation, or corruption rather, of Titles amongst Secular Princes, but from the ambition of the Ecclesiasticks in Rome, who for∣getful of the humility the Ecclesiastical habits did formerly shew, are given up wholly to the study of Pride, and guided by an ambition that has been alwayes connatural to them that believe they can alter the order, even of Nature it self. It is certainly a great shame to all Christendom, to say that the Secular State is constrain'd to beg Examples of humane greatness, from the worldly greatness that is in the possession of the Ecclesia∣stick? It is a great and deplorable misery, to observe Princes oblig'd to leave their pro∣per Titles, to beg new of others, if not improper to their Births, at least lofty, and con∣trary to antient Custome; and all for the conservation of the Majesty of their persons, being persecuted by the pride and insolence of those Ecclesiasticks, that ought rather to have given them Examples of humility. But that which is most curious and remarkable, is that at the same time that the
Princes began to treat of, assuming (with just reason) the Title of Altezza, least they should be wanting to the dignity of their Characters, the Cardinals being jealous of be∣coming inferiour in the degrees of honor that they so much aspir'd to, with great passion, and violence of words, they endeavour'd to obstruct them; from whence it is that Pope Ʋrban the eight (as if all Titles, and Honors, had depended upon him) declar'd that he would give the Princes no other Title than that of Excellence: which they had so long en∣joy'd. But they despising with good reason his irrational threats, betook themselves also to threatning, and protested they would not give the Cardinals the Title of Eminence, if they did not give them first the Title of Highness. And this I know that a certain Secretary of State having receiv'd a Letter one day directed from a Cardinal to his Prince, with no other Title but Excellence, he sent it back again with this writ in a Note, My Master receives no Letters from him that knows not his Merit. And a Prince receiving a Letter that was sent to him from a Cardinal (that is now alive) without the Title of High∣ness, having read the Superscription, he return'd it to the person that brought it, and told him, That the Cardinal had a drunken Secretary, and one that did not know what Titles Princes deserv'd. I could instance in several examples of this kind, but I forbear, left it should render my History too prolix: it is enough to let you know, that the Cardinals (to prevent the loss of the Title of Eminence, which had been already deny'd them by many) did find themselves oblig'd to give the Princes the Title of Highness. I had spoke of the Chamberlains of the Holy Colledge, when I spake of his Holiness his Chamberlains; but I thought it convenient to discourse of it in particular, but with brevity. It is to be understood then amongst the Cardinals, there is alwayes one of them Chamberlains of the Sacred Colledge. which is altogether distinct from the other Cham∣berlain I mention'd among the Offices belonging to the persons of the Cardinals. The chiefest difference lyes in this, that the Popes Chamberlain is for life, but this of the Sa∣cred Colledge but for a year; the Cardinals that are present in the Court, succeeding one another according to their Seniority. His business is to take care of the the Revenue of the Sacred Colledge, and at the years end, when he is to resign up his Office, he gives every CArdinal his proportion; but those that are absent enjoy their share but for 6. months after their departure from Rome. There are many other things I could have inserted sufficiently pertinent to the Cardi∣nalship; but that would be to ingulf my self in an Ocean too far off from any Port: for the Majesty of the Cardinals being really so ample, and so considerable in the Church, it follows by consequence that they must have an infinity of considerable particularities; however I think what is spoken already, sufficient to give the Reader full satisfaction. For the abbreviation therefore of my History, I shall pass to the particular of the Di∣vines which the Cardinals have alwayes about them, and indeed it is a point of no small concernment. Before we proceed therefore to find out the cause why the customs of keeping Cham∣pion Divines, was first introduc'd, it is to be understood, that the Cardinals are oblig'd by the nature of their dignity, to defend the Church from all those Heretical molestations with which it has from its infancy been disturb'd; and are besides bound to propugne and maintain the excellence of the Roman Religion, with such arguments as are necessary for the conviction of all contrary opinions. And forasmuch as to a small number of learned Cardinals (as is mentioned in another place) there is a much greater number of igno∣rant ones, that are not only unable to defend the Church of Christ, but to understand the Essence of the Religion they possess; to prevent any danger that might occurr, they do keep their several Divines ready upon all occasions in their behalf with the two Swords of their Tongue and their Pen, to justifie the verity of the Catholick Faith, that it be not swallow'd up and overwhelm'd with Heresie. But to speak the truth, all this is but a Ceremony, whilst the Cardinals instead of choosing learned persons and exemplary for their Champions, they many times choose such as are more ignorant than themselves, and like those that have read Divinity in the Kitchin, having nothing but the Beard and the Conscience of a Divine. Yet it is true, there are some of them so prudent notwithstanding, that they will oftentimes withdraw
themselves from disputes, under pretence of some Office they are to recite for the dead; so that instead of giving the Hereticks a sight of their Errours, they suffer them to diffuse and disseminate their false Doctrines, even in the very Court of the poor Cardinals, who are guilty of no other fault, than to have receiv'd such a generation of people into their Service. Ordinarily these Divines are of the Regular Orders, and sometimes Priests and Secu∣lar Canons; but whether they be of the one side or the other, they know very well to make the best use, and perhaps too much, of the charge that is given them, not for their merit, for that is but little regarded in Rome (and that in the very Election of the Pope also) but for some great and violent recommendation, which is that which preva most now adayes amongst Christians, and Ecclesiasticks in all Europe, but especially in Rome, where this Proverb is very frequent, Che gli offici, fanno gl amici. And from hence it comes, that the charges of Divines are most commonly bestow'd upon ignorant, insolent, proud, vain-glorious, and perverse persons; because the virtuous, modest, worthy, and good ones, will not prostitute their deserts, but choose rather to lye languishing in their Cells, believing the merit of their virtue, and other good qualities, will some time or other knock at the door of the Cardinals Consciences, to demand them; but they dye in their Errours, for living too much in that hope, and why so? Because the most ignorant are privately conscious of their ignorance, and will not have it expos'd to the eyes of all the world, nor suffer their insufficiency to be too far known; besides be∣ing refractory and untractable, as it is the nature of ignorant people to be, they endea∣vour what they can to free themselves from the obedience of the Cloister, in considera∣tion of some respect that is given to them, or to their pretended office They run up and down from morning to night, at all hours whatsoever, traversing of Rome, and the great∣est part of the Princes Courts in Christendom, to get Letters of recommendation, and they are mightily deficient if it goes no further than Prayers; the worst is, they promise this Secretary a dozen of Silk Stockings, and that Major Domo a purse of Gold stoln out of the Almes of the poor Cloyster of which they boast themselves to be Sons, which Son-ship, is oftentimes purchas'd notwithstanding. With these ways they obtain their desir'd Offices, under the shelter of which, they commit a thousand enormities either out of ignorance, or malice, all of them falling heavy upon the reputation of the Cardinals, who deserve to be pay'd by such people, in such coin; that is, for so easily believing a bundle of recommendations, in matters of that importance. This office of Cardinals Divine, were it exercis'd by some true and able School Di∣vine, with its just decency and decorum, and not rudely and ignorantly by those Kitchin Divines, certainly it would be honourable to the person that executed it, profitable for the affairs of the Church, and no small assistance to the Cardinal that maintains it. But whilst Election is still made of unworthy persons, and such as are only recommended, Adieu all Theological dignity, Adieu the Advantage of the Church, Adieu all Assistance to the Cardinals. That which some of very good judgements admire, is, that ordinarily that office of a Divine, has the office of a Consultor joyn'd with it, and indeed the Theologist ought to consult of the roughest and most intricate matters that occurr in the Congregations; but because he oftentimes, without Counsel, not to say judgement; instead of advising his Cardinals, opposes the good Councels of him, who seems oblig'd to find fault with them that had recommended him. And would to God things would stop here: I would to God they would not pass the bounds of all honesty, nor give any further scandal either to Rome, or Christendome. He that knows the affairs, and intrigues of the Court, un∣derstands me without more adoe; but I will make my self understood by those also that are ignorant of them. There are some of these Cardinals Divines, that knowing their own inabilities, and incapacities to serve their Padroni in matters of Theology, either with the pains of their Pens, or the frequency of good Councels, they endeavour to obtain the favour of the Cardinals they serve, by inveighing him to dishonesty, and opening the Gate for him to Sensuality and Lust. I could produce several examples of this Nature, and cite such Divines as are of the same humour, but I will forbear it out of several respects; Yet I
cannot forbear telling of a certain Divine now living, who besides his Theological Ser∣vice, having receiv'd I know not what Benefice or Dignity by the recommendation of the Cardinal he serv'd, he did him other good service too as a Pimp, conveying into the Car∣dinals Chamber, most nights, a certain paultry Queen in mans apparel, that would pass for a Lady amongst the rest of the Whores, the good Divine keeping the Chambermaid for his own use in the mean time; but the best part of the History was, that he did con∣fess and absolve the Cardinal and the Lady, and her Maid; those Courtiers receiving no small offence, that were constrain'd to be Spectators of such actions as these. I will not say for all this, but there are some of these Cardinals Divines in Rome, that are worthy Theologists, and accomplish'd with all things requisite for the edification of the Court, for the defence of Christianity, and for the reputation of those Cardinals that have receiv'd them into their houses; but they are so rare, one must fix his eyes very well that searches for them, or walk up and down like the Phylosopher with his Lan∣thorn, that was seeking an honest man in that posture at noon day. Some Cardinals there are, that have none of these Divines at all in their Courts, for being doubtful of finding a good one, they will avoid the danger of having a bad. Cer∣tainly those Cardinals deserve great commendations, that are so careful to Elect their Di∣vines; as well virtuous and learned in Theology, as zealous in the Divine Worship, fear∣ful of God, and of their own Consciences, whilst by the Councel of their Divines, and the advice of their Councellors that serve them on purpose, they may be able to serve the Church in her need, that gave them their greatness, and bring great advantage to Chri∣stianity, that is, in want of such Protectors as they, if they will imploy them as they ought; for to say the truth, it is not enough to make choice of a virtuous Divine, but it is necessary also to know which way to employ him suitably to the charge that is given him. On the other side, how much greater praise do they deserve that, endeavour to call the Divines to their duties as loud as they can. Others are as much to be condemn'd, that suffer themselves to be serv'd by such Divines as are accustomed to write all day in the Chimney-corner with the Pen of a Ladle, upon the Paper of a Pipkin. The Courts of the Cardinals are they, that either honour or dishonor the Cardinals them∣selves, the scandals of their ill Courtiers being oftentimes like poyson, that though pleasant in the Pallat, yet taken down into the Body, gripes and torments the reputation of the Cardinal that had no other fault perhaps, than to suffer himself to be serv'd by so unwor∣thy a person; and on the other side, it falls out as often, that the good and modest acti∣ons of deserving and meritorious Courtiers, do make the people believe a bad Cardinal, a good one, so that the Ecclesiasticks ought to use great caution, especially the Cardi∣nals in the Election of their Courtiers, that they may not suffer by other peoples offen∣ces. But some will say, the Cardinals have no need of such advice, they know their own business better that are in Rome, than they that are at a distance. I answer, that that Rule is fallable, for the Cardinals see what is before their faces, but not that which is behind their backs. Let that Censurist consider a little, that believes all that I have writ to be erroni∣ous. There departed from Rome not many years since, a certain person that had serv'd a Cardinal above six years, being arriv'd in Holland, he chang'd his Religion, and his dis∣cretion also, and ran up and down the Streets all day long, publishing of things that re∣flected very much upon the Reputation of the Cardinal whom he had serv'd. But for my part, I believ'd not the Satyrical relations of that person, as not conceiv∣ing it possible a Cardinal should be so weak to commit matters of great consequence to such a person. But let it be as it will, it is sufficient that the Ecclesiasticks use no small diligence in the Election of their Courtiers, lest their private errours become publick offences. Antient custom has not permitted the Cardinals to keep young Pages that may give occasion of scandal to the Court; notwithstanding there are some Cardinals (that know very well the Papacy is not for them) who break those Customs and Laws, because se∣veral Popes had by express order apply'd remedies thereunto, which thing ought not to be; not that I can charge the Cardinals with making any ill use of it; but that the rest of the Courtiers make none of the best. It edifies exceedingly both Strangers and Citi∣zens
to see a Cardinals Court full of grave, and wise, and modest men; and on the con∣trary, it gives as much scandal to the world, to see a Court consisting of scandalous, rash, and insolent Courtiers, as it happens for the most part. There have been some Cardinals have been seen taking distast at other Cardinals their friends, others have fall'n quite out in defence of the rogueries of some of their Servants, that under the name of the Cardi∣nal they serv'd, broke up the doors of the most honorable Matrons. God knows at what price those wicked Courtiers do sell the reputation of the Car∣dinals; God knows how many untruths they tell in a day, to make it be believ'd, that they do nothing but by order from their Patron, although they be for the most part but the tast of their wickedness; I know a Canon, who to obtain his Canonship, had serv'd a Cardinal formerly several years, but the way that he serv'd him was strange, he went very often to the handsomest and most famous Courtezans in Rome, pretending that he was sent by the Cardinal his Master (that lives yet) to let them understand the affecti∣on he bore them, and his great desire of entertaining them in private. To others, he gave hopes that they should enjoy the Cardinal, for above two months time, during which space, he forbore not to enjoy them under the name of his Patron, who thought of no∣thing less than a Woman. In short, this good Courtier understood the mystery very well to make the name of the Cardinal subservient to his Lusts, and which makes it the better, without the expence of a shilling, whilst the Courtezans of Rome would give themselves willingly to the Devil, so that they might obtain the favour of any Cardinal, or of the Nephew of any Governing Pope. This Canon has not been the only man that has done such exploits. There are others that go up and down doing a great deal worse, and with that secresie, that they pretend themselves Confessors, but act like Pimps, and which is more, playing the Pimp and the Whore-master together: I know what I say, because I have heard it whisper'd a thousand times in Rome; but I hold my peace, that I may not at this time appear to be a Roman.
THE ITALIAN PRINTER TO THE READER. THE Second Part of Cardinalismo, to speak truth, hath been Printed abruptly, and twice or thrice laid aside, the Au∣thor (by reason of the difficulty of receiving the me∣moires) not being able to send me his Manuscripts in due time, however (though it be not without its share of Errors) it is notwithstanding more correct than the rest; the principal faults is (and which he could not possibly avoid) the confusion in matters of Order and Preceedence, which he promis'd to observe; but that in my judgement is not of much importance; it being no great Error in History, if a Cardinal of the first Rank be mistaken, and put in the second. Another is, that there is no Alphabetical Order observ'd, which could not be done, because the Author receiv'd not his Memoires in an Alphabetical way, and besides he was in expectation of the promotion of these last Cardinals. One thing kind Reader I can assure you, and swear before the Divine Majesty, that the Author being uninterested and impartial, has mollyfy'd and sweeten'd several expressions that were very bitter and pungent in the Memoires he receiv'd from Rome. For it is too well known thorough the whole world, that the Shears where∣with the Romans cut out the Habits of the Clergy, have as many teeth as a Hand-Saw. Nay I will go yet further, and affirm, that the Ecclesiasticks, even among themselves, do write oftentimes so invectively, that they give great occasion of scandal to the Pro∣testants. I that have been a Printer this fifty years and more, can
with a good Conscience say, I have Printed many Manuscripts concerning the State of Rome, consign'd me by both Protestant and Catholick Authors; but the Catholicks Writings have still dissatisfy'd me more than the Protestants; insomuch, that I have oftentimes, contrary to the Authors mind, taken upon me to ex∣punge several injurious and undecent expressions. The Catho∣licks for the most part being Satyrical in their Writings against Rome, the Protestants only Historical; so as I would choose ra∣ther to Print a Protestants works, than a Catholicks. But let us leave these kind of Complaints, the Catholicks knowing much better how things are carry'd amongst themselves, than the Pro∣testants do. Thus far only I shall advertise the Reader, that I am about putting a History into the Press, that is well worth the read∣ing in this Age. All that have read the Manuscript, have told me, I did well to Print it, and that it could not but take. And the Author assur'd me, that having found several curious Manuscripts in Ascoli, he was encourag'd to undertake the whole trouble, and that he had spent more than ten years in searching of antient Records. In short, kind Reader, it is the Life of Sextus Quintus, a Work re∣pleat, with infinite political Annotations, and multitudes of Cu∣riosities, and Copyes of Letters, both written and receiv'd by the said Sextus, besides thousand other things very grateful to the understanding of the Learned Virtuoso; I shall only add, that if you read it with attention, and it proves not delightful, wish a thousand ill years to the Author, and he will be contented. But I will say no more, lest I should lose time, for my desire is to have it extant within two Months.
Il CARDINALISMO di Santa Chiesa, OR THE HISTORY OF CARDINALS. In III. Parts. PART II. BOOK I. The Contents. In which is treated, of the protection of Crowns given to the Cardinals in Rome. Of the reasons moving those Crowns to declare their Protectors in the Court of Rome. Of the advantages the said Protections do bring to such as exercise them. Of the Protection of the Regular Orders. Of the Causes for which they have introduced the said Protection. Of the reputation the Regulars have lost by the introduction of the said Protection. Of the Protectors that cannot with a safe Conscience protect the Fryers, and the reason why. Of a Fryer that writ several private Letters to a Protector, as well against his Friends, as his Ene∣mies. Of the Roguery committed in the Cloysters, and the reason thereof. Of the manner by which the Religious advance themselves to preferments Of the Letters of recommendation to the Cardinal Protectors, which are obtain'd with very great cost by the Fryers from the hands of the Courtiers, Of the Cardinals that dare not disoblige the Pope in what concerns the Protection of
the Regulars. Of a Letter written by Cardinal Sachetti before his death, and directed to Pope Alexander the seventh. Of all the particulars contain'd in the said Letter, Of the effects occasion'd by zeal in the hearts of the Ecclesi∣asticks that is not mix'd with a holy magnanimity. Of the affliction the Cardi∣nals suffer, to see the Wealth and Substance of the Church imbezled and de∣stroy'd. Of the Bishops that purchase their Miters with ready money. Of the Cognisance the Cardinals have of the evils that happen dayly to the Church, and of the small care they take to prevent them. Of the pretences the Cardi∣nals use to make themselves to be thought innocent. Of the evils that Rome endures. Of an opinion of St. Jeromes, about such as are more sorrowful to see themselves condemned for other peoples offences, than for their own. Of that which will be reply'd to the Cardinals at the day of Judgement, when they shall endeavour to excuse themselves with pretences. Of the torments those Cardinals have suffer'd, that would not consent to thr infamous desires of A∣lexander the sixth's Bastards. Of the proud and imperious humor of Paul the fourth. Of certain Congregations call'd by the Cardinals for the disposing of Urban the eight from the Papacy, and of the course he took to evade that con∣spiracy. Of the chastisement receiv'd by Alexander the sixth for having treat∣ed the Cardinals so ill. Of the small zeal those Cardinals express'd that en∣deavour'd to depose Pope Urban. Of the great commendations Cardinal Pallavicino (before he receiv'd the purple Robe) gave Pope Alexander, be∣cause he kept his kindred so far from Rome, and of his opinion after they were brought in. Of the principal points the said Cardinal Pallavicino left in writing in the last period of his life. Of the Title of Prince of the Holy Church which the Cardinals at present enjoy. Of certain annotations upon that par∣ticular. Of the Authority the Popes have wrested out of the hands of the Cardinals. Of an example of Paul the second mention'd by Platina in the lives of the Popes. Of the common opinion about the Government exercis'd by the Popes Nephews over the Church. Of Saint Peter that would never commit the command of the Church to any of his Kindred or Relations. Of the Car∣dinals true Successors of the Apostles. Of the necessity of restraining the Ne∣phews. Of a Letter written by the most Christian King to the Cardinals, about the accident that happen'd to his Ambassador in Rome, Of the an∣swer the Cardinals return'd to his most Christian Majesty; and of certain other particulars beside. AMong all the Cities of the Universe, Rome alone can boast it self, not on∣ly the Mother of Nations, and the Head of the World, but (which is more) a true Court of Kings, for as many Cardinals as are promoted in the Church, so many Kings are created in Rome. The two Monar∣chies, France, and Spain, that are as it were the two Poles of Christen∣dome, do labour and tyre themselves out with Arms in their hands, to defend that Church of which they are Sons and Protectors, and without whose protecti∣on, it would have certainly been suck'd to the very Soul, by the ravenous and unsatiable lips of those Ecclesiasticks, who forbear not notwithstanding to engross great part of its nourishment, in spight of all their Royal diligence. But that which is most worthy of admiration is, that these two Monarchs which pretend to the Protection of the Church, and do indeed protect it, do yet beg and implore, as it were, to have their interests pro∣tected
by some Cardinal or other in the Court of Rome, as if their own merits were not sufficient to defend the interests of those Monarchs, who are the very founders of the Mo∣narchy of Rome. But that the Reader may be the better inform'd, I shall acquaint him, that at present it is the custom for every Crown to give the protection of its affairs to some of the Cardinals that are resident in Rome; and this protection is with good reason aspir'd to by the Cardinals in the highest degree. Insomuch as Alexander the seventh before he dy'd, us'd his utmost endeavour to have Cardinal Chigi his Nephew declar'd Protector of Spain; but he could not obtain his desire, the Spaniard deluding him, some∣times with fair promises, and sometimes with excuses. Of all the protections of Crowns, which are five, the Empire, France, Spain, Poland, and Portugal; that of Spain is the most considerable, and by consequence most ambition'd. Not that Spain has merited more than the rest, and particularly than France; but in respect of the Territories they possess in Italy, in which it seems the Protector has great authority, disposing of many things at his pleasure, if not by an absolute jurisdiction, at least by his recommendations to the Governours of the Provinces, who do seldome omit to gratifie his desires, and to acknowledge him the Protector of their King; besides which, there are a thousand other considerations that make the said protection so much coveted and aspir'd to by the Car∣dinals. And many are the reasons that induce those Crowns to declare their several Protectors in Rome; but if my judgement may pass, the greatest of all is to satisfie the ambition of those Cardinals, that from morning to night, study no other book, than the augmentation of their own Grandeur; and this is most certain, there is no greater dignity that a Car∣dinal can attain to, than to be made protector of some Crown. And to speak truth, there is something of magnificence in the Name of Protector, implying, that he which protects, has some superiority over him that is protected: however that rule does not hold in this case, for those Kings bestow not those Protectorships upon the Cardinals to receive, but to confer honour upon them, the Cardinals ordinarily making great application for the protection of a Crown, whereas in other protections, they are sought to themselves. It is not many years ago, since these protections of Crowns were introduc'd into the Col∣ledge of Cardinals, ; in former times the Kings disdain'd them, their swords being their sufficient protections, the Pens of their Secretary doing that office, upon any emergence, gave immediate notice to the Court of Rome of their Masters pretensions. But since the Popes began to advance themselves so high to confound the Church and the World, Po∣liticks and Morals, Spiritual things with Temporal, the Sword and the Cross, and in short, to transferr all the interest of Secular Princes to Rome, those Crowns have been ob∣lig'd to have, not only their Ambassadors, but their Protectors in Rome, and that not so much for the defence of their Kingdoms, defended by themselves, nor of their persons de∣fended by their Kingdoms; but for the protection only of those interests that have been sto as it were from the Princes, and carryed to Rome. This protection is no small advantage to the interest of the protected Crown; but 'tis much greater to the Cardinal that is its Protector, because things are not manag'd with that order they ought to be, the Cardinals for the most part having one hand upon the Rudder, and the other upon the Sails. The Crowns may do what they please, oblige their Protectors with their Benefices and Abbyes, yet they will never move out of their Sphear, nor give those Crowns more than an outward appearance of protection, reser∣ving the substance for the benefit of the Pope. And indeed many examples might be brought out of hundreds of Histories to confirm what I say, I having for many years read much, and made frequent observations upon this point. The Princes are deceived, if (in the controversies that happen betwixt them and the Popes, or the Nephews) they be∣lieve to have their interests protected by those Cardinals, that are their Protectors. The protection a Cardinal gives to his Crown, goes to a certain pitch, and no farther; if the Grandeur of the Pope be not diminish'd, nor the Ecclesiastical priviledges intrench'd up∣on, all things go well, as much protection as you please; but if these be touch'd in the least, the Cardinal instead of being a Protector, becomes a Councellor, instead of defend∣ing the interest of his Crown against the Pope, he maintains the Popes interest against his Crown; exhorting him to comply, and to give up some part of his Right, in Testimony
of the cheerfulness of his obedience to the common Father of Christendom. And this is so far from being a wonder, that it cannot be otherwise, the Cardinals growing great with the Popes, their Reputation and Honour increaseth with theirs also, so that the Ma∣jesty of the Cardinals cannot be lessen'd by any other means, than by the diminution of the Popes; forthe conservation of which they are most diligently vigilant, they themselves being Protectors of the Grandeur of the Popes, as the Popes are Protectors of theirs. And now I leave it to the consideration of any man of reason f any Cardinal Protector, let him be never so much oblig'd to the Crown he protect, will do any prejudice to the Pope to satisfie the desires of that Crown. True it is, they will as near as they can mannage their affairs so, as the Honour and Reputation of the Crown they are oblig'd to serve, shall not be violated; yet so it is, the interest of the Pope is alwayes more dear to them, for reasons both Politick, Moral, and Ecclesiastick; nor ought Princes to expect the con∣trary. There is another thing likewise introduc'd into the Court of Rome, as some think to render the Cardinalitial dignity more majestick, and that is the protection of Religious orders, every order having power to elect a Cardinal for its Protector; sometimes some Cardinals ae Protectors of several orders; and one of that sort is Cardinal Francisco Barbarino, as I take it, by reason of the long time he continued Cardinal Nephew, and Padrone; the several Fraternities being ambitious to have him for their Protector that was nearest the Pope, eight several orders chose this Nephew for their Protector; 'tis true the Popes sometimes will assign them Protectors, contrary to the desire of the or∣ders, so as it happens too often they have Cardinals appointed them, that have so little affection for their orders, they would willingly change them; but it is not alwayes al∣low'd them, nor to all, and particularly in the times of Innocent the tenth, and Alex∣ander the seventh. For my part I cannot imagine this kind of Protection was intro∣duc'd for the benefit and advantage of the poor Religious, but to subject them the more rather to he Court of Rome, and by that means as with a Bridle to manage and ride them. For indeed, before these protections of orders in the persons of the Cardinals were introduc'd, the Religious were so venerable in Rome, and in such esteem for their devo∣tion, that the Popes did take delight to employ great numbers of Fryers out of the Cloysters in the most considerable offices of the Church, and with eminent men to fill up the Sacred Colledge of Cardinals, which was thought incompleat, if a good number of Fryers in their Purple, were not seen amongst the rest of the Cardinals; but since the Cardinals began to assume the protections of Religious orders, and to work and insinuate themselves into the intrigues of their Convents, the Religious Fryers are become the scorn of the World, the obloquy of Nations, the scandal of the Church, the dishonor of Rome, and that to such a height, that whereas heretofore the Cardinals thought they gave Testmonies of a good Conscience, as often as they gave their Votes for any poor Fryer in Purple: at present the Popes do believe they offend God and the Church, every time they are as it were forc'd by the accumulated merits of some Fryer that is eminent in Learning and Piety, to admit him into the Colledge of Cardinals; insomuch, that if no other interest does move the heart of the Popes, it is most certain their Goodness, their Virtue, nor their Sanctity it self, will be too weak to prefer them, I will not say to the Popedom (for of that they took their last leave with the person of Sextus the fifth who was in spight of all envy, the greatest Pope that was ever seen in the Vatican) but to the Colledge of Cardinals, from whence also they seem to be banish'd; and God knows whether they will ever be recall'd, whilst the malice of those Priests that have Saint Pe∣ters Keys, and St Pauls Sword in their hands, is so fierce against the poor Fryers, that they have not so much as wherewithall to knock at the door. But some may wonder at this, and think it impossible that the protections of the or∣ders given to the Cardinals, should have been the occasion of lessening the Reputation of the Religious; to remove therefore this miracle, and make the business more clear. I shall inform them, that during the time the Fryers liv'd without Protectors, the iniqui∣ties of the Cloysters, went no further, but lay conceal'd amongst themselves, because the underlings went only to their Pryor for Justice, the Pryor to the Provincial, the Pro∣vincial to the Visitor, the Visitor to the General, and if things could not be accommo∣dated
by them, the Chapters, and Congregations, apply'd their remedies, with absolute authority. And whilst the affairs of the Religious were carry'd in this manner, neither the world, nor Rome, nor the Court, saw any thing but their outward actions of Piety and Religion, which kindled a flame of devotion in the hearts of the people. But no sooner were the protections introduc'd, but their vices became publique, every Fryer, either to destroy the reputation of his Superior, to revenge himself of his Enemies, or to demand Justice, upon every inconsiderable occasion, battering the ears of their Pro∣tectors, with informations of their Rogueries, that perhaps would have been better de∣termin'd in the Cloysters amongst the Fryers, than in the Courts of the Protectors amongst those Courtiers. But to speak truth, how can the Protectors of these orders, with a good Conscience, protect these Fryers? How is it possible to edifie by them, if every Post-day they send them whole dozens of Pacquets of Letters, not mentioning the Discipline of that Fryer, nor the abstinence of this; but the rogueries and cheats of all together. For in these times, one of them no sooner receives any disgust from his Superiour, but to discredit him for ever, after having recorded it in the Congregations and Chapters, he writes imme∣diately to the Protector of it, Baptizing him as it were in Satyrical Ink, so as every Character appears an Original Sin (both in the one and the other) in the mind of the Protector. I my self know an Augustin Fryer that I could name, if I were sure of his life, that took delight to write every year forty or fifty private Letters to the Cardinal Protector, sometimes against one, and sometimes against another, and which is worst, sometimes against his friends, with so incredible secresie inventing his lyes, that Lucifer himself could not in that point have out-done him. These Letters pass from the hands of the Protectors, to their Secretaries, and from their Secretaries, to the rest of their Court, who give what judgement, and inflict what punishment they think good, mocking and deriding the whole orders in general; so as it fares with them in Rome, as with Mice, who are all persecuted and indanger'd, though it be one only that devour'd the Cheese. Every Letter that any Fryer writes to his Pro∣tector, to the prejudice of his Companion, is like an Axe that cuts off a Bow from the Tree of the reputation of the whole order; and hence it is, that the Cardinals (who are all of them as it were Protectors of some order or other) taking offence in this manner, instead of protecting, they persecute them. Alexander the seventh suppress'd two, and (had not greater affairs diverted him) he had doubtless destroy'd more than four orders of Fryers, so full was his heart with the scandals of the Fryers, and so desirous the Car∣dinals to see those Fryers further from Rome, that they did seem to defend. In short, either by their Letters, or their own persons, the Fryers do nothing but molest, and disturb the Gates, and the Spirits of the Cardinals, not reguarding the repulses that are given them, but labouring and persisting with new importunities to arrive at their designs; which makes the Cardinals sometimes resolve upon violent courses to disincumber themselves. But this that I have said hitherto of the ill consequences of the protections of or∣ders that are given to the Cardinals, is but a slight and superficial scandal; there is ano∣ther (and perhaps unknown to the very Cardinals themselves) that unless timely re∣medy be apply'd, will grow up to that greatness, as to beget new Schisms and Heresies in the Church: an evil which appears but little being upon earth, but is really so great, as to make War upon Heaven it self: an evil that gives so much occasion of scandal to the Hereticks, that it fortifies them in their false opinions, and makes them give God thanks that they have no Fryers in their Religion. But the Reader will ask what evil this is? why it is this; in the Cloysters of the Fryers they rob their Treasury, they break open the Alms-box, they steal away the Mass money, they tear down the Silver Tablets from the Walls, they plunder their Altars of the richest of their Consecrated Ornaments, selling them privately when they have done, even to the Vest of the Virgin Mary. But to what end is all this? possibly, to imploy the money in the Christians Warrs against the Turks? Oh no, 'tis to give presents to the Courtiers of their Cardinal Pro∣tector, to procure them Letters of Recommendation. It seems incredible to all people, the manner in which these Fryers advance themselves to preferments, there being whole
bundles of recommendatory Letters, and all of them driving at the principal preferment. I know my self that in one Chapter of Augustin Fryers held in Romania, there were two and twenty Fryers, each of them with his Letters of recommendation, this to be made a Vicar, that a Prior, a third a Provincial, this for one office, that for another; And all these are purchas'd at a dear rate. Are they bought of the Cardinals themselves? No sure, they are most of them innocent▪ but of their mercinary and self-interested Courtiers that sell them, for so many pair of Silk Stockings, such a present of Plate, or perhaps so much in ready money; I knew a Secretary that distributed in this nature above fifty Letters a year, in the name of the Cardinal he serv'd, who is (if I be not mistaken) the Protector of two Orders. He got great sums of money by the means (and it went as freely in the Stews) but the Cardinal was unconcern'd in the business, unless it be, that he must give an account to God Almighty for his neglect, in not watching more nar∣rowly over the actions of his Servants. In short, I find no great advantage that these Fryers receive by the Protections the orders have from the Cardinals, and yet the evil is manifest. For to what purpose are Protectors, if they protect them only in trifles? Not that they want a good will; I know several Cardinals, that (weighing the honour (which is not small) with the duty of their office) would with all their hearts upon sundry occasions, act according to their obligations, and defend the orders under their protections; but they are fearful of dis∣pleasing his Holiness. The Cardinalitial Authority is great, but the Cardinals are un∣willing to put it in execution: they are afraid of their own shadows, and least they should disgust him, they leave all things to the management of the Pope, and had rather burst in silence, than ease themselves by a Declaration of their troubles; for which rea∣son, Cardinal Sachetti never durst speak to Pope Alexander against those errors he knew in his Conscience were too frequent; till at last for the discharge of his duty, he writ a Letter to him in the last period of his life, which I think will not be amiss to insert, for the greater satisfaction of the Reader, and for the stronger confirmation of what I have asserted, viz. that the Cardinals are afraid to speak. The Letter follows. A Letter written by Cardinal Sachetti a little before his death, and directed to Pope Alexander the Seventh. Most Blessed Father, IF before your Holiness fixes your benigne eyes upon these lines, you consider by whom, and for what end they are writ, you will find them sent from a faithful and most humble Servant to your Holiness, to give (in the last Article of his life) new testimonies of his affection and passion for the glory of your Holiness. The zeal and obligation of a Cardinal have put this pen into my hand, and 'tis possible death may take it out again before I have thoroughly display'd, that (which for the greater honor of your Holiness and the Apostolick See, and the greater benefit of Christendom, and the poor people of the Church) God Almighty has dictated to my languishing mind. Being risen from my bed, with great anguish and pain, my sentiments disturb'd, my hands trembling, and my head not able to rest upon my shoulders, and having got my self to the Table, I do first of all protest before my Crucified Redeemer, whom I embrace with all du∣tiful affection, that I have no other end than his Sacred Service, the satisfying that debt which is due from all such as his Divine Majesty has appointed as Collaterals or Councellors to his Vicar upon Earth and that I might not have occasion to cry out at the day of Judgement when there is no remedy to be had, Vae mihi tacui. Hoping likewise that other Cardinals my Collegues, seeing things n so violently to destruction, may be induc'd likewise to the discharge of that charitable duty, that they owe to God, to your Holiness, and to all Christi∣an people. I do hope also from the innate benignity of your Holiness, that these my most hum∣ble demonstrations will not be unacceptable, as proceeding from a sincere heart passionately affected to your Honour, driving only at the Establishment of the high opinion the world has conceiv'd of your virtue, and to stop the mouths of those Hereticks, whose invectives will be
obstreperous and high, when they see your Holiness (contrary to your protestations and pro∣mises both within the Conclave and without) going on in the same road with those, that with so much scandal to the world, and so much desolation to the people, have call'd in their Kin∣dred, have destroy'd the Patrimony of Christ, and built themselves Palaces for their Luxury, out of the rubbish of the Church, and with an insatiable appetite suck up the very blood of her Subjects. But that I may not consume the little time I have left, in superfluous discourses with a Prince so pious as your Holiness, I shall principally beseech you in visceribus Christi, that you would out of your profound prudence find out some way to extinguish those sparks, that otherwise will break out into such a flame, as may put the whole world into a combustion. The Apostolick See, did never commit a greater fault against its honour and authority, than when desirous to act like a Temporal Prince, it quarrell'd with those Princes that were as it were the Arms that sustain'd, and render'd it formidable and respected. Examples of this kind are too frequent, and which is worse, too well known to every body; so that if it did not belong to me to judge of the actions of the Popes (which indeed ought rather to be reverenc'd than rebuk'd) yet with your Holiness I may take the confidence to lay before your eyes the example of Urban the eight, one of the worthiest amongst all the Popes, whose me∣mory is immortal, and to whom I do confess my self a servant with all my heart. That good old man suffer'd himself, to our great misfortune, to be ingag'd into a trouble∣some war, the success of which will be sadly remembred for several reasons, but particularly for the expence of fourteen millions of money, for the indigence it brought upon the Treasu∣ry, for the total desolation of the Ecclesiastick State, for the oppression of the people, for the disesteem brought upon the Apostolick See, and the Pontifical dignity, by so dishonourable a peace, for shortning the life of so great a Pope, who for his Heroick virtues deserv'd to have lived several ages. What advantages that War left to his family, the whole world is wit∣ness of; thence it was from the highest achme of authority, from a long and absolute domi∣nion, it became the laughing-stock of fortune, the contempt of the whole world, and re∣duc'd into a little Kingdom, amongst the storms and calamities of the War, to seek Sanctua∣ry for their lives, against the universal hatred and persecution of its Enemies, and forc'd to beg patronage and restauration from a Prince that was not at all satisfy'd with their pro∣ceedings. The great and undaunted courage your Holiness express'd, in not truckling to their threats, nor suffering your self to be affrighted by any violence, is commendable indeed, yet let me with all humility suggest, we live not now in that age which immortaliz'd the mag∣nanimity of Alexander the third, Gregory the seventh, and other Popes, who arm'd them∣selves with invincible constancy in defence of that which belong'd to God and his Spouse. At this time the world is so possest with an opinion of the wickedness (or frailties rather) of the Clergy, and that the cause is but Temporal and Capricious; that the case is quite al∣ter'd, and I do easily foresee it will be the greater diminution to your Holinesses honour, the longer you delay with the Sword of Prudence to cut asunder that knot, that will otherwise grow dayly more inextricable. And this your Holiness is oblig'd to do in imitation of him whose person you represent, Discite a me quia milis sum, & humilis Corde, in charity to his exhausted Flock, for the safety of your own Family, and for the suppression of a Malig∣nant report, that the present disorder in your Holinesses Court, is but the effect of a visit the French Ambassador deny'd to your Nephews. God forgive them that perswaded your Holiness to Arms, how contrary to the judgement of the Consistory, your Holiness cannot but remember, by the humble instances of your faithful servants. God knows when the fa∣tal consequences will be remov'd, which portend so much mischief and calamity, that make me desirous to end my dayes quickly, rather than live to be a spectator of so lamentable a Catastrophe. Your Holiness is alone against a Powerful, Victorious, Rich, and Fortunate Monarch, that declares himself affended, the Cardinals (by misfortune, rather than by any fault of yours) dissatisfy'd, the Treasure exhaust, the people drawn dry and discontented, so as there are hardly any of them that will espouse the interest of the Nephews, when they will do so little for your own. In these great advantages, your Holiness knows very well how often I have reminded you (and I do it more earnestly than ever) of that Parable in the Gospel,
Quis Rex iturus committere bellum adversus alium regem, non sedens prius cogitat si possit cum decem millibus, occurrere illi, qui cum viginti millibus venit? and who knows but the Princes themselves (that bear so little affection to the Temporal power of the Popes, that they are alwayes undermining its foundations) do for politick reasons incourage and foment those murmers, and (though they promise your Holiness their assistance to ingage you) but that they will afterwards desert you as they did Paul the fifth in his afference with the Venetians. Or else your Holiness relying upon some of them (and they perhaps weak and declining) upon any sudden or unhappy accident what strange resolution will be taken? But if by the benefit of things confederacy should succeed well what would the world say, when it sees, that to oppose the satisfaction desired by the first born Son of the Church, in re∣paration of certain injuries pretended, it was not valued, though there was a new rupture occasion'd between the two Crowns that had been but lately united after so many years Wars? and perhaps it would fall to the share of your Holinesses family to remain expos'd to the indig∣nation of a Prince, whose authority extends as far as Europe it self. Especially if (which God forbid) it makes not its reconciliation in your Holiness his dayes, because your Holiness being tyr'd with delay in a business that ought to have been compos'd as soon as it was begun will leave the care of it to your Successor, with great ha∣zard of seeing the Tragedy of the house of Caraffa; so memorable to all ages, acted over again. The Princes also are dissatisfy'd to see the Popes, after they had opposd the Temporal Sword against every body, pretend at last to recover themselves under the Standard of the Cross, and to sheld themselves with the dignity of the chief Priesthood: Now begins con∣tempts, irreverences, murmurs, and many times seditions to arise the Laity by little and little losing the veneration and opinion they had formerly of the Ecclesiastick Piety and Ju∣stice. And of this you have a good instance and accompt in the banishment of the Ministers of the Apostolical See, out of France, in the commotions at Avignon, in the audacious liberty of those people, that heretofore were obsequious and reverent in the whisperings and mur∣murs of all the other subjects of the Ecclesiastick State, and in Schisms and Separations in all the rest, both in Italy and other Nations. These are the things, the memory of which, is a sharper affliction to my mind, than my infirmites are to my body. Our Divine Master, most Holy Father, taught us in that command Mitte gladium in vagina, that there was nothing more undecent in him that had the Government of our Holy, Innocent, and meek Mother the Church, than Temporal Arms, and that she ought not to defended Mre Castrorum. From hence it is, I am greatly afraid that God Almighty be∣ing offended at our manifest diffidence in him, and our making use of improper means, and contrary to the practice of the famous Popes of former ages, will leave us to our selves, and suffer us to be reduc'd to one of these streights, either to be forc'd by our own necessities, or our Enemies power, to some disadvantagious agreement or else by a long and excessive expence, be reduc'd to extreme misery and distress. To give way to time and necessity was alwayes the Doctrine of a very wise Prince. Paulus quintus undertook (but meerly for the cause of God) to proceed against the Venetian with his Spiritual Arms, and was firmly resolv'd to have joyn'd his Temporal with them, but at last out of his great prudence and compassion, and upon consideration of his want of money, the incapacity of the people to supply him, the danger of over-running Italy with Foreigners, and perhaps with some new Heresie or other, for fear lest by the loss of the liberty of the Italians, he should kindle an unextinguishable fire in all Europe, and lest he should create too great animosittes against his own Family, he suffer'd himself to be brought to a milder temper, and perhaps not without some scruples and remorses of Conscience, if the Church of God should by his fault receive any considerable da∣mage and diminution. Convert (most Holy Father) your Courage and Arms against the perils of Christen∣dome, and the pride of the Turk, who as I hear to my extream sorrow, is marching into Transilvania and Hungary, to overwhelm those Countries as it were with an inundation; against the Turk, against the Turk, let your magnanimity be oppos'd, and with a generous emulation of Pius the second, your most renown'd fellow Citizen, lay aside all unprofitable controversies with your well deserving Son, and let him and the other Princes of
Christendome unite in a firm League, and your Holiness be the Head and the Author of it. What better occasion can there be than this to render your Name and Honour Immortal in all Ages. If of late necessity constrain'd the impositions of some light Taxes upon those Re∣ligions that are now supprest, forc'd you to make other use of the tenths impos'd upon the Clergy for the assistance of the Emperour, and of the two hundred thousand Crowns left by the late Cardinal Mazarin, to be expended in the War against the Turks, tying up your hands as it were from actions of Charity and Alms, with how much more glory and merit may you do it now. Besides in so great and just an opportunity, the application of the assign∣ments to other use, will open a large field to the maledictions of the people, that the Flock of Christ is forsaken, and expos'd to the capacity of that Woolf of the East, the Patrimony of Christ destroy'd, and all to maintain a private, and meerly Temporal quarrel, and to feather your own nest in the mean while. And since by way of incidence, I have spoken of Alms, I will not omit representing to your Holiness the great trouble I receive by the relations of several Orders, and Parishes in Rome, of the great miseries that many poor familyes suffer, which I shall not for brevity sake name, though I am sure it would break your very heart, and inforce you to tears, should I give you an honest and sincere narrative of what they endure. Oh how oft do I remember what before your happy Exaltation your Holiness us'd to tell me, when inflam'd with a most charitable zeal, you deplor'd the Exaltations that in the preceeding Popes time were obtain'd by the advancing of twenty thousand Crowns out of the Alms-money; as if they would have it be believd (as your Holiness said then) that there was no poor to be found in Rome, and for that reason it was lawful to put that into their own purses, which for their sustenance was gather'd dayly from the Charity of the Faithful. They took likewise out of the Office dela Componenda (as your Holiness very well knows) the Pontifical Alms∣money, against which the Hereticks have writ whole Volumns of Invectives, and Satyrs, not knowing perhaps that the Componenda is nothing but a kind of wholesome Pennance impos'd by the Popes upon such persons as have receiv'd from them some considerable favour (not to be granted by any body else) which said sum is afterwards to be dristributed amongst the poor, or dispos'd for the nourishment of those that embrace our most Holy Religion. And so I remember Pope Urban the eight was wont to say, that the Popes Purse ought to be open'd freely, and administer'd faithfully. I humbly beseech your Holiness to take care that the same thing be observ'd in your Holiness his Papacy. This Office della Componenda invites me to say something of the Dataria, and other Tribunals, your Holiness knowing very well, that the most noble, and most deserving quali∣ty that the people admire in any Prince, is his generosity and munificence. May your Holiness advert, that neither the superfluous zeal, nor the forward severity of your Ministers be suffer'd to obscure, or eclipse your Glory, remembring alwayes that amongst the disadvantages in Elective Principalities, it is one of the greatest, the leaving so much liberty to the Ministers to raise their own fortunes, at the charge of their Prince, as Pope Innocent knew how to do very well to one of his own. That the good or bad report of either Pope or Prince proceeds from the moths of their Friends or Domesticks, was the saying of Urban the eight, and all the Court of Rome, by reason that as they were ill or well satisfy'd, so they spread their Characters about the world either to the prejudice or advantage of their Masters. To keep the Cardinals poor, abject, and contemptible, the Prelats idle, without esteem or reward, the Nobility neglected, the Courtiers without hopes to see any recompence of their labours, and all to bestow that upon a few, and many times the most undeserving, that by distributive justice ought to be divided amongst all, can certainly be the production of no good. To leave virtue it self after a long and painful peregrination, unrewarded and forsaken, cannot sound well in the ears nor heart of an Ecclesiastical Prince, that ought to be a Pro∣tection, and Assylum to the learned, and deserving, especially your Holiness who has rais'd the Fabrick of your fortunes, upon the foundation of virtue and worth. Rome abounds with persons of all sorts of Learning at this day more than ever, but they want incouragement, and are buried as it were in sorrow, there being no body that will so much as trouble themselves, to represent their parts and capacities to him that can reward
them. Your Holiness that in the beginning of your Papacy, with so much praise to your self, did own and caress them, will find what advantage it will be to continue the b acti∣ons of a Mecenas, and to allure them by your countenance and esteem (which is the most grateful aliment of virtue) encouraging them with favours, and providing them employ∣ments, that they may not consume and pine away in the Lethargy of idleness. I speak not most Holy Father of those Pensions wherewith the Bishopricks and Parishes are by the Ministers of your Holiness so extravagantly charg'd, that (to the scardl of the whole world, to the disparagement and contempt of the innocent Clergy, and to the prejudice of the reputation of the Church) several poor Bishops are rendred subject to interdictions and censures, or reduc'd to that indigence they are forc'd, of loving Shepherds to become rave∣nous Woolfs, by their rapacities and extortions, to satisfie the exorbitant pensions that are charg'd upon them, squeezing as it were out of the extream necessities of the Church, and her already too much afflicted and exhausted Flock, all that are constrain'd to contribute to the Profit, Luxury, Lasciviousness, and Intemperance of those who God know, had but little virtue to advance them. May your Holiness for the love of Christ open your eyes in a busi∣ness of that importance, which carries along with it consequences so pernicious to the Church. Let not your Holiness for the love of God suffer so many poor Churches, Spouses of Christ, to remain robb'd and dispoil'd of their Dower, nor that at the Lords Table, Uus essriet, alius vero ebrius sit; but rather let the bread of the Church be distributed equally amongst her Ministers according to their merits. Although in the Courts of Rome there are many Prelats and Ministers to be seen, that have integrity of manners joynd to the nobility of their birth; he nevertheless, that for so many years (though undeservedly) has had the directi∣on of the Signiture, may perhaps have seen further into some things than they vz. that the Dependencies and Relations of the Popes and Cardinals, do not suffer the poor Prelats to act according to the Dictates of Equity and Conscience. I do most humbly beseech that your Holi∣ness in your great Prudence, would provide for the extirpating of this custom of recommen∣dation, that the condition of all people may be consider'd, and that Liberetur pauper a Poten∣te, & pauper cui non adest Adjutor. Neither would it be less gratefull to God Almighty, if your Holiness would provide against the tediousness and delays in matters of Law, which sometimes are so long, that be∣sides the ruine and extinguishment of many Families, they become the dishonor of the Courts of Rome, when those causes that might have been determin'd in a few dayes, are by several years suspence grown old and inveterate. Though I believe the Ministers, and Governours of the State, and all they that admini∣ster justice to the people in our Ecclesiastick Jurisdiction, are of themselves inclin'd to do all things equitable and right, yet it would be a greater stimulation if your Holiness would cause it to be inculcated into them, that justice is not attended by interest or passion, but is the on∣ly instrument for the conservation of peace, quiet, and human Society, and that they search all enormity to the bottom, and destroy it root and brance. Legibus enim delicta r, quanto melius provideri ne pccarer. But above all, let that scandalous authority that the Ministers arrogate to themselves of making Buts and Marks for their Persecutions of all such as have recourse to the highest Tribunals at Rome, oftentimes making use of threats to deter them from such appeals. This in my judgement is a matter of great consequence, ths the Supreme Autho∣rity of the Prince, and takes away without cause the confidence his Subjects have in him▪ or otherwise occasions such jealousies as have been the subverson of States and Kingdoms both Protestant and Catholick. Above all, it is necessary that care be taken not to afflict the poor people with their severi∣ties, and vexations (as they have formerly) nor with their Cavalcades their troubles be∣ing too much already with their Subsidies, and Taxes, with the frequent Comssions to the Commissaries of the Buildings, of the Archives, of Saltpeter, of Gunpowder, of the Streets, with their solemn Ridings, Reprisals, and other cruel inventions to exact innumerable sums from the people, which being little or no advantage to the Pope, are of no other use, but by the inrichment of some few ill Conscienc'd Ministers, to contract the Odium of the people, and imploy the tongues of the discontented.
These afflictions do very much exceed what the people of Israel suffer'd in Egypt, they can∣not be mention'd, but with admiration and scandal to Foreign Nations, especially if they consider them as effects of the immoderate inclinations of the Popes to their own Kindred and Families. And your Holiness may ascribe it to your good fortune, that you employ'd your gracious care in Foreign parts, that they might not have so full and exact notice of it, as would have drawn tears of pitty and compassion from the eyes of all that heard it, and per∣haps for the better, because the wound thereby would have been open'd, and render'd more casc for the Cure. And indeed who is there that could hear with dry eyes, that a people not conquer'd by the Sword, but by the Munisicence and Piety of some Prince, by way of Donation annex'd to the Patrimony of Saint Peter, or that otherwise in confidence of the Piety of their Successors, submitted themselves freely to the See of Rome, should be now under a harder and more in∣sufferable Yoak, and treated with more inhumanity, than the very Slaves in Africk, or Syria. The Debt upon the Chamber, according to the account I made of it some nights since by my self, amounts to above fifty millions of Roman Crowns, and that not only without any hopes of lessening, but with assurance it will be increas'd; insomuch that the People, not being able to comport themselves under so excessive a burthen, desperate of any relief, do many of them leave their Native Countryes, wandring up and down in great indigence with their whole Families, perishing with hunger in the fields, begging in other Countries, or submit∣ting themselves to other Princes, to our great reproach. And indeed for the reasons afore∣said, there are not now above half the number of Subjects in the Ecclesiastick State, that there has formerly been, and in the numbers of his people, consists the power and riches of a Prince. The Genoeses that are found to have imploy'd above fourteen millions of our money, though they were carefull enough in their affairs, do now perceive it desperat, either from our dis∣ability to pay it, or from some urging necessity upon the people, that incites them to shake off from their necks, so insufferable and tyrannical a Yoak. God Almighty forgive the Ministers of that time, who with so little Prudence and Equity, perswaded your Holiness (in the Infancy as it were of your Papacy) without any necessity at all, to the reduction of the Banks, out of which so many millions were drawn, as would have immortaliz'd your Holiness his name, had they been apply'd to the satisfaction of those debts, in part, if not in the whole. Your Holiness had not those sentiments heretofore, when it pleas'd God to give us you for our Pastor, and I dare affirm, as I have done often, and that to more than one, that the first stings and compunctions that disturb'd your generous breast, was those of compassion towards the exhausted people: to that purpose you deputed a Congregation to inspect their grievances, and was more than one time present there your self, so that not only the Cardinals, but all the rest of the Prelats expected an universal redress. But God did not permit that your Holiness his good mind, should be seconded by the good practises of your Ministers, who oppos'd themselves against it, to the great dissatisfaction of all that were well inclin'd. It is now time most Holy Father to reap the fruits of it, as you did when you provided against the abuses introduc'd in the administration of the Annona, or annual provision of Corn, which arriv'd to that excess, as might have irritated the minds of the people to such disorders as would have been beyond all remedy. But the exemplary chastisement of a single Minister only, that for several years has with great corruption, and universal dissatisfaction, executed his office, is no competent provisi∣on, unless the cause be remov'd, all occasions for others to do the same be prevented, and the opinion that the Cardinals have their share, be pull'd up and irradicated out of the hearts of the people. The authority of these Officers is arriv'd at that height, that in spight of all Laws, both Humane and Divine, and all rules of Charity and Justice, they endeavour to make the name of your Holiness odious to the world, by their squezings and extortions out of Corn, Oyl, Flesh, and whatever is most necessary to the life of man, it deserves certainly a severe reprehension, if for no other end, than that your Holiness might not appear consent∣ing thereunto. But although your Holiness, even to these open and pernicious Enemies of the publique,
has been pleas'd to abound in your most admirable Clemency, I could wish nevertheless your Holiness would in a particular manner regulate the affairs of the Annona for the future, that those Subjects which your Holiness is oblig'd to provide for, both as the Shepherd of their Souls, and their Temporal Prince, be not brought into a worse condition than the Beasts of the field, who feed and sustain themselves with the Fruits of the Earth, as their Creator or∣dain'd, without being cosen'd and defeated by the malicious covetousness of others. In the Congregations (that I might not be wanting to my charge, as being one deputed amongst the rest) I have endeavour'd to display my opinion in this matter, and as to the par∣ticular of keeping the City of Rome, and the whole Ecclesiastick State likewise, if not in a plentiful, at least in a competent provision of Corn, I have nothing to add to the report I made by your Holinesses Commission in the very beginning of your Papacy. This I shall only say, that if no relief be immediately apply'd to the sufferings of your Subjects, their ruine and de∣struction I see most eminently and unavoidably at hand Your Holiness would do well to take off part of the impositions upon Edibles, and to restrain the insatiable voracity of the Treasurers of Provinces, and other publique Ministers, who to Monopolize and forestall the Markets, by a barbarous invention, do render the people mi∣serable, and not so much as Masters of that, which by the blessing of God, they do gather upon their own ground. It would be a great relief to your Subjects likewise, if the Commerce with the Venetian (which with much detriment has been interdicted till now) were open'd again; nor would those most prudent Senators make any difficulty to consent, as well for the mutual advantage it would bring, as that it would be a means to make the Apostolick See more ready and dispos'd, upon any Exigence of theirs, to tax its own Subjects to relieve them. In short, a Prince that desires the relief and ease of his Subjects, cannot want wayes to effect it. And this your Holiness may do, by incouraging and introducing arts into several places in the State, by making Civita Vecchia, and Ancona, free Ports, by favouring Agri∣culture, that is almost forgotten in most places, by employing able and dexterous men in all Governments and Offices, and not call in so many strangers to usurp and ingross, what be∣longs naturally to your Subjects. By this means, your State would be repeopled, the golden Age restored, and your Treasury recruited. I should have had something to say about the affairs of Portugal, but finding my breath to fail me, my head (no less than my hand) to tremble, and that I might not be any longer tedious to your Holiness, I will only beseech you to ponder and deliberate with your self in a business of so great consequence, and having ask'd Counsel of God, rather than of man, (who is sway'd and actuated by passion) that you resolve, and perform that zealously, that shall be directed by his infinite wisdome. It troubl'd my very Soul to consider the small hopes with which you suffer'd the English Gentleman to depart, that was sent to your Holiness to endeavour the promotion of the Ab∣bot Aubigny, a person so qualify'd by his Birth, Abilities, and Piety, that he would with∣out doubt have become a Pillar and Support to the tottering Catholicks in England, as Cardi∣nal Poole did formerly. Having heretofore with great vehemence and fervour supplicated your Holiness, to be∣stow upon a person so honourable, and so necessary to the Church, that Cap that has so long (though unworthily) adorn'd my head, and which still I would with all my heart lay down at your Holiness his feet, for the investure of such a person. I do now with all my heart re∣iterate those Prayers, that it being likely to be vacant in a few hours by my death, it may be conferr'd upon so worthy a person, that the malevolent may have no occasion to say, it is re∣serv'd for him that will give most, without respect to any ones merits, or to the necessities of our Religion in that Kingdom. It remains that I should speak something about easiness of access, which is a thing that gives a Prince good intelligence of his affairs, makes his Government easie, prevents the corruptions of his Ministers, and conciliates love and veneration in the people. Your Holiness who in the beginning of your Papacy did imitate herein the laudable Cu∣stoms of your Predecessors Pius quintus, and Clement the eight, by the continuation of it, will make your self admir'd, Interpellantibus faciles praebendo aures, nor will you be at any time upbraided with the saying of that importunate old Woman that cry'd out to Philip of Macedon, Si non vis audire, nec regnes.
In this case only I shall be bold to supplicate your Holiness, and that with a most humble and devout zeal, that you would permit your self to be diverted from that melancholly re∣tirement, and not suffer your self to be immur'd as it were betwixt four Walls, and kept at that distance from the knowledge of the affairs of your State, and the condition of your Subjects; because that is the highest of all errors in a Prince, and an occasion that Justice is ill administred, the Ministers corrupt, the people ill govern'd, and oppress'd, and the Prince no more belov'd nor respected; Colligunt se quatuor vel quinquies, aut unum Consilium ad decipiendum Imperatorem capiunt. Dicunt quod probandus sit Impe∣rator, qui domi clausus est, vera non novit, cogitur hoc tantum facere quod illi loquun∣tur, facit Judices, quod fieri non oportet, amovet a Republica quod debeat obtinere, quid plura? bonus, cautus, optimus venditur Imperator, was the saying of Dioclesian, and God grant it may never be verifi'd in the happy time of your Holiness his Go∣vernment. And here it would not be improper to speak something relating to the Election of Mini∣sters and Counsellors, for though a Princes ill fortune may have some share in the mis∣carriages, yet for the most part mala electio est in culpa, it being great difficulty to erre, where all necessary diligence and circumspection is us'd. The profound Judgement of your Holiness, renders all advertisement in this affair super∣fluous, however I will not omit supplicating you with Gregory Nazianzen, and to ad∣monish, that in those that are by their Counsels and endeavours to assist in the management of the most weighty affairs of State, these three signal Qualifications be resplendent, Rerum usus, Ingens charitas, Os berum. As to what concerns Spiritual things, they ought to have been treated on in the first place, (but God knows whether the greatness of the peoples afflictions will suffer them to think on Heaven) yet if I should have touch'd upon them, I could not have done it without reflection on the great Piety of your Holiness, who from your very assumption, has made them appear to be the principal objects of your Pastoral care. Nevertheless it will not be amiss to renew your Holiness Orders, to such as have the super∣intendance and custody of Souls, even to the Parish Priests and Confessors, as well Regulars as Priests, that they give no scandal themselves, that they restrain the exorbitant liberty of sinning, that they persecute and extirpate Blasphemy, grown too common and familiar amongst the people in these unhappy times; that they observe due reverence in the Church, and set with more zeal and devotion in the Confessionaries, Ne Deus iram suam effundat super nos. The Evangelical Law, most holy Father, is at this day too much depress'd, and the obser∣vation of the Divine Precepts, with great blindness neglected, in so much that Saint Cy∣prian, and Saint Eusebius Bishop of Caesaria, would with more justice have bewailed the corruption of our age, than they did of their own, seeing now a dayes, student augendo Pa∣trimonia singuli, & obliti, quid credenes, aut sub Apostolis ante fuissent, aut semper facere deberent, insatiabili cupiditatis ardore, ampliandis facultatibus incumbant. Non in Sacerdotibus religio devota, non in Ministris fides integra, non in Operibus misericor∣dia, non in Moribus disciplina, ad decipiendum corda simplicium, callide fraudes, cir∣cumveniendis fratribus, subdolas voluntates, non jurare tantum temere, sed adh etiam pejus perjurare. And what can be expected from such detestable causes, but those lamentable effects, which Jeremiah prognosticated with so many tears, Obscuravit in ira sua filiam Sion, & dejecit de coelo gloriam Israel; Non est recordatus Scabelli pedum ejus in die irae suae, sed de∣mersit Dominus omnem decorem Israel, & demolitus est omnes spes ejus, so as we may too justly cry out with Policarpe, Bone Deus, ad quae nos tempora reservasti? God grant that our Church one day be not forsaken by the Divine protection, by reason of the faults and enormities of the Ministers that govern it so ill; and that she have not to just cause to cry out with tears in her eyes, Deus, Deus meus, ut quid dereliquisti me? Hence it is that (being more afflicted with the unhappy condition of the World, of Christianity, and of Religion, than with the bitterness and atrocity of my disase) I be∣take my self to our Saviour, and cry out from the very bottom of my heart, Cupio dissolvi, & esse tecum.
And now finding my spirits failing me, I lay by my pen, (that I had taken up again three or four times) and prostrate my self with all Reverence, begging your Holiness his Benediction, and recommending to your Paternal charity the soul of your most sincerely de∣voted Servant, who (being in a short time to appear before the Tribunal of God, to give an account of every one of his thoughts) is certain he never had the least, of deceiving your Holiness by these faithfull representations. I do on the other side assure your Holiness, that in the very life to come I will not cease to pray to our most loving Father, ut sis longaevus super terram; and that he would preserve your Holiness from all dangers, and from the malice of Flatterers, that are the plague and destruction of all Kingdoms and Principalities, that he would give you, Cor docile, & sedium suarum assistricem sapientiam; and the same special grace, as to the rest of his Servants, ut si transeatis per bona temporalia, ut non amiatis aetera. May that infinite Goodness that governs all things, assist and alleviate with his Divine arm the great weight of your Holiness his charge, that you may not be oblig'd to relye upon the help of Man. And thus with most tender and entire Reverence I bid your Holiness adieu, embracing and kissing your most sacred Feet. From my house the 17 June 1664. Your Holiness's most humble, most devoted, and most obliged Servant, G. Cardinal Sacchetti. Oh how true is it, that fire may be buried and preserved under ashes, but with an effect contrary to the very nature of fire; to what purpose is a spark of zeal in the breast of a Minister, if he has not the devout courage to blow it up into a flame. Where are now a dayes those Prophets that were not affraid to reprehend the faults of King David, even to his own face? God forgive those Cardinals, that have render'd the Cardinalitial dig∣nity so abject and timerous, (to say no worse) that there is scarce any thing left of Greatness in it, but the Title. He who is silent at the iniquities of his Neighbour, and exhorts him not to leave them; he that may rebuke them with Authority, and does it not, gives not only manifest evidence of defect in his duty, but charges himself clearly with the same faults, as fearing to correct offences in other people, lest his own (some time or other) should be found out and chastiz'd. I do not doubt but the Cardinals may have judgement, and conscience, and insight enough, to penetrate and discern the evils that for many years the Church has lain under, and which are hourly multiply'd by the Nephews of the Popes. I am satisfi'd that in the secret of their hearts, they are afflicted to the very soul, as often as they see the sub∣stance and subsistance imbezel'd, that belongs to the poor Subjects of the Ecclesiastick State, if those may be call'd Subjects, that are every day like Slaves constrain'd to truckle to the barbarous insolencies of so many new Ministers, that by the favour of the Nepotisme, do revive as a man may say a new Nronisme of Tyranny. I do cer∣tainly believe, that the most zealous of the Cardinals are fully inform'd of the Scandals the Hereticks receive, to see from time to time Gabels added to Bulls, Taxes to Breves, Tenths to Pensions, Customes upon the People, Impositions upon Religious Orders, and the very ground it self where people are to be buried. I am perswaded they cannot be ignorant of proceedings at Rome, seeing there is not a Bishop at present but may thank Simony for his Mitre, nor a Prelate, nor other Minister of the Church that has not gain'd his preferment by money or interest. They know, they know very well almost all the Cardinals, that they who embrace the Ecclesiastical habit in these dayes, whether it be Secular or Regular, they do it not to consecrate themselves to God, but to gratifie their ambition and covetousness, and to establish greater foundations to their hopes, of which design they give daily and most evident tokens to the people. But what advantage is it that they know it? To what purpose is it if the Physician understands his Patients disease, if he has not courage enough to apply such remedy as is
necessary? It seems to me an aggravation, and renders the Cardinals more Criminal, whilst they see the precipice the Church is upon, and either take no care to deliver her, or pretend they did not see it at all. That one Brother should suffer another to run head∣long upon his own destruction, may be written in the Politicks of the World; but there is no such toleration in the Law of God. I would ask the Cardinals, if they should see a Thief breaking (in their presence) into their Houses, would they let him ransack and rifle all without speaking a word? No certainly, they would sooner awake all Rome to have him stopt, and make the Judges thunder out their Proclamations for his appre∣hension, though their loss was never so small: Notwithstanding all this the Cardinals can behold the Church of Christ robb'd, the people of the Church ruin'd, the blood of the poor suck'd up, the propriety of the City invaded and taken away, to raise lofty and new Palaces for the Nephews, yet dare not speak one word in behalf of the Publique, for the recovery of the Poor, for the edification of the People, or for the glory of the Church, but leave them all abandon'd to destruction. But they are not without their excuses, using alwayes a hundred pretences to conceal their hypocrisies; and indeed the people (that judge every thing by appearance) are satisfi'd with the multitude of excuses the Cardinals bring to convince the World of their innocence, and to make it appear they are not at all accessary to the Extorsions com∣mitted by the Nephews, upon all the afflicted Subjects of the Ecclesiastick State. They say, but what? Shall we (say they) disgust his Holiness, the acknowledg'd Head of the Church, and upon that score adored by the whole World? Shall we oppose our selves to his pleasure, the actions and resolutions of whose Government are directed by the Holy Spirit? Shall we dare to make resistance against one, before whose feet the greatest Monarchs do throw themselves with Reverence. To these they adde many other excuses, full of policy and cunning, but they are not sufficient to satisfie Heaven and Earth too; the Cardinals must give an account to God, as well as the World; To God I say, in whose presence no excuse, or pretence, is re∣ceiv'd: There are no Rhetorical flourishes, no circumgiration of words, no fictions or pretences there; the Process is read openly there, in which not only they which rob are condemn'd, but they which connive, that had ability to hinder it, and did not; and there∣fore it is that Saint Jerome sayes, that those souls endure more pain that see themselves condemn'd for other peoples faults, that they pretended not to see least they might dis∣gust those who committed them, than for their own proper offences. And God grant the Cardinals be not of this number, who I fear will be able to give but a small account of the dammage the Church does daily receive, by the ill Government of the Popes, that are themselves but a prey to their own ravenous Nephews. Nor will all their excuses be able to clear them, because our Redeemer knowing the secrets of all hearts, will have his answers ready, and perhaps reply to them in this manner. Do you believe therefore that I am inferiour to your Pope, because you are more fearfull of offending against his Courts that are but Temporal and momentary, than mine that is most holy and eternal? My Apostles were not affraid, even in my own presence, with great con∣fidence to rebuke the good Woman, who with a little oyl was come to refresh my feet after so long and so many journeys; and you, you can every day behold Assassinations, Robberies, Sackings, Burnings in the Church; my blood (represented in the blood of the poor) swal∣low'd down and devour'd; my bowels (in the bowels of the Church) torn in pces; my nourishment (in the nourishment of the people) perverted; my Patrimony (which is the Patrimony of Saint Peter) misapply'd, without speaking one word, pretending not to know, pretending not to see it? Would you, would you, who are affraid to defend the interest of the Church in the presence of your Popes, that suffer it to be destroy'd by the insatiable hands of their Nephews, would you bear the Title of Apostles? God grant the Cardinals meet not with these interrogations at the day of Judgement. I know there are some that are partial in defence of the Cardinals, who will produce hundreds of examples to prove their zeal towards the Church, and instance in several tortures and injuries have been suffer'd, for opposing the ill Government (to speak no worse) of the Popes, of whose wicked∣nesses all Christendome rings to this very day. Is it not true (will they say) that by Alexander the sixth those Cardinals were mi∣serably
afflicted, that would not consent to the barbarous will of his Bastard, that ty∣ranniz'd over the world, and imagin'd by fear and violence to make the Popedome he∣reditary to the house of Borgia; so that according as the zeal and constancy of the Car∣dinals was augmented, so did indignation increase in the Breast of the Pope; insomuch that every word, and intimation of their resentment to the Pope, begat in him fresh thoughts of revenge, till at last to remove and free himself from all opposition, that Ta∣ble was prepar'd, in which, instead of seeing the destruction of the Cardinals, and the establishment of his own house, Rome recover'd her liberty by the death of the Pope, who was poyson'd with the same potion he had provided for the Cardinals. Is it not true, that the proud humour of Paul the fourth, not being able to endure a Companion in the Government, to stop the mouths of those Cardinals that, excited by their zeal, reprehended the barbarous deportment of the Carafechi, gave himself over to the destruction of all respect, and confounding his spiritual weapons with his Tempo∣ral, he threatned them sometimes with Excommunications, and sometimes tormented them with Imprisonment, without any regard to the scandal Christianity receiv'd there∣by; so as he had but room for his revenge, he car'd not how any thing went, by which means, all the Prisons in Rome were full of innocent Prelats and Cardinals. Is it not true, that several Cardinals (and those the most Catholick and Zealous amongst them all) foreseeing the detriment the Church would, and indeed did receive, by the tedious Pontificacy of Ʋrban, to prevent further inconveniences that were like to follow upon all Christendom, assembled themselves many times, and had several Con∣gregations, for the deposing the said Ʋrban from the Papacy, which he had already in∣joy'd for the space of thirteen years, with small satisfaction to the Cardinals, though with much advantage to his own Family. Insomuch, that whilst his Holyness under pre∣tence of change of Air after a long indisposition, had removed himself to the Castle of Gondolfo, the Cardinals had secretly assembled a Congregation, for the Election of Car∣dinal Zacchia Pope, upon pretence of Ʋrban Barbarino's indisposition, with resolution to shut up the said Ʋrban in the Castle of Saint Angelo. But their design miscarried, for the Pope having intelligence of all, return'd privately to Rome, and calling a Consistory, in which all the Cardinals were present, the said Ʋrban with a loud voice demanded Where was their new Pope, that he might pay him his respect? An expression that struck confusion into the hearts of those Cardinals that had conspir'd his deposal, and found themselves so unexpectedly discover'd. And this gave so great occasion of Revenge to the Pope, that he immediately publish'd a Bull, in which he commanded all the Car∣dinal Bishops, and Arch-Bishops, and all such as had the Cure of Souls, to repair forth∣with to their several Churches and Residences, upon pain not only of Excommunication, but of being depriv'd also of their Dignities and Benefices; so that all those who were assisting in the foresaid Congregation, were in great trouble and perplexity, and particu∣larly the Cardinal Ludovitio, and Zacchia, being principal contrivers of the design, fell into so great melancholly for the miscarriage of it, that they dy'd with very apprehension that it was discover'd. To this it may be answer'd, that Alexander the sixth receiv'd the punishment he de∣serv'd, by which it may be clearly discern'd, that God Almighty fails not to justifie the cause of his Church, and protect such as address themselves to its defence, and to the ruine of such as endeavour to trouble the repose of those that go about to defend it. So that the example of Alexander (who was poysoned by the same Cup he had provided for those Cardinals that had oppos'd him with so much zeal) may rather excite that Sacred Colledge to the incouragement and protection of the people, and the Church, be∣ing secure, that if they shall be persecuted by the Popes, they shall on the other side be rewarded by God himself. In the same manner it happen'd to Paul the fourth, though he was a severe Enemy to those that with great and continual acclamations cry'd out against his Nephews, to the end that Rome might be deliver'd from so great a Plague; neverthe∣less that Pope (by the means of the continual twinges and compunctions that he felt) recollected himself, discover'd his errour, and not only banish'd his Nephews from the Vatican, but seem'd likewise to own and gratifie their importunities, that had open'd his eyes, and given him occasion to discover the danger his own Person, and the Church were in.
Of Ʋrbans Case I shall speak but little, for though he was a Pope indeed too much addicted to the interest of his Kindred, who govern'd the Church with that insolence and pride, that render'd them odious to the whole world. Nevertheless in matters relating to the benefit of Souls, he was very solicitous to give general satisfaction, whilst the mischief from his Nephews extended no further than to the Ecclesiastick Treasure, which is the Patrimony of Saint Peter. Besides this, those Cardinals that negotiated his deposal, did it not so much out of any Christian zeal, or ardent instigation from their duty, but rather in compliance with the Spanish Interest, which was then thought with great reason to be offended, and therefore in all this conspiracy there were none but the Spanish Cardinals concern'd; so that if the crime be consider'd, the punishment was but small, for when the hand is once put to the Plough, there is no looking back. He that attempts to correct the Errors of the Pope, must divest himself of all Humane interest, and arm himself with the Celestial only. The Cardinals must lay aside particular interests, in the defence of the Church, and have regard to nothing but the Publique. 'Tis the glory of God, and not the love of the World, that ought to animate them to the protection of Christs flock, lest they be de∣vour'd by those Shepherds, that are too often no better than Wolves. If in the hearts of the Cardinals a flame of Divine zeal be kindled, in vain will all the tempests and cala∣mities of this World endeavour to quench it. To what purpose is it to expose ones self to Martyrdom; To what purpose to pass so many Seas to preach up the Name of Christ, with so much peril in the most remote parts of the Earth, amongst the greatest Infidels, if it be depis'd even in Christendom, in the very bowels of Religion, and in the midst not only of Rome, but the Vatican it self. And now I would fain know what likelihood there is, that the Cardinals should oppose their own breasts against that violence of the Barbarians, that seem to threaten so nearly the destruction of Christendom, if they be affraid to speak one word to the Pope against those Governours, that by fleecing the people do bring the State into great misery and distress? How shall they take the Sword into their hands to encounter those Hereticks, that destroy our Images, and violate our Holy Temples, if they can patiently behold the plundering of our Altars, and the rob∣bing of the Almes that is given to the poor? How shall they defend the Christian Faith, that suffer the blood of Christ to be devour'd? How shall they dare to preach to such as are in Rebellion, and Enmity, if they be affraid to speak to the Popes that are their Friends? How shall they be faithfull keepers of the flock of Christ, if they be fearfull as Lambs, toward those Wolves that devour his flock? In short, how can they stop the mouths of those (with a good conscience) that do blame the defects of the Popes, when they themselves are the causes of those defects? This I am sure of, the Purple they wear would be much more honourable, did they take more care to preserve the Treasure of the Church; and for my part I am of opinion, the Popes would be more wary of introducing their Kinred into the Vatican, if they observ'd the Cardinals more vigilant; nor would the Nephews commit such notorious robberies, if they did but see that their eyes were upon them. The Cardinal Pallavicino the Jesuite, who in plain terms was a person that could frame and accommodate himself to another mans humour, thereby to work him over to his own; he was one of those that cry'd up Alexander in the beginning of his Papacy, above the Skies, and all because he would not admit his Nephews into Rome. Insomuch, that in his History of the Councel of Trent, that came out from the Press about that time, he made a Parallel betwixt his Holiness, and his Saviour; and upon this ground, because being ask'd by a certain publique Ambassador, if he would not receive his Kindred, his Holiness reply'd in the words of our Saviour, Who are my Brothers? but they that do the will of the Lord. It is not possible to imagine the great and extravagant praises he gave the Pope in all quarters of Rome, for his aversion to the Nipotisme, extolling him for the greatest Pope that ever sate in the Vatican; he prophesied a golden Age again to the Church in a short time, and supplyes of Inhabitants to the City; he went up and down all the Courts of the Cardinals, giving God thanks for his great mercy towards the Church, in sending it a Pope so clearly disinterested, and unaddicted to the advancement of his private Family.
In short, he exhorted them all by the authority his reputation and intimacy with the Pope gave him, that it was the duty of the Cardinals themselves to conserve that great benefit to the Church, and in case Alexander should relapse, that they should oblige his Successors to keep their Nephews out of the Vatican. But the humour of the Pope being altered at length in this point, and instead of his former aversion, he become most partial to his Nephews; Pallavicino also began to change his note, and harp no more upon that string, he found himself oblig'd to stop his mouth in all things, and to sanctifie the defects of the Nephews (as he was the Popes Confessor) or else to ruine and precipitate his own fortunes, and those of his Order. This politick deportment was a great affliction to his Conscience, for he was indeed a well meaning man, and intirely devoted to the benefit of the Church. He found out a hundred querks and pretences to excuse the commendations he had formerly given the Pope; and being one day in discourse, and ask'd by a Cardinal that was his Confident, if he would magnifie no more his Holiness his impartiality to his Relation; he couragi∣ously reply'd, That he then had spake of the Pope, as Pope, and did now speak of Alexander as Alexander. He endeavour'd by all possible means to force his own nature, and not to be concern'd at those evils which he was too sensible did hourly increase, to the great de∣triment of the Church, by the ill Government of the Nephews. But notwithstanding all this, the more he saw Don Mario advanc'd, the more did indignation swell in his Bowels, to think that there could be no remedy found, to quench that fire that seem'd formerly extinct; insomuch that he many times shut himself up alone in his Chamber, and made as many Soliloquies as King Midas his Barber. At last it pleas'd God (as he himself declar'd to a friend of his upon his death bed) by his special grace to take away his life in the vacancy of the Apostolick Chair. He was much affected with the great affairs of the Church, as he signified in a paper he left writ∣ten with his own hand, wherein he protested his intentions were alwayes so far from de∣fending the errors of the Nephews, that he would not so much as excuse them. The writing contain'd five principal points. The first was, that the Church would ne∣ver find any repose in her afflictions, nor be free from the Calumnies of the Hereticks, till the Nephews were banish'd from Rome. The second was, that whilst every Pope had liberty to inrich his own Kindred as they did, the Treasure of the Church in a short time would be imbezled, and dispers'd into Foreign Countreys. The third was, that there was no hopes of seeing the Charity and Benevolence of the faithful increas'd, for they being scandaliz'd to see the Charitable Alms (bestow'd and left by other people to the Church) dissipated and consum'd, did choose to squander away themselves what they had, rather than by giving it to the Church, to increase the number of Extravagants there. The fourth, that the Cardinals could not with a safe Conscience suffer the dissipation of the Treasure of the Church, by the prodigality of the Nephews, and that they were oblig'd therefore as his Holiness Assistants, to endeavour to remedie it. And in the last place, by good arguments he shew'd which was the most proper time for the application of so necessary an expedient, and he concluded the vacancy of the Chair would be the most convenient, because if a new Pope was once Created, and a new Nepotism set up, it would be impossible to compass their ends. This writing fell into the hands of the Cardinals, who call'd a particular Congregati∣on on purpose, to find a remedy in some measure for the disorders the Nepotismo occa∣sion'd in the Church. But their words were more than their deeds, for though some were of opinion a definitive decree should be pass'd, by which all succeeding Popes should be oblig'd from calling their Relations to Rome without the consent of the Sacred Colledge. Nevertheless the major part thought it more convenient not to meddle in it at all, lest they should give fresh occasion of scandal and derision to the Hereticks. So that Pallavi∣cino's Paper had no better success, than the resolution of Cardinal Cena, who had fancy'd to himself the extinguishment of the Nephews a diculus fancy; because in my iudge∣ment the extinction of the Nephews would be a great prejudice to the common re of Rome, if the Pope was constrain'd to trust himself rather to the Councels of his Enemies,
than his friends, and to introduce persons unknown to him, into the Vatican. The Duty of Cardinals, as they are Senators of the Church, should be to watch over the Nephews, that of Governours, they become not Princes, of Keepers of the Pa∣trimony of Saint Peter, they prove not barbarous devourers of the very blood of Christ; and indeed if the Cardinals pleas'd, they might do wonders for the benefit of the Church. Were they all unanimous for the destruction of all corruption, they would give the Pope and his Nephews matter to think upon; but they have no mind to it, this for one consideration, that for another, this for this interest, that for that; so that facti∣on, and division, ruines the Church, and gives opportunity to the Popes in the mean time, to prosecute the advancement of their own Families. Some few years since, the Cardinals amongst other Titles, call'd themselves Princes of the Holy Church, which gave sober men great occasion to wonder; for my own part, I look upon it as so strange and incongruous an usurpation, I cannot tell which way to excuse it. That they call themselves Senators of the Christian Commonwealth, Coun∣sellors of the Supreme Senate of Christ upon Earth, Apostles of the Catholick Religion, Assistants to Christs Vicar, Supreme Ministers of the Gospel, I can allow, as what they may reasonably deserve, but I know not how they can assume the Title of Princes of the Church. Are they Princes, that are many times used worse than Slaves by the Nephews? Are they Princes, that are forc'd to wait from morning to night, not upon Christs Vi∣car, but the Popes Nephews? Are they Princes of the Church, that know not so much as where her Treasure is? Are they Princes of the Church, that suffer her to be ran∣sack'd, and ravish'd, before their own eyes? Are they Princes, that can see their Princi∣palities destroy'd with so much patience? Your true Princes, from the rising to the setting of the Sun, and from its setting to its rising again, do study nothing more than the conservation of their proper Principali∣ties; they endeavour with all possible care the augmentation of the number of their Sub∣jects; they suffer not their people to be press'd or overlay'd with more grievances than the condition of his Principality does necessarily require. If any go about to disturb the peace of their Neighbours, they arm themselves immediately, marching up and down their Dominions to hear the grievances and complaints of their Subjects, and to comfort them with his presence, and due execution of Justice; and these are Princes indeed: But what kind of Princes are your Cardinals? Or what service do they do the Church, to de∣serve that Title? But their Soveraignty, or (to speak more properly) their Dominion and Govern∣ment is not in spiritual things; forasmuch as the Pope is he that dispences indulgences, gives dispensations, sends out his Bulls, and creates Bishops and Cardinals as he pleases, so that the Pope only is Prince of the Church, and not the Cardinals; and although they may seem to have some share in the creation of Bishops, because they are examin'd usually in a Congregation of Cardinals, yet that is only form, and outward appearance, for in strictness the Pope can make whom he thinks good, and without the consent or knowledge of the Cardinals, send a Bishop into any City, whether the whole Colledge of Cardinals dare not so much as send a Deacon, to recite the Offices for the dead, with∣cut the Popes permission. And this is a thing that gives me no small discomposure as often as I think of it; for indeed we all know, and all History both Ecclesiastick and Prophane do confirm it, that Saint Peter never did any thing but by the concurrence of the Apostolick Colledge, but the Colledge often without Saint Peter; nor can I tell how the face of things came to be chang'd, for above twelve Centuries the Popes never insinuated, or pretended to the creation of Bishops, Cardinals, or other Officers of the Church, that belonging alwayes, to the Synode, and Colledge. But now the Popes do all things as they list themselves; and yet the Cardinals must needs have the Title of Princes of the Holy Church, which the Popes do willingly allow them, as not caring who have the smoak, whilst they them∣selves run away with the roast. But if the Popes have usurp'd upon the Cardinals Jurisdiction in Spiritual things, much more have they robb'd them of it in Temporal. One of them being taken away, drew the other after it: Whilst the Popes began at first by degrees to entrench upon that
Authority in Spirituals that the Sacred Colledge was legally possess'd of, and finding by little and little that they parted with patience, with what they usurp'd with pride, the good Popes took courage and seiz'd upon all, driving them out both of their Spiritual and Temporal Authority too, so that at this present the Cardinals have nothing left them but the benevolence of the Pope. The worst is, the Cardinals cannot yet tell in what manner they came to be robb'd of those Priviledges they in former times were possess'd of; but for my part I believe it was from nothing else but their negligence, and too little care they took of the conservation of that Authority that was given them by God, by the Church, by the Emperors, and by the People; for seeing their Authority very great, they us'd not sufficient diligence to preserve it; whereas the Popes being con∣scious of the weakness of their own, they made it their business to enlarge it, and they have done it so effectually, they have left the other none at all. Platina in his first impression of the Life of Paul the second, gives an account, that amongst others being accus'd of I know not what, and brought Prisoner before the said Pope, he petition'd his Holiness that he might be try'd before the Colledge of Cardinals, in whose Judgement he would willingly acquiesce. But the Pope enrag'd at the request, told him, What do you talk of Judgement? know you not that I am infallible, and carry all their Judgements and Reason in the Cabinet of my breast? I consider no mans person: I am Pope, and 'tis in my power to null or confirm their Acts, as I think good my self. Let not the Cardinals inquire now, what means the Popes made use of, to invade and usurp the authority they formerly injoy'd, because they are sure to be answer'd with no∣thing but violence, insolence, and threats: against which, they having not courage enough to defend themselves, do sit down contented only with the Title and appearance: and it is certain at this day, that the Cardinals have no more authority over the Church, than the Duke of Savoy has over the Kingdom of Cyprus, of which he will be call'd King notwithstanding; so the Cardinals will be call'd Princes of the Church, whilst the Pope runs away with the power, doing, and undoing, as he pleases, giving offices and prefer∣ments at his pleasure, and imposing his own Laws without contradiction; insomuch that the Consistories, Congregations, and Colledges, are only for the service and assistance of the Pope, who suffers not the Cardinals to transact any thing but by his di∣rection, and if they do, he revoaks it; so that it is too true they have nothing left but a bare outside authority. All this would be past over nevertheless, and their affliction would not be so great, were it the Popes only that commanded the Cardinals; but the misery is for more than an age past, so many Nephews as have been in Rome, so many Popes have there been to com∣mand them; for the Popes communicating the authority they usurp'd, with each of their Nephews, they know very well which way to put in execution, and have no need to be taught how to make their advantages. Is it not a melancholly and most deplorable sight to see two sorry little-headed Nephews, make so many Logger-headed Cardinals to tremble? that one poor single Nephew, should keep the whole Colledge in awe? That two pittiful Relations of the Pope's, born, and brought up in obscurity, should be more considerable in Rome, than so many Princes of most noble Extraction? That the Popes should give more ear to the advice of a Nephew, newly taken from School, and many times from the Shop, than to the Councels of so many Cardinals, us'd and accustom'd to publick affairs, and zealous of the Service of God? That they should command, that know not how to command, and they be forc'd to obey those, they ought in all equity to command? That the foreign and extraneous Nephews should have freer and more un∣interrupted access to the Vatican, than the Cardinals that are born in Rome? Now if affairs be carry'd in this manner in the Court of Rome, in respect of Spiritual and Temporal Things, how can the Cardinals be properly call'd Princes, that leave the Church in the hands of other people? It is the Nephews that are the Princes, that hold the Patrimony of Saint Peter in their possession, that divide it from the Church without any resistance, and appropriate it as a Patrimony for their particular Families. Nor ought the Nephews on the other side to permit (seeing they have the authority in them) the Cardinals to bear the Title of Princes of the Church, lest very ill consequences should follow. They have no other right of Dominion over them, than by Usurpation
and Tyranny, and Tyranny is sometimes rais'd above the Majesty of Princes; Now if the Cardinals be Princes of the Church without any Soveraignty, the Nephews that have got that Soveraignty without any title must be Tyrants; and therefore to remove this inconvenience, it is necessary either to leave the Dominion of the Church to the Cardinals that have the Title, or to give the Nephews the Title that have the Power already, and exercise it with great Authority. There is not a Heretick, a Gentile, a Jew, a Catholick, nor a Protestant, but knows the Government of the Church by the Nephews is Tyrannical, because the Authority they have to govern it, is deriv'd only from the Popes, who have no Authority to dispose of that which belongs legally to the Cardinals; Christ (as if on purpose to prevent disputes) said expresly, when he gave the power of the Keyes to Saint Peter, Tibi dabo claves Regni coelorum: observe the word Tibi, to Thee, that is, to Peter I give the Keyes of my Church, and not to his Nephews: It is my pleasure that you Command, and give Laws, not your Relations and Kindred, Tibi dabo claves Regni coelorum. And therefore Saint Peter, who understood his duty very well, would never admit any of his own Relations to the Government of the Church, but only such as were call'd by the Divine mouth of our most blessed Saviour. Now a dayes the Popes proceed quite con∣trary, glossing as they please upon the Gospel, robbing them (as soon as they are entred into the Vatican) of all their Authority, and giving it to their Nephews; and instead of governing the Church with the assistance of the Cardinals, (in whom the power is directly from our Saviour) they govern with the assistance of their Nephews, that cannot with any justice enter into the Vatican, nor take possession of an Authority that belongs only to the Cardinals. It is clear the Cardinals are the true successors of the Apostles, so that if the Apostles receiv'd none of their Jurisdiction from Saint Peter, but immediately from God; and if Saint Peter did never command them, neither can nor ought the Popes to command the Cardinals; nor are they oblig'd to obey them in what relates to the Government of the Church, seeing they have as much power in those affairs as the Popes: For my part when I shall see the Popes hold the same correspondence with the Cardinals, that Saint Peter did with the Apostles, I shall believe them true Popes; so on the other side, I shall believe the Cardinals true Princes of the Holy Church, when I shall see them replete with holy zeal, and labouring for the recovery of that Jurisidiction which hath been so unjustly taken from them. If they shall at any time be restor'd to the exercise of that Authority, they formerly for several ages possess'd, they will make the Popes, the Church, and themselves happy, and fortunate, and bless'd; themselves bless'd, because that respect which at present is given by the Faithfull to the Purple only, will be kindled in the hearts of all Christendom, and break out into a flame of devotion, to behold them with such passion and solicitousness endeavouring the good of Christianity, the Church fortunate, because it shall be no more worryed nor tormented with the tongues and pens of Historians, but see every day new Christians sprouting up in her bosom. And lastly, the Popes shall be happy, in having Companions in the care of the Flock of Christ, in discharging themselves of a part of that burthen, that is not to be sustain'd by one, but with great danger of sinking under it. Let not the Cardinals therefore any longer delay the wresting again that Dominion out of the hands of the Nephews, that by Divine or∣dination belongs to themselves. Let them force themselves, and endeavour the repose of the Church; let them have an eye over the affairs of the poor, whose lawfull Princes they are; and let them not (as they value the praise of the World, and the benediction of Christ) forget the Jurisdiction that was given them by him. If the Popes by debasing the Authority of the Cardinals, have erected their own Mo∣narchy, why do not the Cardinals (by depressing that of the Pope) exalt themselves to the condition of Senators in the Christian Common-wealth? If the Popes have thought good for the private advantage of their particular Families, to change (to the great detriment of the Cardinals) the Republick of Christ, into a Monarchy for their Nephews, why shall not the Cardinals for the benefit of the Church, subvert that Mo∣narchy, and re-establish the Republick of Christ? Christ did not call them to the Apostleship, to make them Deacons of Apostles, but that they should watch over, and
superintend, that the Offices of the Deacons were executed well. In Republicks the Dukes are not chosen to destroy the Senators, but on the contrary, they keep up the Grandeur of the Senators, to render their own Authority the more Majestick. Let the Cardinals therefore have a care it fares not with them, as it did with a Souldier of Alex∣ander, who being ask'd his Name by the Emperor, and answering Alexander, his actions being not answerable to his Name, the Emperor reply'd, Either leave the Name of Alex∣ander, or do as Alexander does. And certainly the Cardinals ought either to act like Cardinals, and vindicate that dignity God has given them as principal Ministers in his Church, or relinquish that Emi∣nent Title. The habit makes not a Monk, nor the Purple Robe a Cardinal; if that were so, there would not want Purple to make Cardinals, nor habits to make Monks. The zeal of Religion, the safety of the Christian Common-wealth, the protection of the People, the care of the Cures, the administration of the wealth of the Church, the ba∣nishment of Vice, Sweatings, and Labourings, and Watchings for the augmentation of the number of the Faithfull, and the propagation of Christianity, are as the Poles upon which the Wheel of Cardinalism ought to turn. If a Cardinal goes this way to work, tyres and harrasseth out himself in prosecution of the virtues aforesaid, he will be a Car∣dinal indeed, though he wears no Purple; but if he shuts his eyes, and leaves all things forsaken and deserted, he may have as much of the Purple as he please, but he will have nothing of the Cardinal. The Cardinals tremble at the very Name of the Pope, and yet it is they themselves that give him his Papacy: They humble themselves at the beck of him, who proceeds from their own bowels; they are contented to be stript of their Au∣thority, to invest him with it that robb'd them. The Protestants deny the whole power of the Pope, and in their Schools bring many arguments to refute it; yet they allow more dignity to the Cardinals, than they know how to ask of his Holiness. They say that if the Pope could be contented to be a Car∣dinal amongst the Cardinals, and the Cardinals as Popes with the Pope, the Church of God would be restor'd to the true form in which it was created in the infancy of Chri∣stianity, when the Apostles were Peters, and Peter as the Apostles; and they would not find that difficulty of closing with our Church, which by that means would be Univer∣sal, and not particular; whereas now they are glad of any opportunity to distract it, because they see it particular, by reason of the absolute Authority that is given to the Pope. I was a while since invited to dinner by a Friend of mine, and by accident there were several Protestants, and some Catholicks at the Table. About the latter end of dinner, the Catholicks with great freedom began to discourse (it was in the time of the vacancy of the Chair) of the discord and dissention amongst the Cardinals; one of them in∣stanc'd the example of the Apostles, who when the Holy Spirit descended upon them, were Congregati in unum; applying all to the difference betwixt the Apostolick Col∣ledge in these times, in which they are at variance; and what it was in the Primitive, when there was nothing but meekness, and charity, and love. Amongst the rest there was a French Gentleman indifferently well learn'd, and of a pleasant conversation, who taking the word from the other, reply'd smilingly, that those words Congregati in unum, might very justly be apply'd to the Apostolick Colledge in being, with this difference only, that the Apostles then were Congregati in unum with Christ, and now they are Congregati in unum with the Pope. And e had gone further, had he not been interrupted, and forc'd to rise from the Table, upon an unexpected visit that was made, which altered the whole discourse. I who had then this Cardinalism in my head, and resolv'd to make an end of it, and publish it to the world, began to make some reflection upon what the French man had said, and I found his opinion was not ll grounded, so much did it correspond with mine. For in truth in Rome where the Congregations are infinite, the Cardinals are Congregati in unum, not in their judgements or desires (in which many times there is so much dis∣crepancy, that every Cardinal has a several opinion) but in a resolution to do whatever his Holiness commands them. They are Congregati in unum, because in the Consistories they conclude of nothing, but what is dictated by the Pope. From whence it happen'd
that a Cardinal of a very profound judgement, that liv'd in the time of Innocent the tenth, being ask'd one day whether he went, he answer'd, To Donna Olimpia's Congregation, implying, that that Lady having the absolute management of his Holiness, her Cousin, it was necessary to observe her orders exactly whether they were good or bad: and indeed, some few that would needs peevishly and obstinately withstand her Commands, found but little ease or advantage by it. Were the Cardinals Congregati in unum, for a good understanding amongst themselves, as they are Congregati in unum, to do what ever they are commanded by the Pope, the Church would be better serv'd than it is, the State would flourish in plenty and peace, and the Nephews reduc'd to their primitive indigence and necessity. The Popes do rejoyce (if not contrive) to see the minds of the Cardinals divided, as much fearing the consequence of their unity; and a certain great Pope that lived in our age, was wont to say, That the division of the Cardinals, was the exaltation of the Popes; a saying, as Diabolical as Politick, which discover'd clearly, that the in∣tentions of the Popes were fix'd upon the Supremacy they injoy, that is, to keep and conserve the Monarchy of the Church, in their own absolute Dominion, though to the utter destruction of all that oppos'd them; and because there is no visible opposition to be made, but from the Society of Cardinals (who are indeed the true Senators of the Christian Commonwealth) for that reason the good Popes make use of a thousand wheedles and pretences, to bereave them of that Senatorial dignity, and to bring the ab∣solute Dominion both in Temporals and Spirituals, to depend upon their own pleasures and wills. But here it may be objected, that I do contradict something I have said in another place, viz. that many Popes have by their particular vigilance, endeavour'd to aggran∣dize the Cardinalitial Majesty; sometimes by magnifying the reputation and credit of the Cardinals, sometimes by declaring them to be like Kings, and sometimes by advancing their Titles. To which I answer, that if things be examin'd nealy, there will no con∣tradiction be found. True it is, the Popes have taken great pains to increase the Gran∣deur of the Cardinals, but not to raise by that Grandeur any real profit to the Cardinals; but that the Majesty of the Cardinals may contribute to the augmentation of their own Grandeur. The Popes allow the Cardinals as much authority as is sufficient to render them serviceable to them; but in other things they regard them not a jo. They are not so weak to divide that Monarchy that in their hands is intire, to give it to the Cardinals, by whom they will be serv'd. That Pope that declar'd the Cardinals equal to Kings, had no regard but to his own ambition, to the end, the height of his Pontificacy might be the more illustrious, by how much he had Kings in his Service. In short, the Popes are very liberal in conceeding ample Privileges, and outward Mag∣nificences to the Cardinals. Let them have the preceedence of Princes, let them go Cheek by Jole with Kings, let them have the Prelates for their Slaves, and transcend the Episcopal dignity, all is well, these things shall be allow'd them by the Popes, and the people oblig'd under pain of Excommunication to be contented. But let them have a care withall, that they meddle not with the publick Treasure; that they touch not the Alms∣money; that they question not the actions of the Pope; that they do not recommend the causes of the afflicted; that they press not the disposal of offices and preferments to per∣sons of merit; that they look no further than they are desir'd; that they do not work or insinuate themselves into any command, but as they are directed; and in a word, not so much as to mention the Robberies and Extortions of the Nephews; if they do, they will be banish'd the Court, frown'd upon by the Nephews, turn'd out of their Offices, and treated as the vilest of their Subjects, without any respect at all to the Purple they wear. And of this, several examples have been seen in our dayes. I could name more than four Cardinals that are now alive; (and perhaps I shall name them when I come to speak of them in particular) who, for having follow'd the dictates of their own reason, and for refusing to comply with the extravagant desires of the Nephews, were reduc'd to that exigence, they were forc'd to beg their protection from Foreign Princes. So impli∣citely do the Popes pretend the Cardinals are to obey them, without asking so much as why or wherefore. This method of proceeding was very well known to a certain Cardinal Padrone, or
Nephew of a Pope that dy'd not full thirty years since, who being in discourse one day with his Unckle about certain persons that were to be promoted to the Cardinalship, his Unckle insisting upon the merits of some persons, and the service they had done to the Church. The Nephew did what possible he could to put them out of his Holinesses mind, and to recommend others that were in his head, if not in his purse; and because the Pope consider'd his Pastoral obligation, he would not turn from his resolution, but to pacisie his Nephew, began with sober and grave reasons to demonstrate the advantage that would accrue to his Family, by obliging persons of that virtue and merit to his party. But the Nephew that was of another opinion, reply'd boldly to his Unckle, That be had no need of Cardinals but in the Conclave, so that it was of little importance to him whether his Crea∣tures were virtuous or otherwise, if they were but wise enough to give their voices there. I doubt not but if there are already none, there will be others of this opinion, and which is worse, the Cardinals will not know what remedy to apply, the evil being ul∣cerated, and gone too far. But that would be done by the tryal of one single medicine which should be by renewing that Congregati in unum, not in unum with the Pope, but in unum with Christ; by serving the Church before the Pope, and the Flock of Christ before his Nephews; otherwise to repeat what I said before, let their names be chang'd, and instead of Cardinals of the Holy Church, let them be call'd the Popes Cardinals, as indeed they are. If the Pope creates them for his own service only, and his Nephews, let them not pretend to the Apostolick office; and if they be created for the Churches service, why do they stick so close to the interest of the Nephews? if the affairs of the world go on with the same vicissitude as formerly, other things will be seen in time. However, either death must follow, or some remedy must be apply'd; a disease that in∣creases so fast, can never last long; but perhaps that which men are afraid to do, lest they should prejudice their own interest, may be done by God Almighty himself, who takes the only care of the interest of the Church. I was upon a time in a Stationers Shop in Bolognia, in which they were discoursing of the insatiable desire the Nephews had of heaping up wealth, and of the carelessness of the Cardinals in preserving the Treasure of the Church as they ought: and to speak truth, I had a particular fancy to understand an expression of an Academick of Bolognia, who said the Cardinals were of three sorts; the first, were such as aim'd to be Popes, the second, of meaner designs, and the third, the Princes. That the Cardinal Princes took that habit upon them, for the interest and advantage of their particular houses, and took but little care of the Church, because they had little from her but their bare Titles; the poorer and more interested Cardinals, look'd no further than the gaining of some Ab∣beys or Bishopricks for their own conveniences, laying aside all other considerations, lest they might lose their designs; the Cardinals that pretended to the Papacy (that they might not hazard that fortune that depended upon the votes of other people) would pre∣tend not to see the Turks themselves, should they come to take possession of the State. And of this opinion, I suppose there are many more in Rome, than in Bolognia. But that which seems most strange to me is, that the Cardinals should have all the trouble, and the Nephews go away with the profit. That the Nephews break Treaties, and the Cardinals are left to make them up again. If there be any business of importance transacted in Rome, and it succeeds well, though done by the advice of the Cardinals, the Nephews have the honour of it; if the Nephews interrupt or break off any impor∣tant Negotiation, without the knowledge of the Cardinals, the miscarriage and disgrace is taken from the Nephews, and imputed to the Cardinals; though the good Nephews do ordinarily declare and profess the spoyling, and perplexing of whatever they manage, to give the Cardinals the trouble to find out a remedy by their frequent consultations, which they are forc'd to do, though to their very great affliction. Paulus quintus (as a certain Politician of our time writes) being brought to an exi∣gence in a business of great importance, by the ill conduct, or at least, the ill fortune of the Cardinal Borghese his Nephew, in great melancholly and distress told him, Nephew, you have brought this affair into a very ill condition; to save your Reputation, it must be turn'd over to the Cardinals, if they can remedy it, it shall be our care to see you have the honour who began it so ill, and not the Cardinals that accomplish'd it. Such Presents as
these the Popes Nephews send the Cardinals very often; though generally by their insuf∣ficiencies they ruine what ever comes before them, and then send the business they have broken to pieces, to be patch'd up again in their Congregations and Consistories. The Cardinals are inrag'd, and like to burst with indignation, and indeed they can do no less than be angry with those that ruine their affairs, by not advising with them, or by thinking themselves not oblig'd to do so; but when they consider that the Cardinals their Predecessors took but little care of rectifying the ill wayes of the Court, they leave things at sixes and sevens as they found, according to the example of others that were be∣fore them. The Nephews do but laugh and mock at all this, they live with that latitude and li∣centiousness, as if there were neither God, nor Justice for them. If the Church has any thing that is good, they know how to make the profit on't; if any thing evil, let the Cardinals look to that. It is reported, that Donna Olimpia being in a fear one day that the Cardinals would not espouse the interest of the Duke, out of animosity to the Pope her Cousin, he pacify'd her with these words, Cousin, the Cardinals will be of our side in spight of their teeths, and defend the State for their own interest, although we would ruine it for ours. Another Prelat, of a sound Judgement, and Zeal towards the worship of God, and no less experienc'd in the Intrigues of the Court, was ask'd by a Gentleman of his acquain∣tance that travell'd with him, what it was the Cardinals did treat on in their Congrega∣tions, to which he answer'd, Sir, Let me advise you not to trouble your head about the acti∣ons or interest of that Court, for it is enough to confound the understanding of the most ex∣perienc'd Minister in the world: the less you know the better, yet in few words I will satis∣fie your curiosity; know then, that the Congregations (which are very numerous) serve only as a pretence to the Pope, whereby he would perswade, that his affairs are manag'd with great prudence, seeing he has the judgement of so many Cardinals in Councel. If an old Prelat of that Court spake in this manner to a stranger, it is a sign he was well acquainted with the Intrigues of that City; and therefore there may some reflection be made upon those words. There is certainly great difference betwixt saying, and doing, betwixt acting and advising: I believe really the Popes do consult with the Cardinals, but they act with their Nephews; that is, if the Pope find the Councels of the Cardinals profitable to their Families, in the name of God their Councels are receiv'd, they are good Councels, and the Cardinals are commended as learned Councellors; but if it falls out on the other side, that the Cardinals to satisfie their Consciences, advise any thing for the publique advantage of the Church, and of Christendom, and contrary to the immoderate increase of Riches and Grandeur in the Nephews. In this case, the Popes laying aside all reason, turn tayl upon the Councel of the Cardinals, and aspersing them with inexperience, they call their Nephews to the Cabal, with whom they do not so much deliberate, as ope∣rate, in spight of whatever was propounded by the Cardinals; and which is worse, the Popes in all these cases pretend and excuse themselves with the advice of their Cardinals, though the business be resolv'd with their Nephews only, and of this I shall give you an example. Paul the fifth envying the Soveraign Authority that was given to the Venetian by God, Nature, and the liberality of the Emperors, and Popes, as soon as he had assum'd the Papacy, he began to search out for wayes to subvert it, supposing by his threatning, to gain some part of his unjust pretensions from that Commonwealth; and having a fair opportunity, by the means of some Ecclesiasticks that were legally imprison'd by the mature deliberation and prudence of that Senate, to bridle the insolence of those that pre∣tended to be exempt from the Supremacy they had gain'd, with Sword in hand, in de∣fence of the Christian liberty. The good Pope thinking this a fair occasion to disgorge the hatred which he had kept so long in his stomach against this Republick, he began to thunder out his Excommunications and Interdictions against their Subjects, and the li∣berty of the Senate, without any regard to the trouble and disquiet it gave, not to Italy only, but to all Europe, to see that Republick us'd at that rate, which God had so mira∣culously erected to be a Bulwark to Christendom, a defence to the Liberties of the Italian Princes, a protection and re-establishment to those Popes that were chac'd out of
Rome, and persecuted by the Barbarians; the ornament of Europe, and the terrour of Asia. The most Christian King Henry the fourth, who had a particular esteem for this Republick, dispatch'd away an Ambassador Extraordinary, to divert his Holiness from a Resolution so dangerously prejudicial to the interest of the Publique. The Ambassador fail'd not to perform his duty with all sincerity, and being one day in private discourse with his Holiness, he told him freely, He wondered how his Holiness came to be so easily transported into a resolution, that would be so transcendently prejudicial to the reputation of the Church. To which the Pope answer'd with some indignation, That that resolution could not be call'd light, which came from the breast of Gods Vicegerent on Earth, and who was acted by Divine inspiration, and assisted by the counsell and deliberation of so many Car∣dinals. Thus do they ordinarily excuse themselves, thus do they pretend the advice of the Cardinals; thus are the guilty made innocent, and the innocent guilty. However if the Pope did really believe so, the Ambassador was of another opinion; he knew very well, that when his Holiness call'd that Consistory, in which Pope Paulus resolution of Excommunicating the Venetian was for several dayes in debate, there were three factions of Cardinals; one of them deny'd absolutely to concurr, and with good reasons demon∣strated the Errour his Holiness was in; the second was of opinion to protract a while, to consider more of it, and to try if by another means the Venetian might be brought to accommodate with his Holiness his demands: The third faction (which consisted of Cardinals either created by him, or oblig'd to him for some Bishopricks, Offices, or Preferments) gave their voices clearly for the Interdiction. Not but that they knew in their Consciences the prejudice the Church would receive, and the danger of introducing some new Heresie into Italy; but seeing the Pope resolute, and impatient to be thun∣dring his Excommunications amongst them, to satisfie his designs, they stuck close to him; and would have done the same to the detriment of the whole World, if the Pope had desir'd it. And therefore it was that Paulus insinuated, that he had done nothing but with the advice of his Cardinals; but he said not, that he had follow'd the bad part of them, and neglected the good. The case of Ʋrban the eighth is not much unlike it; he was a Pope otherwise of great worth, and had left a nobler memory of his actions, had he not (towards the end of his Papacy) obscur'd the splendor of his labours, by suffering himself to be transpor∣ted by the furious counsel of his Nephews, to a certain violence, destructive to the Ec∣clesiastical Decorum, the reputation of his own person, and the peace and repose of all Italy. I say, then when he undertook the invasion of the Duke of Parma, who had de∣serv'd very well of the Church; turning all Europe as it were top-si-turvy, and obliging all the Princes in Italy to stand upon their guard, against those Armes that were taken up and manag'd with passion. Ʋrban at that time excus'd himself, with the same pretence that Paulus did, assuring all the Ministers that were then in his Court, negotiating a Peace, That he was certain he had not erred, for besides that as he was Christs Vicar he could not erre himself, he had not resolv'd upon that War without the deliberation and advice of the whole Consistory of Cardinals. Which thing was so said, but not so done, for the least thing that prevail'd with his Holiness, was the opinion of his Cardinals, who with all the prayers and exhortations imaginable, beseech'd him to desist, laying before him the universal scandal it would give to all Christendom, and the insufferable calamities it would bring upon the people; but there was no room for such arguments in the breast of the Pope, the Nephews had resolv'd to turn the Cross into a Sword, and the Rochet into a Mantle de la guerre; not at all regarding those counsels that were inclining to peace. But let us leave this, and grant that that War was undertaken by the advice of the greatest part of the Cardinals; Let it be as Ʋrban said: but what then? shall the Pope be excusable by that? or the Cardinals blam'd? Oh no: I affirm, that though the Cardinals had given their voices for the undertaking of that War, it would have been to be pardon'd. And that this is true, let us see what kind of Cardinals they were that were present when Ʋrban propos'd this War against the Duke of Parma? They were either Cardinals created at the instance of Francisco, or Anthonio; Cardinals oblig'd for their Caps to the whole House of the Barbarini. Now what could such Cardinals do? deny to satisfie the desires of the Barbarini, who had given them their
Dignity? refuse to give their voices for the War, if Francisco and Anthonio recommen∣ded it? I know very well Reason ought to take place of Passion; that Gods interest is to be preferr'd before Mans; the universal advantage, to the particular; the honour of the Church, before any private person: and I know again, there is not any of the Car∣dinals so weak, but they know it; but the business is, the Ecclesiasticks are fed with Flesh, and not with Divinity: and the interest of this world outweighs the interest of the next, and the reason is, they are not Angels but Men. Afterwards Alexander, who was (I speak under the permission of the House of Chigi) Master of the turnings and equivocations, the jugglings and pretences that he us'd, un∣derstood this point better than the rest; and some are of opinion, that for many years backward there was not to be found in the Vatican a Pope more inclin'd to Monarchy than he, taking no small pleasure in humouring and indulging himself, according to the dictates of his own fancy; nevertheless he broke the brains as it were of the Consisto∣ries, and hourly tormented the Congregations, and by his usual equivocations and falacies, he appear'd dis-interested in all things, committing all things to the Councels of the Cardinals; in so much that in the beginning of his Papacy, there was a certain Car∣dinal so far deluded by his outward appearance, that he cry'd out one day in company where he was, God be prais'd we have at last found a Pope, that is a lover of good Councell. But when the sack came to be shak'd, there was nothing but dust; for whilst he said all the trouble upon the Cardinals, to lull and inebriate the World, he himself went away with the wealth, not deviating in the least from the Capriccious Monarchy that was ex∣ercis'd by his Predecessors, unless it were in this, that he did it with more neatness and cunning. And indeed he not only left his Treaties, and matters of greatest importance, to be lifted in the Congregations and Consistories, but his common and more ordinary affairs; and yet he did but refer the cause from Herod to Pilate, by a Maxim of policy spun and contriv'd in his own brain. If the Judgements and Votes of the Cardinals did not agree with his desires, though the business was determin'd and concluded in this Consistory, or in that Congregation, he would still refer it to another; but if they were suitable with his designs, then there was an end of the business, and the Cardinals dis∣charg'd from any further trouble. In short, Alexander made the affairs that were to be discuss'd, to be so much tumbled and toss'd in the Consistories, that at last things would of necessity fall out as he would have them. It happen'd one day a Consistory being call'd, for I know not what business, already examin'd, and perhaps several times decided, two of the Cardinals going together to the said Consistory, and discoursing of the subject they were again to deliberate, the one said to the other, The Pope will make us come and go in this manner, till we guess out his mind; 'tis better to make an end of it quickly and be at ease, then to let him tyre us out, and at last carry the victory. It is not ten months since I met in a Journey with two Roman Gen∣tlemen, one a Priest, and the other a Secular, who were discoursing betwixt themselves about the business of Castro, the Priest swearing that upon that single subject, there had been more than two hundred Consistories held; I who had already wrought my self into the discourse, (for to speak truth when any thing is spoken of the interest of Rome, I open my ears as wide as is possible) had the curiosity to desire the cause of it; to whom he answer'd like a true Roman, though not like a good Priest, You must know the Pope does nothing in Rome but what is conformable to his own designs, so that the Cardinals not all of them agreeing with his resolutions in the business of Castro, the Pope to weary them out tumbles them up and down at that rate; and I am perswaded there will never be an end of their Consistories, till they comply with his Holiness his pleasure; and you shall yet see this affair of Castro brought about again to the Congregations and Consistories, which is as much as to say, kept in a perpetual dependance in Rome. True it is, Alexander found out a good way to excuse his obstinacy, and in that he out-did both Innocent and Ʋrban; nor indeed was there ever any Pope knew better how to wynde himself out, and throw the fault upon the backs of the Congregations and Consistories. When that infamous affront was offer'd to the persons of the Duke and Dutchess of Crequy, the King of France being himself injur'd in the person of his Ambassador, writ many Letters full of resentment, and amongst the rest one to the Queen of Sweden, which is inserted
at large in the Nepotismo, complaining not so much of the Pope as Pope, as of Alex∣ander and Fabius, that is to say, of his Kindred. A Cardinal of no small authority and zeal being inform'd of it, forbore not upon a good occasion to speak to the Pope himself in these words; Most Holy Father, his most Christian Majesty does not complain of your person who is Christs Vicar, and Head of the Church so much as of your Brother and Nephews, who have too great injunce upon you. Alexander answer'd, That he had not receiv'd his Kindred into Rome but upon the perswasions of the Sacred Colledge. Which being told the Cardinal Albici when he was at his Table, he reply'd in the absence of the Pope, what the other Cardinal omitted in his presence, That 'tis true the Holy Colledge had entreated him to bring his Nephews to Rome, but not to destroy both Rome, and the Church too, to advance them. All this was told me by a Gentleman of credit that was then present in the Cardinal Albici's Chamber when the words were spoke; and it is no hard matter to believe it, to them that know the humour of his Eminence, who freely discharges himself of whatever is in his mind, and justifies reason in spight of the World. It must needs be confess'd then, having so many examples to corroborate, and so many experiments to attest it, that the Popes use the Cardinals in the Government of the Church for a pretence, and no otherwise, laying the fault upon those Cardinals rather that comply with the desires of the Pope, than upon themselves that act according to the pleasures of their Nephews, or for satisfaction of their own private passions. Of this kind of proceeding I dare not for my part accuse the Popes, who are forc'd to do what they can for the preservation of their Monarchy: But the Cardinals I dare, who can so easily suffer themselves to be robb'd of their Authority, be contented to take Eggs (as it were) for their money, and either out of meer pusillanimity, or some other thing, part with that which is legally their own, and permit their private passions to over-rule the interest of the Publique. The Church without doubt would be a hundred times better serv'd, and the Court in greater esteem, if the Cardinals would restrain the Nephews, and not nffr the Pope to operate as he pleases. When the attempt was made upon the Duke of Crequy, his most Christian Majesty (supposing it able to oblige the Pope to give him a proportionable reparation) apply'd himself to the Sacred Colledge for redress, and his Letter was exactly as follows. Cousin, THe assault that was made the twentieth Currant upon the person of my Cousin the Duke of Crequy, my Ambassador Extraordinary, his Lady, and all the French the Corsi of Rome could meet with in the Streets that day, is an enormity so great in all its circumstances, that perhaps in no time, nor place, even amongst the Barbarians themselves, can an instance be found in which the jus Gentium hath been with so much inhumanity violated and abus'd: And for as much as your Eminence is a Member of that Sacred Body, that is the natural Councel of the Popes, I have encharged Monsignor Burlemont, Auditor of the Rota, to wait upon you in this conjuncture, and acquaint you with my resentment of so great an offence, to the end that by your interposition, (which I doubt not but you will willingly undertake as far as you shall be able) I may receive a satisfaction adequate to the quality and extravagance of the affront. But if your Eminences good offices should happen to be ineffectual, they shall not be imputed to me (after this application) whatever mis∣chiefs or calamities shall happen, assuring my self I shall be excusable both to God▪ and to Man, whatever the consequences be; and thus referring the rest to what Mr. Burlemont will present to you by word of mouth, I beseech God my good Cousin to preserve you in his holy favour. LEWIS. St. Germans en Ley, 20 Aug. 1662. De Lominie. This Letter was read and deliberated in the Sacred Colledge, but only in the particu∣lars relating to the satisfying of the King, not in his Majesties Complement in these words, Of the Sacred Colledge which is the Natural Councel of the Popes. The Cardi∣nals
spent no long time in reflecting upon that which was the principal point, and ought well to have been consider'd, because when one of the greatest Monarchs in Christen∣dom does Canonize the Sacred Colledge for the Natural Councel of the Popes, what is it but to remember and excite them to maintain that Station God Almighty has plac'd them in, that is, to have a care the Popes usurp not an absolute authority over the Church, and that they do not, and undo not at their pleasure, without any respect to the quality of the person they offend. What is natural to the Church, is by special favour from God, if the Councel of Cardinals be the natural Councel of the Popes, the Popes ought not to usurp any jurisdiction over the Cardinals, so as not being at any time subordinate to the Popes, when they are united and assembled in the Sacred Colledge, it must of necessity be granted that the Popes are inferiour to that Councel, so that the Cardinals as Mem∣bers of a Supreme Councel, and depending only upon the power of God, and the pro∣tection of Princes, are oblig'd to constrain the Popes to an obedience of those Councels, that proceed from that Councel that indeed is natural. But the Cardinals will not under∣stand this, but turning the Natural Councel into a Bastard, they advise nothing that in their Consciences they think necessary for the Service of God, for the Honour of the Church, or the Repose of the Faithfull, but only sift out the Councels, Advices, Sen∣tences, and Opinions of their Popes, and then making their Decrees as they desire them, they take but little care of the rest, not that they want good will, but courage, and au∣dacity, to put that good will in execution, which is a thing so prejudicial to their Gran∣deur, that it detracts and lessens their dignity. This I am sure of, that would they once take up a resolution of resuming that authority they formerly injoy'd, and renounce the Tyranny of the Nephews, the greatest Princes of Christendom would take their parts, and provide them with all manner of assistance. But let us see the Cardinals Answer to the Kings Letter, which in my judgement will not improperly be inserted in this place. Most Christian and most Royal Sir, I Am very sensible of the transcendant favour your Majesty has done me, in vouchsafing to impart to me your resentment for the unhappy accident betwixt the Corses, and cer∣tain of the Duke of Crequy's train; besides the honour you have done me by the benigne con∣fidence express'd in your Letter, and by the mouth of Mr. Burlemont, your Majesty has al∣so given me occasion with all reverence to represent the great displeasure conceived by our whole Court, but more especially his Holiness, in whose heart there is already so great an im∣pression of esteem, and so tender an affection for your Majesty, produc'd and augmented by so many glorious actions, so many perpetual testimonies of your Valour and Piety, in demo∣lishing the Garrisons of the Hereticks, and shutting their Churches in places under their command: so that his Holiness could not evidence with more paternal demonstration the dis∣gust that action has given him; which he has not only declar' publiquely in his Briefs upon that occasion, but in the Consistory also, and in his private discourse, but much more in his actions, bending all his thoughts to your Majesties satisfaction, as he has alwayes designed. I hope therefore your Majesty, with your wonted generosity, will reflect upon the just mo∣tives, and remain satisfied even for the intire quiet and consolation of your Servants, amongst which, I being not inferiour to any in point of observance, neither have, nor will fail in my obedience to your Majesty, nor in imploying my self to the utmost of my abilities in your Ma∣jesties Service. On the other side likewise I shall rejoyce, if in your Majesties resolutions, your Majesties Royal Bounty and Prudence does more and more shew. So that to make me perfectly happy, there remains nothing but your Majesties fresh commands, which I most obsequiously do beg of your Majesty, and make my most humble Obeisance. Rome the 24. of Sept. 1662. Had these Cardinals have been to write in Paris, as they were in Rome, the Letter would perhaps have been otherwise, and not have flatter'd his Holiness as it did; and in∣deed in any publique Conflagration, people run with water, and not with wood. Yet it is no such wonder to me, that the Cardinals sided with the Pope, as that they rob themselves of their authority, and make show of certain independency, giving the world
to understand, that the composure and accommodation of the business belong'd wholly to the Pope. There would not so many scandalous offences be committed in Rome; there would not be so many Murthers in the State; the Church would not be hara'd as it is, nor thousands of Families run away from the Tyranny of the Popes; the Court would not swarm so much with dissolute and ignorant persons, nor the people be so deplorably miserable; Virtue would not be banish'd the Vatican, nor Flattery received into the Ca∣pital; Miters would not be bestow'd upon Asses, nor Monkeys introduc'd into the Col∣ledge; Caps would not be sold at that rate, nor Offices conferr'd upon him that bids most; in short, all things would go well, if the Cardinals would exercise the authority that God has given them, and not depend upon the Humour, and Capriccio of this Ne∣phew, or of that; did the Popes see the Cardinals vigilant over their actions; were they sure of their diligence and sincerity towards the well governing of the Church, they would consider of it a hundred times before they would call their Kindred to Rome, and put their whole Dominion into their hands; they would make many a serious reflection before they would disoblige any Prince, and not suffer themselves to be drawn by their Nephews into the displeasure of one or the other. But in short, if they meet no impe∣diment, if they see the Cardinals loytering and asleep, why should they go about to satis∣fie their wills. Whilst the Popes are sure to have the Cadinals Canonize their errours, why should they forbear to commit them. I shall tell one Story very lamentable for the Catholick Church, though in this only, that it makes sport for the ignorant and pragmatick Hereticks; for those of better judge∣ment, are troubled at any misery that befalls the Catholicks, and which is more, do give God thanks when he delivers them from any extraordinary calamity; but because what I am about to say, is sufficient to break a mans heart, I shall for this reason accom∣pany it with such examples and arguments, as I have been able to draw from the dis∣course of some persons it was my fortune to be amongst, and particularly two Divines, but both marry'd, which is enough to prove they were no Catholicks. These two reading of a Gazet one day (do not wonder kind Reader if I say they were reading a Gazet, for we live in an age in which the Ecclesiasticks spend more time about the affairs of the world, than about their Sermons; and of this sort I knew one my self, that in publique was reserv'd and grave, and in company a very honest man; however he privately translated out of Italian into French, a book so Prophane and Satyrical, that even the worst of Christians are afraid to read it) these two Preachers then being read∣ing a Gazet, in the time of the vacancy of the See, they found in it, That the Cardinals had concluded upon certain Ordinances and Rules to be observ'd by the Pope, when he shall be created, and that they had propounded in the Vestry of Saint Peter the abolishment of the Ni∣potismo. One of the two (which was he that was attending) with a grave voice, that seem'd to proceed from a heart full of zeal, said, God Almighty remove those good thoughts out of the minds of the Cardinals, for the scandals of their Church, are the ediica∣tions of ours; disturbances in their Church, giving ours repose. He that has ears to hear let him hear, he that has zeal enough to make reflection upon these words, let him make it, whilst I betake my self to more deep considerations. It is not above a hundred and sixty years, since this Nipotismo began to Lord it over the Church and the Cardinals in Rome. They insinuated by degrees, and multiply'd their authority dayly to that pass, that at present of a custom, it is become a necessity; there being little difference either in their Grandeur or Command, betwixt a Pope and a Nephew; so strangely is their Majesty con∣founded. About the same time Luther, and Calvin, one after another began to appear, preaching with great vehemence against the errors of the Catholick Church, and the exorbitant co∣vetousness of those that govern'd it, and in a short time putting the whole world into dis∣order, introducing Reformations in those very Kingdoms that were thought the most Catholick. Against this Torrent that ran down with great Victory and Triumph, the Emperour Charles the fifth thought good to oppose his zeal, perhaps more ambitious of gaining Suc∣cess to his arms, than Provinces to the Pope; so that with his Sword in his hand, Try∣umphing
thorough Germany, he conquer'd their Captains, but not their Preachers; he subdued their Soldiers, but not their Consciences; the Reformists increasing every day. It was not Luther and Calvin only that oppos'd themselves against the abuses in the Church, or that made themselves heads of the Religious, and Reformists. There were other persons that appear'd, of greater learning, of better extraction, and of more emi∣nence and credit. Nevertheless the Popes of those times knew how to find a remedy, and with most accurate diligence they hindred its growth, crushing the Brat as it were in the Cradle. And yet the Popes then had not so many thousands of men, were not in that esteem amongst the Princes, had not so many Cities and Provinces under their Dominion, nor so many thousand Crowns to expend, nor in short, made use of their Spiritual and Temporal arms so easily. And O God, who is it that can dive into the secrets of Heaven, or understand why the Church should in its poverty be able to oppose it self to the very face of its Persecu∣tors, and so weak and unable now the Popes are grown rich, to put a stop to an inunda∣tion, that sprang from so small a beginning? Oh God, why have the Popes, that pre∣tend to an universal Monarchy, given place and submitted to too weak and unarmed men? that their hearts should be able to endure to see themselves devour'd without so much as speaking a word? that they should be contented to condescend though with shame, rather than to contend with honour. In this condition do things stand, though it ought to be otherwise; did not our expe∣rience teach us all this, it would very hardly be believ'd; did not example confirm our Faith, our Faith would stagger to believe it; did not our eyes behold the Enemies of Rome multiply'd daily, and Rome it self neglected, these relations would be counted false, though they be never so true. But let admiration cease, when reason appears; the minds of the faithful are di∣sturb'd, and wander in the very sight of that light that directs them. Let all amazement cease, seeing the cause of these evs is so manifest. He that would know why the Popes for so many ages have shewn themselves so zealous in defence of the Church that is com∣mitted to their custody; let him go no further than Rome; Let him visit the Coffers of the Popes, and he shall see that, and the reason why (being really besotted and asleep, notwithstanding their pretences of vigilance) they have been this hundred and fifty years purging the Church of Christ of so many Persecutors, to the great scandal of Christen∣dome, and the great derision of the Hereticks. Before the said hundred and fifty years, the Popes had no other thoughts than the es∣pousing the interest of the Church; so far have some of them been from preferring their own Families, that they would sooner have expos'd all their Kindred to the greatest misfortune, than in the least have been deficient in their Pastoral Cure. As soon as they were sensible of any new Heresie that was broach'd, they stirr'd up immediately zeal in their breasts, and indignation in their hearts, they united their Prayers, sent Ambassa∣dors every where, and open'd their Treasures of Indulgences to the Reformists, and of Gold to the Soldiers. The people being fortify'd in this manner, and the Princes excited, they cheerfully drew their Swords against the Hereticks, postponing their own, to defend the interest of Christ. They glory'd in exposing themselves to a thousand inconveniencies and disasters, and to spend their bloods in the preservation of the Christian Faith. They emptied their Chests of their Treasure, to replenish the Flock of Christ. They rais'd Armies of Chri∣stians, to destroy the barbarous Enemies of Christendome. And in a word, they thought of nothing but following the example of those Bishops, that follow'd the example of Christ. But for these hundred and fifty years last past, things have gone clear otherwise; the Princes are grown cold, the Infidels multiply'd, the Hereticks increas'd, the Credit of the Clergy diminish'd, and the Church on all sides afflicted; and why so? because the Popes, of Pastors of Christs Flock, being become Monarchs of the Church▪ have had no other thoughts but to make Princes of their Nephews; casting off Gods Interest, lest they should destroy the Interest of their Kindred. History does shew us (as the curious may observe in a hundred places) and clearly
evince, that for the space of fifteen ages, the Princes took a pride to spend their Trea∣sure in opposition of those that oppos'd the Religion of Christ: the reason that excited them, was the example of the Popes, who having but little, gave all they had notwith∣standing, to the supply and reimbursement of those Princes that imploy'd theirs against the Enemies of Christ. And in truth, till within these fifteen hundred years, the Empe∣rours, Kings, Princes, and Commonwealths, did strive and contend to joyn themselves in Leagues with the Popes, against the Hereticks and Infidels; and rejoyc'd more to be acknowledg'd Defendors of the Faith, and Persecutors of the Infidels with their Swords in their hands, than Princes with their Scepters; and the same glory the Popes took like∣wise, not spending their dayes in pleasure in their Castle of Gondolfo, nor strutting in their Gardens of Monte Cavallo, but in solliciting and uniting the Princes in a League against the Infidels, offering on their part for their supply, not only to sell their Consecrated Vessels from their Altars, but their very Clothes from their backs. But how comes it, things being thus manag'd, that the Armes of the Christians advanc'd not victoriously to the farthest extremities of Asia? How could Heresie reign so long, if the Sword of the Catholicks was alwayes ready drawn against it? But one may ask here, how it comes to pass that the zeal of the Princes is grown so cold, seeing that for a hundred and fifty years last past, they have been more ready to persecute the interest of the Popes, than to defend the Faith of Christ. To this it may be answer'd, That the Princes are grown cold, because the Popes are so; whilst they were zealous for the good of the Church, so were the Princes; but since they began to throw Religion behind their backs, and give themselves over to the aggrandizement of their Nephews; since they began to empty the Coffers of the Church, to fill the bags of their own Kindred, the Princes are fallen off, as not conceiving it prudence to strip them∣selves of their Clothes, to cover the nakedness of that Church, that is robb'd and dispoil'd by the Popes her Governours, or to supply their Nephews, who are Enemies to the Princes. It would certainly be ridiculous, not only to the Infidels, but to the Christians them∣selves, should the Princes suffer the Nephews of the Popes in Rome, to batten with the Blood of Christ; and they consume the Treasure of their Subjects, in making War upon those that do not so much mischief to the Popes, as their Nephews do to all Christendom. When the Knights of Malta took the Grand Sultaness, (which was the occasion without doubt of the War with the Venetian) I was present in Rome, where they dis∣cours'd generally, that the Turks would not fail to be reveng'd, to the detriment of all Christendom. And one day above all the rest, as they were talking in this manner, a certain Roman adventur'd to say in these very words: I would to Heavens the Turks would take Rome; for 'tis most certain the Slaves in Constantinople are better treated by the Grand Signiour, than the poor free▪ born Romans are in Rome. And another discoursing likewise upon the same subject, in the company (amongst the rest) of a Prelate that was discontented, and talking that there was a necessity of the Princes joyning in a firm League against the Turk; the Roman reply'd, That it would be a better deed to drive the Nephews out of Rome, than the Turk out of Constanti∣nople, because the Turk had never done so much mischief to Christendom, as the Nephews had done to the Church. A Friend of mine had the curiosity to calculate the Money that has been given to the Nephews, and he began at the year 1500. and after a great deal of pains, he found issuing from the Treasury of the Church, above seventy Millions of double Ducats, all deliver'd into the hands of their Kindred; and this is to be understood of visible Moneys, for of private and invisible sums there may perhaps be twenty Millions more: And those Romans that are within the Town, and have more time to cast up what has been extorted from them, if they would take the pains to examine it more strictly, I am satisfi'd would find it much more. Now if these seventy Millions of double Ducats had been spent in persecuting Here∣ticks, or in making War upon Infidels, where would any Infidels be? where would any Hereticks be? Those seventy Millions would have been enough to have over-run all
Asia. And (which is of importance too) the Princes would have contributed as much more, had they seen the Popes more tenacious against their Kindred, and more free to the Souldiers that were fighting for Christ. The Protestants apply all this to a Miracle of the Divine providence; for God Al∣mighty, say they, began to send Popes that were zealous and passionate for the enrich∣ment of their Kindred, from the very time the Reformists began to appear, to the end that the Popes having given all to their Nephews, and wanting money, they should have no mind to assist those Princes that would willingly have made War against the Refor∣mists; and hence it was that it was said by the Minister that read the Gazet, That he desir'd that God would put it out of the minds of the Cardinals, to oblige the Pope to turn the Nipotisme out of Rome. And not without reason, as fearing those great Sums that have been robb'd from the Church, and hoarded up by the Nephews, should be imploy'd after∣wards to their ruine and destruction. I leave it to the zeal of the Cardinals to make re∣flection, who if they cannot obtain from the Popes that no more moneys of the Church be given to the Nephews, let them at least prevail so far, as that they would pretend no longer to any Wars with the Hereticks and Turks, which would be more reputation to the Church, and give less scandal to the Catholicks: Who are engag'd upon any tydings of War with the Hereticks, and in that rapture cry out, How a Devil should we make War with the Hereticks, whilst the Nephews run away with the means, applying that money to their private use▪ that was given by the Faithfull for maintenance of the Christian Religion, and the destruction of the Enemies of Christ. Hundreds of Examples we have to confirm these opinions; What Succours were sent to the Emperor Ferdinand (who was then fighting against the Protestants in Germany) by Pope Ʋrban? plenary Indulgences, hortatory Epistles, and dilatory Excuses: Yet it is certain there never went in all the times above 200000 Crowns in ready money, and most of that was kept in the hands of the Nuntioes, or Merchants; and whenever his Imperial Majesty demanded supply, he was answer'd with pittiful Remonstrances, and tedious Representations of the miserable Estate of the Church, the poverty of the people, and the emptiness of their Treasury. However the Barbarini were in Rome at the same time, and enjoy'd an annual rent of 400000 Crowns, and yet in a War of that impor∣tance to the Catholick Religion, they could not find above 40000. But oh God! (I speak it with tears in my eyes) against the most Catholick Princes of Italy, whole Millions were nothing; they could turn the Cross into a Sword, to revenge their parti∣cular injuries; but in relief of the Emperor, who was vindicating the Christian Faith against the Enemies thereof, they could not find so much as a few Hundreds. Innocent the tenth, to satisfie the fancy of a Kinswoman, spent a hundred thousand Crowns upon a Fountain, yet with great difficulty could scarce find 40000 for the sup∣ply of the Emperor, who seeing himself abandon'd by his Holiness in his Wars with the Protestants, he was forc'd to patch up a Peace, with no small disadvantage to the Catho∣lick Religion. And yet this good Pope could leave to his Cousin, to the House of Pam∣philia, and other Houses allied to that, above eight Millions of Crowns, with which sums they flourish in Rome to this very day. The same story is reported of the King of Poland, besieg'd as one may say by the Pro∣testants of that Kingdom, and brought to a necessity of loing that Crown from the Ca∣tholicks, or the Catholick Religion from that Crown: And yet for all this both Ʋrban and Innocent thought of nothing less than relieving him, because perhaps the Religion of the Nephews (which was nothing but riches and honour) was dearer to him than the Religion of Christ. In short, (and let those Parasites not prosper that write the con∣trary) the Church of God was never so harrass'd in Poland and Germany, as in the time of those Popes. Not that the Emperor wanted heart, or the King of Poland courage, but because they saw the Pipes (that convey'd the Supplys formerly from Rome) broken and cut off, and those two Popes resolv'd to spin out and protract the War, with bare hopes of relief; that they might not bring the rest of the Catholicks into an extremity of misery, they concluded to leave the Church of Rome to its self, and make the best use of their own policies, though to the prejudice of Religion, seeing Rome took no care of the Church, nor the Popes of any thing but their Nephews: He that hath judgement,
and zeal, and understands affairs, let him correct me if I speak amiss. But what shall I say of the Venetians, who have spent the dearest blood of their Citi∣zens in defence of the Faith, of Religion, of Christ, and even of the Popes themselves, and yet many times for all that have they been deserted, and persecuted by the Popes; of which ingratitude I shall not speak much in this place, as hoping for the consolation of all zealous Catholicks to publish ere long a Book entitled, The ingratitude of Princes to∣wards the sole Virgin of Christendome. This Republique, that for the Glory of God, and the Benefit of the Church, under∣took so memorable a War against the Emperour Frederick, and all to restore the Vicar of Christ to the Apostolick Chair, out of which he had been chas'd, could not notwith∣standing obtain for the maintenance of its Armies imploy'd against the Enemies of Chri∣stianity, any thing but a pittance of supply drawn by Prayers and Supplications, not from the purse of the Popes, who had sworn to bestow all the Riches of the Church upon their Nephews, but from the tears of the Ecclesiasticks that were destroy'd. To that Republique that spent ten millions of Crowns and more, in two years time for the Service of his Holiness in a War against Frederick the Emperour, the Popes ought in all reason to have given at least two millions in ten years; that those Senators that want neither courage, nor zeal, might have been completely inabl'd to have defended the Inte∣rest of Christ. Oh God! to what purpose will they keep so many Jewels at Loretto, so much consecrated Plate in Rome, so many Abbeys for their Nephews, so many Benefices for the Cardinals, so much Wealth for the Popes; if abandoning this Commonwealth, and refusing it that Humane supply that is necessary for the maintenance of the Celestial Glory, it be constrain'd to submit and truckle to the Ottoman power, which threatens it now with its greatest effect. If the Wealth of the Popes be devour'd, the Benefices of the Cardinals given to the Priest of Mahomet, the Abbeys of the Nephews usurp'd by the Turks, the Sacred Vessells in Rome prophan'd by those Infidels, and the Seraglio adorn'd with the Gemms of Loretto. God grant my eyes may never see that spectacle. Against this, your zeal, most eminent Princes, against this you care, is to watch. In our dayes (or rather) yours, we have seen the victorious Swede entring into Germany to the great detriment of the Catholicks, because the Popes were pleas'd to have it so, that fatten'd up their Nephews with that nourishment, that ought to have been reserv'd for the beating back the Swede to the very walls of Stockholme. God grant, that for want of our utmost assistance the Turk be not seen triumphing in the middle of Italy, nay of Rome it self. The Ottoman Emperour knows very well that Popes think of nothing but shearing the Flock of Christ, and giving the Wool to their Nephews; and this it is that secures the Turk that little assistance is to be expected from the Popes, and less from the Princes; concluding rationally enough, that the Princes will not do much, when the Popes that are Christs Vicars, do so little for his service. The Infidels laugh, and the Hereticks rejoyce, to see the Wealth of the Church so ir∣religiously devour'd, whilst the poor Christian weeps at their merriment. They know they are safe enough for having any more Leagues made against them; and understand the emulations and dissentions amongst the Cardinals. The Protestants are much more liberal of their utmost supplyes to those Princes that make War upon the Catholicks, than the Popes are of their assistance to those that fight against the Protestants: and from hence it is, the Turks are so victorious over the Christians, and the Hereticks over the Catholicks at this day. That heat and passion which the Popes shew hourly for their Ne∣phews; to gain Principalities for them, to bestow Pension upon Pension upon them, to build Pallace upon Pallace for them, and to fill their Coffers with Treasure to the Brims, is that which cools the resolutions of the zealousest Prince, and exasperates the Infidels in their wicked designs. A great shame it is indeed, that the Hereticks should have more ground to accuse the Catholicks, than the Catholick has to impeach the Heretick. And of this the Cardinals are oblig'd seriously to consider, as persons thought worthy to be Members of that Sacred Body, that is, the Natural Councel of the Vicar of Christ.
Il CARDINALISMO di Santa Chiesa, OR THE HISTORY OF CARDINALS. In III. Parts. PART II. BOOK II. The Contents. In which several particularities of the magnificence of the Colledge of Cardinals are treated. Of the manner in which the Popes have endeavour'd to debase the Cardinalitial Majesty Of the ill usage Cardinal Astalli receiv'd of Innocent the tenth. Of a remarkable saying of a certain Cardinal, upon the ill usage the Cardinals receive from the Popes. Of certain Popes that have had thoughts of encreasing the number of Cardinals to a hundred, and the causes that mov'd them thereunto. Of certain politick reasons, about this advancement, and diminution. Of the causes why the Popes delay to make Promotions till towards the latter end of their dayes. Of the reasons that mov'd Urban the eighth to continue seven years without creating one Car∣dinal. Of the industry of the Nephews in raising their Fortunes, and pro∣curing wealth to their Families. A parallel betwixt the Families of the Medici and Barbarini, in the time that Florence was a Republick. Of the small esteem they had at Rome, before the creation of Urban. Of the pro∣motion
of Francisco Barbarino to the Cardinalship. Of the time that Urban alone govern'd the Monarchy of the Church. Of the causes that mov'd him to leave the whole Dominion in the hands of his Nephews. Of the natural in∣clination of the Romans to count all the Popes Nephews Devils. Of the num∣ber of voices Cardinal Francisco had in one scrutiny. Of the false opinion some people had, that Cardinal Francisco bought the Papacy in the last Con∣clave, with the disbursment of a round sum of money. Of Cardinal Ginetti, of the difference of his manners and inclinations, from Cardinal Barbarino's. Of his immoderate covetousness. Of the Vicarship, and other Benefices con∣ferr'd upon him by Pope Urban the eighth. Of the number of Nephews that he hath, and of their virtues and vices. Of some particulars of Cardinal d'Arach, and how little he was regarded in the Court of Rome. Of his zeal in the reprehension of the iniquities of that Court, in their secret Congrega∣tions. Of Cardinal Antonio Barbarino, and the reason why he was call'd Romano. Of the Dignities conferr'd upon him before his Cardinalship. Of his inclination towards Women. Of the prudence he us'd in defence of the French Interest. Of the grëat severity Cardinal Palotta us'd in his admi∣nistrations of justice. Of his sentencing Cecca Buffona, a famous Courtezan, and Cardinal Anthonio's Mistress, to be whipp'd. Of the animosities it be∣got, and the great persecutions that follow'd thereupon. Of the dis-interet he shew'd towards the Crowns. Of the manner how Cardinal Brancaccio obtain'd the Cap. Of a notable saying of a witty man. Of the great number of his Kindred. Of the assiduity wherewith Cardinal Carpegna was alwayes ready to serve the Barbarini. Of his humour that was something melan∣cholly. Of one of his Brothers call'd Don Mario. Of the difference betwixt the Youth, and the Age of Cardinal Durazzo. Of the way by which he arriv'd at the Cardinalship. Of his affability in conversation, and other particulars of his nature. Of his death. Of the advancement of Mr. Julio Gabrielli, from being Clerk of the Chamber, to the Cardinalship. Of his Bishoprick of Ascoli, and his Legation from Urban. Of his nature, and his ignorance in letters. Of the great merit of the House of Ursino, and the pro∣motion of Virginio Ursino to the Cardinalship. Of his protection of Portu∣gal, and the great ardour with which he defended the Interest of France. Of the good life of Cardinal d'Este. Of his art in equivocating, and his affa∣bility in conversation. Of Cardinal Facchinetti, and his reputation in the Colledge. Of Urbans promotion of Girolamo Grimaldi, a Genoese, to the Cardinalship. Of the esteem they had for him in the Court of Rome, and in Paris. Of Cardinal Rosetti, and his Negotiation into England. Of that which exalted Cardinal Donghi to the Cardinalship, and of the reputation he got in his Legation to Ferrara. Of the principal causes that mov'd the Pope to conferr a Cap upon Monsignor Rondanini. Of the fortune Nicolo Ludovisi had to he advanc'd to the Cardinalship, and other particulars of his nature. Of the kindness Innocent had for the Cardinal Cibo, and of the esteem he had in the Court for his good behaviour. Of the great respect and reputation Cardinal Sforza is in. Of his humour, that has more of a Souldier in it, than of a Prelate. Of the Cap that was given to Cardinal Odescalco, upon the importunity of Donna Olimpia, and of the opinion they have of him at the Court. Of the promotion of Monsignor Raggi to the Cardinal∣ship,
of his comportment, and what they thought of him at Court before his promotion. Of Cardinal Maldachini his humour, his promotion, and other particulars of his life. Of the promotion and Persecution of Cardinal Rhetz. Of the ambition Cardinal Homodei had for the Cardinalship, and of his virtues. Of Cardinal Ottobuono, and his qualities. Of the Cardinal Im∣perial, and his qualities. Of Cardinal Borromeo, and of his promotion. Of Cardinal Santa Croce. Of the Cardinal d'Hassia. Of the Cardinal Charles Barbarino. Of the Cardinal Spada. Of Cardinal Albici. Of Cardinal Aquaviva. Of Cardinal Pio. Of Cardinal Gualtieri. Of Car∣dinal Azolini, and several particulars of the Cardinals aforesaid. Of the number of Cardinals created by Pope Urban the eight. Of the saying of a great Wit upon the number of those Cardinals. Of the number of Cardinals created by Pope Innocent. Of the principal end the Popes ought to have in the promotion of Cardinals. Of the causes that render the Court of Rome so Majestick. Of the opinion of a Tuscan Gentleman thereupon. Of the glory wherewith Innocent began his promotions. Of the Cardinal Princes created by Innocent the tenth. Of the little inclination Urban had for the creation of Cardinal Princes, and the disgust given to the creatures of Paul the fifth. Of the zeal wherewith Alexander the seventh began his Papacy. Of his intention at first to make many Cardinal Princes. Of the discourse he held thereupon with his Domestiques. Of the power given to Signour Ma∣jetta Ambassador from the Duke of Savoy. Of the misery the Colledge is in at this present, for not having a greater number of Cardinal Princes. Of the great pleasure the Popes take at the news of the death of any Cardinal. Of the Cardinals that are created by the Douzanes, and oblig'd to follow the interest of the Nephews. Of the cause why the Cardinal Princes do wear the Purple, and of the great honour to receive it. THE Magnificence of the Cardinalitial Colledge is so great, and its splendor so immense, the Cardinals themselves could not wish it to be greater. The respect and observance that is paid them, is very little different from what is given to Kings, and in some things they exceed the condition of Princes. Yet the Grandeur of the Sacred Colledge would have been much greater, if (after its first institution, or at least after the multitude of Prerogatives conferr'd upon it by so many several Popes, by whom it hath been inrich'd) it had maintain'd and continu'd its antient virtue and decorum. But I know not how it is come to pass, that the Popes either repenting that they had rais'd the Cardinals to so high a pitch of magni∣ficence, or that they did not regard (as it is too likely) the pulique benefit of the Church, postponing it to their own private interests. It is sufficient that they have en∣deavour'd not the conservation or advancement of the Cardinalitial Majesty, but the abasement and destruction of it, and that two several wayes, but one much more perni∣cious than the other. The first is, in having admitted into the Colledge persons of mean extraction, and of as little virtue, with which they are not able to cover in the least the baseness of their birth, for certainly it would be a less evil, had they either virtue or learning to attone for their natural defects. Nor would this be so despicable and dishonourable for the re∣putation of the Colledge, were the Caps given only to persons of mean extraction, but the worst is, they are conferr'd upon most infamous persons, abounding with all wicked∣ness and mischief, and perhaps fitter for the Galleys, than the Colledge.
The second is, that the same Popes (who with so many Bulls and Ordinances have ingandiz'd the Colledge) either forgetful of their former policy, or blinded by some Mundane passion, have for a certain time past given themselves over to lessen and abuse them, as has been many times seen, not only in the times of Paulus quartus, and Sexis quintus, and other Popes; but in the milder and more moderate dayes of Innocent the tenth, who upon a single relation (whether true or false) receiv'd by Azoleni, against the person of Cardinal Astalli (as shall be related in its proper place) without process, or information, nay I may say without any offence, prejudicial to the Church, or scan∣dalous to the Court, he us'd the said Cardinal Astalli so ill, he could not have us'd the greatest Rogue or Criminal worse; to which may be added the same usage that Cardinal Anthonio receiv'd from the same Pope. And after this manner it is, that the Cardinalitial dignity is brought into great obscu∣rity by the Popes themselves, which serves as an example likewise to the greater Princes, who seeing the Cardinals handled at that rate by the Popes, they in time take their op∣portunities to intrench upon their authority, and usurp upon them, inspight of all the clatter of Rome. Insomuch that there are some Cardinals asham'd as it were of their Pur∣ples, to see themselves subjected to the insolencies of mean persons, that for the most part are they that are advanc'd to the Papacy. To this purpose I remember, that one day two Cardinals of great judgement, talking together about the above said ill usage of the Cardi∣dinal of Rhetz in France, the elder of them, told the other, That it is better to be abus'd by a great Monarch, than a great Clown. Nor is this dignity ambitioned by Princes to add honour to their birth, but only because it is the office of the Cardinals as I have said be∣fore, to make election of their Popes. For this reason the greatest Monarchs are glad to have them their friends, and to oblige them with large pensions, which custom was in∣troduc'd by the Spaniards, amongst whom it is practis'd with more liberality; that the Popes may thereby be made the more inclinable to their party. There have been some Popes that have had it in design, to incraase the number of Cardinals, from seventy to a hundred, according to the example of Romulus the founder of Rome, who elected a hun∣hred persons, the most excellent in the whole City, and call'd them Fathers. But the Popes of this Age, who are so taken up, and devoted to the interest of their private Families, would with more readiness reduce, than increase them, in respect of the great reverences that are requisite to the dignity they possess, it being necessary they should leave some considerable subsistance to persons oblig'd to live in Pomp and Gran∣deur. Yet the augmentation of their number would be more advantage, because if their number was greater, the more frequent would their promotions be, and by consequence they would be the more able to create more creatures to for their Families and Nephews, which is the only thing their Holinesses think on. But on the other side, if things be consider'd more nearly, the smaller the number of the Cardinals is, the better for the Purse of the Nephews, for by that means they re∣ceive the profits of all vacancies, the Popes not making a promotion, but with a great deal of trouble, whilst they bestow all the vacant Rents of the Cardinals upon their Ne∣phews▪ who knowing very well there can be no better supply than ready money, they part with any thing that may furnish them with that. However they are zealously in∣dustrious to get whatever they can; the Popes whilst they are vigorous and strong, and free from infirmities and diseases, do keep their Cardinalships vacant and unsupply'd, drawing the whole profits to themselves; but when they find themselves sick, or in ex∣tremity, they fill them up immediately, as Ʋrban the eight did, who for seven years to∣gether did not create one Cardinal; but afterwards, towards the latter end of his Papa∣cy, he created fifteen at one Ordination, and eleven at another. And Alexander the seventh, would have put it off likewise to the last; yet the truth is, he left not the Sa∣cred Colledge long unsupply'd, because he had no other way to fortifie and sustain his own Family, but by augmenting the number of Cardinals with his own creatures. But it is time now we discourse something of the qualities, merits, customs and ad∣herences of all the Cardinals, to give the greater perfection to our Cardinalism, and the greater light and illustration to the Reader, by consideration of the natures and humours of all them that make up the Apostolical Colledge, which are in all sixty eight, viz. of
the creatures of Ʋrban, sixteen, of Innocent the tenths, twenty, and of Alexanders, thirty two (of Clement the ninths addition we shall speak in its proper place) and to avoid confusion, we shall proceed according to the order of preceedence, beginning with the creatures of Ʋrban, amongst whom FRANCISCO BARBARINO presents him∣self first to our consideration. This Cardinal is at present Dean of the Sacred Colledge, to which dignity he arriv'd after the death of Cardinal Carlo de Medici, Unckle to the Great Duke. I shall not in∣large my self here by the description of the Family of the Barbarini, which consider'd in the time when Florence was a Republique, appear'd to be equal, and in competition with the house of Medici, that had the preceedence of them all, which Family, in∣creasing in Riches and Grandeur, and growing by degrees to the Supremacy in command, the other could not brook the Tyranny of the Medici's, but dispers'd his branches here and there, and particularly in Rome; where Maffeo Barbarino being made Cardinal, Francisco, and Anthonio, two Brothers, and Sons of the said Maffeo's Brother, were put to study in a certain Colledge, in which, the esteem they had of them was so small, that the Sons of Artificers would scarce give them the place, especially to Francisco, who was so little known, so ill shap'd, and of so unrefin'd a wit, they could not believe him to be the Nephew of a Cardinal who was witty and judicious indeed, but otherwise fit for any thing else than to make a Pope. Fortune notwithstanding, who sports her self with whom she pleases, dispos'd things in that manner, that she render'd Cardinal Maffeo worthy of that dignity, in spight of the whole Colledge (if it be lawful for me to say so) who little thought of making such a man Pope as was inducd with so arrogant and haughty a mind. No sooner there∣fore was Maffeo leap'd into the Vatican by the name of Ʋrban, but he promoted Fran∣cisco to the dignity of a Cardinal in the very first Consistory, which was in the year 1623. on the second of October, with the Title of Saint Onofrio first, and then of Saint Agata, to the wonder of all those that would have thought it an injury to him, should they have said that he was in so short a time to leap over their heads. And Pope Ʋrban understanding how unfit this Nephew was for Councel, how little read in politick affairs, and in the interest of the Court, he kept him a while from the management of business, and did not suffer him to be present at any debate; and under the Title of Master of his Chamber, he gave him Monsignour Filo Marini to be his Tutor and Governour, which Filo Marini had serv'd the said Ʋrban in the same Character of Maestro di Camera. But it was not possible for Barbarino to submit himself to the Tutelage of Filo Marini, although he was but three and twenty years of age, he avoided not only his Councels as much as he could, but his Conversation and Company, having conceiv'd so great an aver∣sion to his person, that forgetting all the services he had done him, he endeavour'd to hinder his exaltation to the Cardinalship: a few months after he gave Filo Marini to understand that he should not take too much upon him, or behave himself as his School-Master, for he had judgement enough to govern himself and other people too. And in∣deed he began to govern after his own fancy, and with so much insolence, that he little regarded the displeasure either of the Court, or his Unckle, who to satisfie his pride and ambition, gave him the quality of Cardinal Padrone, that was never known in Rome be∣fore, nor usurp'd by any Nephew of the Popes. About the same time Ʋrban created Anthonio Brother to the said Francisco Cardinal, and sent both of them his Legats a Latere, Francisco into Spain, and Anthonio into France, one of them taking upon him the protection of one Kingdom, and the other of the other. Francisco obtain'd much more in Spain, than Anthonio did in France, returning with great presents and pensions, and with an affection wholly devoted to the service of that King, whom he afterwards alwayes observ'd with much more punctuality, than An∣thonio did the French King. For the space of ten years Ʋrban govern'd all the Dominions of the Church, as well Spiritual as Temporal alone, in which time he got the reputation of being one of the most renowned Popes that ever was in the Vatican, not permitting his Nephews to thrust themselves into any business, till they had twice receiv'd his commands from his own mouth; so that the Cardinal Barbarino, who had the Title of Padrone, could not
dispose of so much as one flower in the Garden of the Vatican without his Unckles knowledge; but the ten years being expir'd, and Ʋrban growing infirm, and overlay'd with so many cares, and diseases, Francisco began to lift up his head, and to take the whole Government of the Church into his hands, and to manage it with great Magistery and Dominion. But this absoluteness of his, brought him no small disrepute, for there∣by he palpably disgusted all the Princes of Christendom, even the King of Spain himself, upon his own private Capriccio, opposing the Abbot Perretti's having a Cap, though that King did earnestly desire it. But in this, Barbarino shew'd his great policy, revenging himself for a long time of Perretti, and preventing his having the Cap so cunningly, that the King had not the least shadow of suspition that it was he, but believ'd the fault to proceed rather from another. However this I shal say, that had not the Papacy of Ʋrban been so long, Francisco had not had so many occasions of disgusting the Princes, he having otherwise qualities worthy of a Pope, both in respect of his Learning, his Prudence, and the Candor of his Converse, which (though some people conceiv'd to be counterfit and forc'd) I could never imagine, he having given so many evident proofs to the contrary. The truth is, it being the nature of the Romans to look upon the Nephews as so many Devils, though they be never so good men (which notwithstanding happens but seldom) Francisco could not during the Pontificate of his Unckle obtain the least air of reputation, unless from the common people, in respect of the great alms that were given them, not only from his own house, but from the Coffers of the Church. Innocent the tenth, a sworn Enemy of the house of Barbarini, endeavour'd to debase it, and reduce it to its primitive State; so that not contented with the process made against Anthonio, he would needs take out new against Francisco, but there were not so many Articles against this, as against the other. However this persecution prov'd at last to the glory of the Barbarini, Pope Innocent recalling them from their Banishment in France, he made an alliance with them, and made use of them in the management of his principal affairs so much, that in his time Francisco began to get great credit, reconciling himself to all the Princes, and to the Colledge of Cardinals, so that after the death of the said Innocent, he wanted but little of leaping into the Vatican, having receiv'd in several Scrutinies, thirty four voices or more. Certainly, consider'd as a private person, this Cardinal deserves so much praise, as is not possible to describe; he is reckon'd of so immaculate and untainted a virtue, that he is by many people suppos'd to be a Virgin, and indeed I never heard the least scandal or aspersion upon his Chastity, he being alwayes a great Enemy of all sort of scandal. His manners were of that uprightness and integrity, that all those gifts that Saint Paul recommended to the Pastors of the Church, were applicable to him. There was never the least Oath or Blasphemy known to come out of his mouth; and if at any time he chanced to be transported with anger, he was never so far overcome, as to be carried out of his road of Modesty, for which he had alwayes a great value, abroad, as well as in his own Court. There is not a day but he performs his Divine Offices, as well of Charity as Devotion, and so frequently, and so devoutly visits the Church, that he makes all people believe him a Saint. Amongst all his Virtues, his Charity towards his Neighbour is most conspicuous, he relieves very liberally, not only those whose necessities are visible to every one, but such as are privately in misery, giving several largesses of Alms to the Widows, and Father∣less, and such poorer Families, as being asham'd to beg, are wont to starve betwixt four walls, before they can ask. In short, these works of Piety in him have so captivated the affections of the people, that 'tis verily believ'd, were the Election now in them, they would pull the present Pope out of the Vatican, to put Francisco in his place. But if we consider him as a Prince, his qualities are much different from his qualities as a private person, and I believe in those, few Cardinals can compare with him. In his irresolution he had no Peer, being so much unresolv'd, he can scarce be brought to a resolution after very long debates: his fear lest things should not succeed well, keeps him in so great a suspence, that he forgets still to come
to a conclusion. He believes no man so wise as himself, and therefore can hardly be brought to take advice from any body else, and if he does, he spoils all commonly with his arguments thereupon. The weakness of his judgement does not suffer him to undertake great matters, so that he alwayes endeavours to oppose them that would, contrary to his Brother Cardinal Anthonio, whose judgement is so strong, that it is an easie matter for him to believe the whole world may be put into his hands: besides, if at any time he has taken an impres∣sion of any thing, whether good or bad, into his mind, which indeed happens but sel∣dome; the power of God only is able to remove it, and not the Councel of man. His love to his Family is so great, that he advanceth them as if he Idoliz'd them, and thinks them impeccable, even at the same time he sees them offending. But all this would be nothing, were he not over-rul'd by a great desire of revenge, as being an implacable Enemy to all that he hates: however he is no Hypocrite to his Ene∣mies, for he carries that malice alwayes in his brow, that is rooted in his heart. Not∣withstanding all this, the defects that he has as a Prince, are obscur'd by his virtues as a private person, with which virtues he has so effascinated the hearts of the Court, that he is generally thought worthy of the Apostolick Chair. There are four things considerable in him, and capable to advance him to the Throne of the Vatican. The first, is the affection of the people, purchas'd as I have said by so many actions of Charity, that they do firmly believe he would not fail to find out some expedient, to ease the people of those grievances in which they are so miserably involv'd. The second, is his long practice and experience in publique affairs, there being not one Cardinal to be found more skilfull in the Intrigues of governing the Church; in the time of his Unckle, he Govern'd all, and in the time of Innocent, he did it further, who to∣wards the latter end brought him into no small reputatation, and though he had had some slips when he was Cardinal Padrone, and disoblig'd several Princes, however 'tis now be∣liev'd, being advanc'd in years, he will administer with greater maturity and judgement. The third, is the great Wealth of the Family of the Barbarini, besides vast sums of money lying by them, so as this argument of Eecting a Pope, whose Familie has no need of greater supplyes, as being already on the Pinnacle of Felicity, may perhaps in∣duce the Cardinals to exalt him, to stop the mouths of all Christendom which murmures incessantly against the Popes, who for the inrichment of their Families, give themselves over to the destruction of the Church. In short, if the Chair were vacant, his pretentions would probably bring it happily about, especially if with his infinite wealth, and above all, with his ready money, he should resolve to follow the example of Alexander the seventh, a most barbarous and abominable Pope, that made it lawful, at a very dear rate to purchase the voices of the Cardinals; and this infamous Merchandizing, was by many people believ'd to be shut up in this last Conclave; but it has been found clear contrary by all people, and but the in∣vention of false and malignant tongues, to pollute the reputation of the Barbarini, and the Conclave; such a thing being not to be believ'd in honesty, or piety (reasons of too weak foundation when a Kingdom is the price) or rather because Barbarino is studious of appearing as he is, would not, nor never will, by so foul an action, defile the lustre of his Virtues. And there wants not another way for him to make his utmost attempt, and that is, by endeavouring to get the Chigi to his side, that they may cooperate with the rest of his Creatures, the Spaniards being with him already, or at least not against him; but ob∣serving new rubs in his way, he betook himself to his Politicks, and prevail'd to have the Papacy thrown upon Rospigliosi, that is older and more infirm than he, as not de∣spairing but he may outlive him, and have a new push with his pretences; but I will say as another man did. Evecchio Barbarino, ed e Decano, Dean Barbarino is an ancient man, Ma e troppo dro, e saria gran fortuna, 'Tis hard, and would be strange, if ere he can Calcar due volte il soglio Vaticano. Twice get possession of the Vatican.
GINETTI is the next in order of preceedence to Barbarino, a person in his con∣verse, and inclination, different from him to a wonder, there being no conformity be∣twixt them, but in the integrity of their lives, and the irreprehensible preservation of their Chastity, both of them being believ'd to be Virgins. For other things, Ginetti con∣trary to Barbarino, would be a good Prince, as loving good Councel without an obsti∣nate adhaesion to his own opinion, a great enemy to Revenge, and a friend to all good Resolution. But on the other side, as a private person, he is very unfit in many respects, but espe∣cially for his extraordinary Avarice, for which he is called by an Antonomasia il Giudo, a vice that is, and will be much to his prejudice, having already render'd him ungrateful to all good people, and subject to many falsities and lies: and it may be said very truly, that this height and extravagance of Covetousness, has twice snatch'd the Papacy out of his hands. That Cardinals not thinking it possible he can be a good Prince that is so pol∣luted with a desire of gain, though otherwise of very great virtues and endowments. He was born in the City of Velletri, the Son of a Merchant▪ of but small fortune, yet very industrious in the acquisition of Wealth, and trading in trifles, so he might but turn the Penny; and from him it was Ginetti learn'd his Covetousness, and proved his Fa∣thers own Son. His name of Martio, made him never the more Martial, his inclinations bending him to Peace and not War, to idleness rather than labour; and finding the scarcity in his own house not agreeing with his desires, he came to Rome, and took upon him the Eccle∣siastical Habit, as proper to conceal the defects of his nature; and it fell out very well, for after he had courted certain Cardinals, he gave himself wholly to the service of the Barbarini, serving Cardinal Francisco, as he would have him himself, and with as much humility as was possible. And Barbarino well satisfied with his service, and approving the intireness of his dependance upon his Beck, made him be created a Cardinal, that he might be sure of one that would be true to his interest. And Ʋrban moreover, that he might stick the closer to his Family, declar'd him his Vicar in Rome, which is a conside∣rable charge; and for life, he gave him several other Benefices likewise, and great au∣thority in the Apostolical Pallace, and made him Protector of the Order of the Carme∣lits besides. Ʋrban also would needs have him acknowledg'd amongst the Princes, but 'tis most cer∣tain he had better have suffer'd him to have staid in Rome, than to have sent him his Legat into Germany to negotiate an universal peace amongst the Princes, seeing that Legation turn'd to his perpetual dishonour, by reason that he addicted himself more to the interest of his own Family, than of Christendome; but that which is most strange is, that at his re∣turn (as if to do the Church ill service, was to merit reward) he was declar'd Legat of Ferrara, where for three years time he heap'd up much wealth, and transacted under∣hand with the Jews themselves, and all to leave his Kindred rich, if he should dye before he arriv'd at the Popedom: he having not omitted any thing imaginable to advance them to divers offices, and civilize that rusticity that was natural to them. The affection he hath for his Family, and the desire he hath to advance them both in Honour and Wealth, though in him it be very exorbitant, yet 'tis a fault rather of the age, than of his person particularly: for in the Sacred Colledge at this very time (by the secret judgement of God perhaps) there is scarce one person to be found that is not overwhelm'd with that abominable Vice, and would not be glad to see the whole Trea∣sure of the Church in his private Coffers. Ginetti has three Nephews, and two Neeces, the elder that is a Prelat, helps much to∣wards the expiation of his Unckles miserableness, by the lustre of his own liberality; he is Chierico di Camera, and in his inclinations as bountiful, as his Unckle is sordid, noble in his conversation, studious, intelligent in matters of Law, and not ignorant in Poli∣ticks, and the art of Government; so that many believe the Papacy would be very hap∣py in the hands of Ginetti, because this Nephew would be as it were chief Minister, and mae good the defects of his Unckle. The other Nephew is a Prelat likewise, and in his nature resembles his Unckle, but not in his ablities; for that reason he is not much consider'd, every one being satisfy'd,
that though his Unckle should be elected Pope, he would never make much use of such a man as he. The third is a Secular, an honest man, but of very small parts, however his Unckle is pleas'd that he has marry'd him into the Family of Emilio Cavalieri, forasmuch as great Alliances carry no small advantages along with them. What to presage of him further I cannot tell, because he is fourscore and two years of age, and the Pope that was made not above three months since, is but seventy: and yet it happens many times the Lamb dyes before the Sheep; but though they have leap'd over his head twice already, he may live to be leap'd over again, though the Spaniard be his friend, he having alwayes carry'd himself with great circumspection towards him, and the Barbarini must acknowledge him their constant creature. If he should live to see another Conclave, in respect of his great age, he might possibly have a great party, though otherwise his extravagant parsimony would be no small im∣pediment; for it may be said with Pasquin; Ecco che nella giostra entra Ginetto, Ginetto for the Popedom (like a Dog) Grave d'eta, ne sperarebbe in vao, Does wait, nor would he meet with any clog, Se il Consistoro sifacsse al Ghetto. Were but the Consist'ry a Synagogue. ERNESTO ALDALBERTO d'ARACH, a Dutchman, troubles himself not much with the Court of Rome, for divers reasons, but especially because he finds the Ro∣mans to have as little regard for him; not but they have an opinion of his merits, but because he observes his Country to be almost alwayes infested with wars and troubles, so that every time he appears in Rome, he fills them with a thousand jealousies and sus∣pitions; and therefore with great prudence he keeps himself at a distance, and never comes to Rome, but upon a Vacancy, and then only to keep up the interest of the Empe∣rour, to whom he has alwayes been a most affectionate Subject, and not ingrateful for the benefits he has receiv'd. He was a Priest at the time Pope Ʋrban the eight conferr'd the Cap upon him at the in∣stance of the Emperour, to whom he had done so many transcendant services, that he seem'd oblig'd to advance him to a Cardinalship, there being nobody more worthy, both in respect of the greatness of his parts, and the goodness of his life; which qualities, gain'd him the Arch-Bishoprick of Prague also; which office he exercises so well, that the people adore him, all Nations reverence him, and the Germans acknowledge him a person of great Morality and Virtue. He has a great aversion to the artifices and dissimulations of the Court of Rome, and in the last Consistory for Clement the ninth, it astonish'd some of the Cardinals that were present, and had their residence in Rome, to hear with what frankness and integrity, he reprehended (in their private Congregations) those iniquities that afflict the Court, and are a scandal to the Church. This Cardinal in his converse is very affable, and familiar with every body; he is ve∣ry generous to his Servants, and no less charitable to the poor. He was promoted in the year 1626. the 19. o January. ANTONIO BARBARINO, a Floretine, is Brother to Cardinal Francisco, is Chamberlain of the Holy Church, has an infinite number of Abbeys, and Protections of Orders, and is Arch-Priest of Santa Maria Maggiore; he was born in Rome, and for that reason was call'd Romano. His Unckle made him Prior and Grand Croce di Mal∣ta; not being willing to violate the Decrees of the Popes, who do expresly forbid the making of two Brothers Cardinals. But Antonio being impatienty ambitious of a Cap, solicited his Unckle so earnestly, that he declar'd him Cardinal in the year 1628. though Francisco was not pleas'd with his preferment, and privately oppos'd it as much as he could. Great were the employ∣ments Pope Ʋrban conferr'd upon Antonio, being much pleas'd with the gallantry and generosity of his deportment; he was declar'd Generalissimo in the States of Bolonia, Fer∣rara, and Romania, against the Venetian, the Great Duke of Tuscany, of Parma, and Modena, and behav'd himself very honourably in his charge; but the people that were
saated with the Government of the Barbarini, and look'd upon that War with an ill eye, and as an affliction both to their Bodyes and Souls, approv'd not the manner of his proceedings, though in truth he knew well enough how to manage his affairs. The great inclination he has had to women, hath been no small blemsh to his reputa∣tion, nevertheless he knew how to wash out that stain. At first he was a great Enemy to learning, but he is since grown a great lover, and protector of it. Splendour and Generosity are so natural to him, he has gain'd off several creatures from other persons, by his liberality and magnificence, and although in the the opinion of the people he be fallen into some errors, yet he is so far from being hateful, he is exceeding∣ly grateful to the people of Rome. He uses great prudence in defending the interest of France, to which Crown he is infi∣nitely oblig'd; he speaks of the French with very great respect, but so, as to give no just offence to the Spaniard. Though he receives great emoluments from France, yet he spends much more than he receives in regaling the French. GIO. BATTISTA PALLOTTA of Caldrola in the Province of Marca, is the Nephew of the late Cardinal Pallotta, who left him not only his Estate, which was great, but his Maximes also: and a certain austere way of proceeding, in his distribution of Justice. The house of Pallotta deduces its nobility no further, than from the dignity of these two Cardinals, and particularly of him that is living, who had Benefices and dignities conferr'd on him, as soon as he had taken the Ecclesiastical Habit upon him. Ʋrban the eight loved him so well, he thought him a proper person to do the Church good Service, and therefore, as it were in the beginning of his Papacy, he declar'd him Governour of the City of Rome, in which office he gain'd the affection of the whole City, exercising all things impartially, without respect of persons, not regarding so much as the Nephews themselves; which was evident enough, when he order'd Cecca Buffona (a famous Courtezan, and very dear to to Cardinal Antonio) to be whipp'd thorough Rome▪ Cecca Buffona believ'd, under the protection of that Cardinal, she might do what she pleas'd, so that she made no scruple to transgress against a severe order of the Governour Pallotta, but he was not long in revenging it; and that he might do it with the less trou∣ble, and impediment, he charg'd his Servants, that for the space of two hours, nobody should be introduc'd to his Cabinet, where he shut himself up, whilst justice was execu∣ting upon her. Cardinal Antonio having the news of her Imprisonment, dispatch'd a Gentleman to Pallotta, who was very civilly entertain'd by his Domesticks, till the two hours were expir'd, and then he being brought into the presence of Pallotta, presented him with an order from the Cardinal Antonio, for the immediate inlargement of the Prisoner Cecca; Pallotta reply'd, his Eminence was his Padrone, and without more ado, gave order for her dismission. He arriv'd with his order at the Prison, just as the Officer brought her back from being whipp'd, which put the Cardinal into such a rage, he swore he would be reveng'd. Pallotta own'd all to his Holiness, who was well pleas'd with the action; but knowing well his Nephews humour, to prevent any mischief he might con∣trive against Pallotta he sent him in the quality of Collettore into Portugal, where in the maintenance of some Punctilio of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, he excommunicated the Royal Councel of the City of Lisbon; who sending their Officers to carry him to Pri∣son, he was forc'd to leap out of a window to escape, with no small danger of breaking his neck: and so posting to Rome, a few months after his arrival, he was promoted to the Cardinalship, in spight of Cardinal Antonio, who did his utmost to prevent it. But his promotion notwithstanding did not secure him against persecution, for he did not only meet with many troubles, and affronts, during the time of Pope Ʋrban, by means of Cardinal Antonio, who studyed day and night which way to do him an injury; but was forc'd likewise to retire out of Rome in the Papacy of Innocent the tenth, by the contumelyes he receiv'd from Donna Olimpia, incens'd against him for being one of those that endeavour'd her expulsion. His great zeal not induring to see a woman domineering in the Vatican. In the Congregations, and Consistories, his judgement is as much regarded as any mans, nay even by the Barbarini his profess'd Enemies themselves: his con∣versation
is pleasant, his life Angelical, and retir'd from all vain company. He is inclin'd to do good to all people; there is no body comes to him, but he goes satisfi'd away; he gives his Letters of recommendation very freely, provided it be not to restrain the hand of Justice; in that case he by no means concerns himself for any one, nor will hinder the course of Justice that is alwayes to be free. In his Legation of Ferrara he gain'd the ill will of the Venetian, by some controversies that they had, but certainly they had no reason to complain of him, because he upon all occasions speaks well of them: For the Crowns indeed he shews no great concern, as shunning all occasions of giving jealousie either to the one or the other: yet 'tis generally believ'd he is inclining to the Spanish party. He is more fear'd than belov'd in the Court; he is a man of great integrity, and irreprehensible in his conversation. In his transactions he is something too long and irresolute, and too much given to the affairs of the Fryers: Not only his Lodgings, but his Palace is perpetually full of Solicitors, in private affairs as well as publick; and it is believ'd by every body, that if he were Pope, he would go very far in the reformation of the Fryers. But this tediousness and delay in his affairs, may be excus'd by a certain abhorrence, and impatience of idleness that he has in his nature, that spurs him on to be doing, though it be never so little, and raises him business out of every trifle. Yet were his imploy∣ments greater, he would appear no less resolute than he was in his Government of Rome. For my part I think him not likely to come to the Papacy, and that out of chastisement to the People, that are not worthy of so good a Pope; for this I dare affirm, that in the whole Colledge of Cardinals there are not any more deserving the Chair than Pallotta, Farnese, and Elci, for their integrity, justice, love of the people, for their im∣partiality, and that they are not lovers of their Kindred; only Pallotta is seventy years old, and were it not for the Gout wherewith he is often tormented, he would be very healthfull and strong. FRANCISCO MARIA BRANCACCIO is a great Lord, and Knight of Nido in Naples, which is as much as to say, one of the principal Nobility. He receiv'd the Cap from Ʋrban the eighth, at a time when he little expected it, and was created, more in despight of the Spaniard, than for any merits of his own; for they going about to violate some of the Immunities of the Church, Brancaccio undertook to defend them, and caus'd the Captain of a Company of Spanish Foot, that was over-active against him, to be shot. The Spaniards resenting much the death of their Captain, (who was Ne∣phew to the President of that Province) sent out immediately to take the Cardinal (that was then Bishop of Carpasio) Prisoner; but he to avoid the violence of the Kings Officers, escap'd by night, and arrived safely at Rome, where within certain months he was made Cardinal, and gave occasion to a witty person to say, That he who kills one Spa∣niard is made a Cardinal, and he that kills two a Pope. Ʋrban did this to animate the rest of the Prelates against the Spaniards, and one there was that attempted in the same nature, but he was clapt in Prison, and came not out but with his heels forward. Brancaccio is a great Lord, moderately generous, but irresolute and inconstant. He loves Learning well enough, but gives not much countenance to learned men; he is a good Lawyer, and sustains only such causes as are equitable and just, which makes him to be thought worthy of the Papacy, though his excessive kindness to his Kindred, makes him not take the right way to attain it. The number of his Relations is infinite; for the House of the Brancaccio is so nume∣rous, and divided into so many several Families in that Kingdom, as will supply (upon occasion of his Exaltation) all the Charges and Dignities of the Church. So as should he live to see another vacancy, there would be but little hopes for him, the Spaniards having no great affection for him, though they pretend to be reconcil'd; and besides he has but a very small party of his own. He is about 69 years of age, much addicted to his pleasures, and too frequent at Balls and Comedies, though his age takes him off very much. ƲLDERIGO CARPEGNA of Ʋrbino, in regard of his Nobility, has some small respect in his own Country, but his poverty obscures it; and to the end he might not
alwayes remain so, he devoted himself with great assiduity to the service of the Barbarini: and they to remunerate his services, and adde another Creature of their to the Colledge, got him created Cardinal in the year 1633. the 28. of November. He is a great lover of Learning, and Learned men; he is a good man, of an exem∣plary life, but his parts not extraordinary; in affairs of State he is competently well practis'd, but the best is, he knows well enough he is not the most experienc'd man in the World, and therefore hearkens very readily to other peoples counsel, as having wit and judgement sufficient, to choose and select the most proper for his own affairs. His humour is something melancholly, but without asperity or moroseness, speaking alwayes kindly to every body; to the poor he is very charitable, and would be more, if his Estate would bear it. His complection is weak, and his age about seventy: He is a most partial Friend to the Great Duke and his Family, who would govern all in case of his exaltation to the Papacy: And the truth is, the Barbarini and the Grand Duke have endeavour'd his ex∣altation to the utmost in the Conclave of Chigi, but in this last there was no great men∣tion of him, because there were no Cardinals of the House of Medici to promote his interest. He has a Brother call'd Comte Mario, a name not at all acceptable in Rome, for Don Mario Chigi's sake, though he be of a humour clearly different; for this Count is of a good nature, and a profound judgement, so that were his Brother Pope, 'tis probable he would have the Government of all things. But if the Chair should come to be vacant, I know not what to say of him, he having nothing to recommend him but his being a Cardinal, nor nothing to support him but the Grand Duke; so as I shall say of him as they did in the last Conclave, Carpegna c'ha una debil complessione Carpegna's of a weak complection, Si tien spedito, perche questa volta And may despair of his Election, Li Medici non fanno ordinatione. Since Medici give no direction. STEPHANO DƲRAZZO, was born in Genoa, of a Noble Family, and conside∣rable amongst the greatest and most antient in that State, though his Order be but mo∣dern; his youth and his age were very different, for he may pray with all the reason in the world, Delicta juventtis mea, & ignorantias meas ne memineris Domine. And indeed before he was Cardinal, that is whilst he was a Prelate only, he regarded nothing but his pleasures, and indulging his Genius, playing from morning to night very often at Cards and other recreations, both with men and women, but especially with women, his nature inclining him more particularly to that sex; in so much that whilst he was young and under thirty, he was more than once or twice constrain'd to kiss the Holy Cross, and keep Lent with Bisket and hard Eggs only; nor can he now he is old number the money that he has spent upon Ladies, and Luxury. But as soon as he was made a Cardinal, he alter'd his humour so much, that it may be said, there are very few equal to him, in the unblamableness and devotion of his pre∣sent life. As soon as he took upon him the Ecclesiastick habit, he bought the Office of Chierico di Camera, and a while after that of Tesoriere Generale Apostolico; but he en∣joy'd that but a short time, for the Barbarini that they might have it to ell to another, made Durazzo a Cardinal, and as report goes at this day in Rome, there was a Present extraordinary in the case. Ʋrban the eighth having no mind he should be idle, gave him imployments good store, and particularly he made him Legate of Bolonia, in which Office he deported himself so well, he gain'd the universal affection of the people. But the Nobility look'd not so kindly upon him, because when Justice was in action he consider'd not the difference of degrees. He was likewise Legate of Ferrara, but he staid not his full time there, being oblig'd to give place to Cardinal Antonio, during the Wars with the Princes of Italy; so that he retir'd to his Archbishoprick of Genoa, from whence he seldom came forth unless it were to the Conclave.
There is nobody, but he perhaps could have told how to have disintangled himself from those many difficulties he met with in that Archiepiscopacy; he having upon sundry occasions disoblig'd the Senate. In his Conversation he is affable, but not alwayes of the same humour; so that oftentimes the best way is to comply with that, and they that know how to do it, obtain what they please themselves. He is accessible enough, but not too liberal to the poor, especially for a person of his fortune. He has not been over happy in the Election of his Vicars, there having been some of them that have serv'd him very ill. He seems to interest himself zealously for the Crown of Spain; but when it comes to an Election of the Pope, he does no great mat∣ter, which makes some people of opinion, he is for the French at his heart. If he has had hitherto any thoughts of being Pope, having past the seventy fifth year of his age, I imagine he has laid them by now. In the last Scrutiny he had seventen voices, and had he had thirty more, 'tis probable he might have carry'd it. But I shall speak no more of him, for at this very time▪ when I am concluding the aforesaid particulars, I have news that he dy'd the tenth of July; God Almighty send him peace, for he has left a great number of Masses for his Soul. GIƲLIO GABRIELLI a Roman, from the Chiericatura di Camera, was advanc'd to the Cardinalitial dignity without any merits of his own, only the good disposition of Ʋrban would have it so; and the Nephews were resolv'd to sell his place to another. He was made Bishop of Ascoli a while after, nobody else being to be found that would accept it, because it was so unreasonably overcharg'd with Pensions. But he ventur'd on it, meerly that he might have his residence out of Rome; according to the judgement of many, believing, that the less a Cardinal is present at Court, the more likely he is to ar∣rive at the Papacy; he is a true Roman, when he has a mind to discover himself freely, (which he does but seldome) he uses great variety of Complements, which at first were look'd upon as very great instances of his goodness by some persons, but since it has been generally known, that it was only to imitate and revive the Modes of Innocent the tenth, they have for the most part chang'd their opinion. In the time that he was Legat of Ʋrbin, under the Government of Ʋrban the eight, he shew'd no small rapacity, or (to give it a milder name) avidity; so it is, by his parsi∣mony, and other ways, he has known how to inrich his own Family vastly, and would do it more, should it come into the Cardinals heads but to make him Pope; but I see no great probability of that now, for Clement the ninth, that is but lately Elected, is a year younger than Gabrielli, and will scarce leave him his place so soon. It is true, he has the Spaniard on his side, with whom he holds correspendence; but for the future 'tis sup∣pos'd his intelligence may be greater with the French, in respect of an allyance he pretends to have with the Cardinal Vandome. He has many other noble Kindred, as being ally'd to several of the principal Families in Rome, as the Altieri, Lancelotti, Coccini, and others. The people of his Diocess are not wes satisfy'd with him, not for any defect in the exercise of his Pastoral Cure, but because he press'd and exacted several Taxes that were impos'd by the Pope. His virtues are, that being conscious of his own ignorance, he endeavours what he can to improve himself, and to that purpose disdains not the conversation of learned men, in whose company he is very sweet and affable, but something too ceremonious. Some there are, that look upon him as malacious, and revengeful, and truly I think him so, but it is only in great and serious matters that he shows it, for small things he passes over with gentleness enough. He was promoted in the year 1641. VIRGINIO ORSINO a Roman, known all Europe over, as well as in the Court, is esteem'd by all that understand the merits of the house of Orsino; this Family of Orsino has for several ages past, kept the Barbarians from Rome, and preserved the Apostolick Chair in tranquility, so that with good reason may it be said, that the whole Church of God are particularly oblig'd to the Orsini, and that the Popes will be very ingrateful, if they suffer not them to have a Cap now, as they have formerly had, there having been above three hundred Cardinals in that Family. He was an Abbot; and whilst it was in agitation to make him relinquish his Abbey,
to qualifie him to marry the Princess Ludovisi, Pope Ʋrban being alarm'd at the con∣junction of two such Families, to prevent the match, promoted him to the Cardinal p, as soon as he understood the design. Some there are that imagine he was made a Cardinal at the great instance of Cardinal Antonio, who induc'd by the importunity and presents of the Duke of Bracciano, Unckle to the Cardinal Orsino, who being troubl'd to see his Family without a Cap, apply'd himself so effectually to the Cardinal Antonio, that at length he obtain'd his desire. But for my part I cannot believe it, for his Nephew the Abbot, by his virtue, and his parts, did sufficiently deserve a Cap, besides the nobility of his house; and in truth the Colledge of Cardinals receives more honour to have one of the house of Orsino, to be a Member thereof, than the house of Orsino to have a Cardinalship; and therefore 'tis not to be believ'd that those advantages can have made him purchase that so dearly, that was due to him without it. Formerly the house of Orsino was of the Spanish faction, but now it has the Protection of France, and his most Christian Majesty has Cardinal Orsino in great estimation, and not unreasonably, for there is not any body that regards the interest of that Crown with more ardour and integrity, than that Cardinal does. Some years since, to the great dissatisfaction of the Spaniard, he was declar'd Pro∣tector of Portugal, yet the Marquiss of St. Romano forbore not to invite him amongst the rest of the Cardinals when he made his Entry into Rome; but repenting of it afterwards, he sent to him that he should not incommode himself, unless he would declare upon what score he would send his Coach, lest afterwards he should give out he sent it as Pro∣tector of Portugal. This was reckon'd a great weakness in the Ambassador, and a thing that might have produc'd ill consequences to himself; but all was pacify'd and set right again before the Entrade, by the interposition of Monsignor Burlemont, a person of great worth, that by the prudence of his deportment does the French great honour in Rome. This Cardinal is much respected in Rome, because he is much fear'd, some people be∣lieving him vindicative, but his anger is only a sudden impetus, not lasting or durable at all. In one of the Congregations held during the vacancy of the See after Alexander, the revocation of the Decree made by the Congregation of Ceremonies, about the Title and Entertainment the Cardinals were to give the Roman Princes, being propos'd and press'd by the Cardinal Aquaviva, Orsino was so much disgusted, that he departed an hour be∣fore the Congregation did rise, and continued in open defiance with the said Cardinal. He lives splendidly enough, if we consider what he has, and keeps up that Grandeur, and Liberality, that have been alwayes connatural to his Predecessors. There are some that asperse him with Pride, but unjustly; for he is very civil to all persons that come near him, and particularly obliging in his Letters, which he vouch∣safes to return in very familiar language to all that write to him, especially if they be of any quality. RINALDO d'ESTE a Modenese, is a Prince of an Angelical life, a great Ene∣my to Epicurism, and voluptuousness, which in some Cardinals Princes seems to be their only design, they being oftentimes ambitious to be Cardinals for no other end, but to live profusely and high. Yet is not this Cardinal so severe, but that he uses such recreations and divertisements as are honourable, and may consist with the dignity of his place. Amongst the rest of the Virtues in this Prince▪ there are two more especially resplen∣dent: one is his affability in treating readily with all such as come to him, making no scruple, as others do, to give access to every body, and to dispatch them with good sa∣tisfaction: the other, is the great affection and alacrity with which he protects all such as have their recourse to him, and to be protected by such a person, is not amiss. All the world holds him very well read in the Art of dissembling, and keeping his de∣signs close and reserv'd: yet he could not dissemble at the news that was brought him, that the Admiral of Castile, Ambassador extraordinary from the Crown of Spain, had declar'd at his arrival at Rome, that he would visit all the Sacred Colledge, but the Car∣dinal d'Este; which the Cardinal disdaining, he took a resolution to go immediately to
Rome, where having entred into some difference with the Ambassadour, they both fell to their Arms, and as some Histories report, put the whole City into confusion. Nor could he dissemble any more when Pope Ʋrban told him, that he did believe, that he having been formerly against the Family of the Barbarini, and now tack'd about to their side, did it only to obtain the Abbey he desir'd, with which the Cardinal was very much net∣led, and reply'd hastily, I suppose your Holiness likes not my being in Rome, if I were sure of it, I should depart immediately; and the Pope having told him, God be your speed, the Cardinal took Coach forthwith, and return'd to Modena. This Abbey of Nonantola came into his hands by means of the Marriage the Barbarini made with the Duke of Modena his Nephew, the Barbarini having given nothing to that Cardinal, but that Abbey which yeilds him but twenty thousand Crowns a year at the most. He was promoted to the Cardinalship in the year 1641. the 16. of December. CESARE FACCHINETTI, is a Gentleman of Bolonia, Innocent the ninths Ne∣phews son. He is a worthy person, and lives with the reputation of an honest and pru∣dent man. He hath been imploy'd in the principal offices of the Court, and has shown great judgement and dexterity in them all, but especially when he was Nuntio in Spain, where he carry'd himself so well, he got the applause of the whole Nation, the King de∣claring him a person of worth, and recommending him to his Holiness, so as upon his return, he was made a Cardinal by Pope Ʋrban. He was afterwards made Bishop of Sigaglia, a strong City and Port in the Dutchy of Ʋrbin; but his merits being more worthy, he had the Bishoprick of Spolto given him in exchange, where he now remains, to avoid all occasion of involving himself in the interests of the Court, which are too often but a prejudice to such persons of desert, as think that way to advance their fortunes, though many believe the way to arrive at the Papacy, is to keep out of Rome. He has no Cardinals his Enemies in the whole Colledge: the Spaniards are his friends, and the French have no reason to complain on him; his merits also are so great, that if the See were vacant, he would have no small party for his Election. But the mischief is, an unlucky custom that is lately introduc'd, and that is, that the Nephews of the last Pope, will have one of their own creatures to succeed him. He was promoted to the Cardinalship in the year 1643. the 13. of July. GIROLAMO GRIMALDI a Genoese, was promoted to the Cardinalship by Pope Ʋrban, and that for four reasons. The first was, because he was born of one of the principal Families of Genoa, with the quality of Soveraign, as he was Prince of Monaco. The second was, to recompence the office of Chierico di Camera that was purchas'd by the said Grimaldi, and devolv'd afterwards to the benefit of the Pope. The third was, the prudence of his carriage in his Government of Rome, with which he gain'd the affection of the whole people, as also when he was Nuntio in France, and began with all integrity imaginable to incline to the interest of that Crown. And the fourth was, to find him so firm to the service of the Barbarini his Nephews. By several persons I have been inform'd of his qualities and humour, in the relation of which, his virtues and his frailties have been describ'd as follow. He is said to be very thoughtful and cogitative, a great designor, jealous of himself, bold in his enterprises, and full of tricks and windings to support them, inclin'd to his own accommodation, though with never so much inconvenience to his Neighbour, a friend to Novelties, pleas'd to hear his enemies ill spoken off, a free discoverer of his own mind, and not a little given to the conversation of Ladies. As to his Virtues, they say he has many likewise, with which the French were much taken; and particularly he is loving and courteous, and desires with gentleness to satisfie all that have business with him; he is respectful to all people, without exception of per∣sons, that is, every one according to his degree; he rewards his servants liberally, and willingly receives the recommendations of his friends; he loves learned men, and de∣lights himself to converse with them in the time of his recreations; he has a quick judge∣ment, and discerns very well betwixt what is to be retained, and what is to be rejected; in short, he is well beloved both at Rome, and at Paris, as a person dexterous inbusi∣ness, and exquisite in the most eminent affairs.
CARLO ROSSETTI of Ferrara, was a wild and dissolute young man, and insolent in all the Company he came; and because ordinarily the Italians believe, to put a Reli∣gious habit upon such shoulders as his, is to consecrate a Sacrifice to God, Rosetti was advised to repair to Rome, and take the Ecclesiastick habit upon him; which he did im∣mediately, and apply'd hemself to the service of the Barbarini, who were then regnant, and particularly to Francisco, who took so extraordinary an affection to him, that he provided him such imployments as might lead and introduce him into the Colledge of Cardinals. He was sent in the quality of Nuntio into England, to negotiate with that Kingdom for the ease of the Catholicks, but his Negotiation had but little success, his life being in no small danger amongst those tumults; and indeed he would have withdrawn him∣self with more reputation, had he been wiser: but he had much ado to scape with his life. When he was Nuntio at Colen with Chigi, he spoil'd all that transaction, by the too much partiality he shew'd to the Spaniard, and had not the prudence and conduct of Chigi been interpos'd, all things had gone top-si-turvy: At which he took so great a dis∣pleasure, that he alone oppos'd the Election of the said Chigi, although he saw the Bar∣barini on his side, to which Family he was gratefull only in this, that he oppos'd him∣self publickly against Pamsilio's Election, and for no other reason but that the Barbarini were against him. In short, in the person of this Cardinal, there are two things considerable, his moral vertue, and his politick dexterity; as to the last he never had any great success in all his Negotiations, either that he had no fortune, (which oftentimes has its share in the greatest transactions) or that he had not that subtilty or sagacity in business as is ne∣cessary. It is enough that he deserv'd not the Title of an Excellent Politician, though some of his Friends, and particularly in the Grand Dukes Court, do cry him up for an Arch Politician: But they that look nearer upon him, do but laugh at those Elogiums. As to his morals, he is indeed worthy of commendation, not having given the least scandal since he took the habit upon him. He is inclin'd to do justice impartially, and therefore in the Bishoprick of Faenza where he is ordinarily resident, he is belov'd of all people; he is charitabls to the poor, especially if they be sick; he is zealous of the Worship of God, and has other vertues that render him worthy of being Cardinal and Bishop, but not Pope, which is no less Prince. He was promoted to the Cardinalship 1643. the 13. of July. GIO. STEPHANO DONGHI is a Gentleman of Genoa, worthy of the Purple from the very time he took upon him the Ecclesiastical habit, yet it was not his worth, but his wealth, that open'd the door to his promotion to the Cardinalship. He first bought one of the Clerkships di Camera, and a while after Cardinal Spada's negotiation proving unhappy, he was sent into Lombardy in the quality of Nuntio and Plenipotentiary, to agitate the Peace with the Princes of Italy, in which imployment he spent above fifty thousand Crowns of his own money, and being return'd to Rome, he complain'd very much of the Barbarini, that so many persons of less merit than he, were preferr'd before him that had done such service to the Church, and that Family, at his own trouble and expence. In so much that Ʋrban to avoid the imputation of in∣gratitude, and that he might have the Clerkship di Camera to dispose of again, promoted him to the Cardinalship on the 13. of July 1643. in which Dignity he behaves himself with so general applause, that they have good reason to bless God for his promotion. In his Legation of Ferrara he acquir'd immortal reputation, as a person that under∣stood which way to distribute justice, with sweetness; and upon several occasions he oblig'd the Venetian so, that they give him the greatest commendation imaginable. He is apparently engag'd to follow the interest of Spain, his whole Family depending upon the protection of that Crown, yet he manages himself with that prudence, that he gives no disgust by his expressions, to the other party. As he is rich, his expences are great, but it is in things that are honourable and ne∣cessary, not in vanities and trifles. He is of a benign, affable, and pleasant nature, and
charitable above all, so that were it not for his unhappiness in being a Genoese, he would be very worthy of the Popedom. PAƲLO EMILIO RONDANINI, the last Cardinal of Pope Ʋrbans Creatures, he was promoted the 13. of July 1643. and that for two reasons especially: The first was the desire the Barbarini had to be selling his Office of Chierico di Camera, and finger∣ing the money. The other was, to recompence the several services he had done them, particularly when at his own charges he rais'd a Troop of Cuirasiers for the service of the Barbarini, against the Princes of the League. He has many virtues that render him worthy of the Dignity he possesses, but those virtues are eclips'd by certain natural defects, and above all by his pride, he disdaining to take notice of the salutes that are given him; but he is striving by art to correct these infirmities in his nature: he loves to be accsted, and comes not with the last to Come∣dies and Pastimes. In matters of business he is not much considerable, his brain is too weak to receive any thing of consequence, though he should engage himself in any such affair, so as I fancy he will dye before he will arrive at the Papacy, and be content ra∣ther to enjoy what he desires. It follows now that we speak of the Cardinals created by Innocent the tenth at several promotions, which are now living, and the first that presents himself is NICOLO LƲ∣DOVISI a Bolonian, who was advanc'd to the Cardinalship on the sixth of March 1645. This Lord obtain'd the Cap by fortune meerly, his merits not rendring him worthy of that honour, though he was endued with judgement and other qualities good enough for a Prelate. The Cardinal Colonna about the beginning of the Papacy of Innocent, resign'd the Archbishoprick of Bolonia to him, but so over-charg'd with Pensions, there remain'd not a thousand Crowns clear, for the maintenance of himself and his Court. His friends ad∣vis'd him not to engage himself in that manner, nor to undertake so troublesome a Cure, where the profit and reputation was so small; for it was the general discourse that Colonna had a long time sought out for a person that would accept of it, and could find none, it seeming impossible to most people to live with so great a charge. So that it may be ra∣tionally concluded, that the Archbishoprick was not conferr'd upon him in consideration of his merits, so much as of the Pensions that were upon it; however the Nephews out of an ambition of having an Archbishoprick at their devotion in their own Country, en∣courag'd him to take it, and he did so. The Prince Ludovisi being about this time married to a Neece of Pope Innocents, was consequently introduc'd into the favour of the said Pope, though but indifferently, (Donna Olimpia not suffering his greatest graces to depend upon any but her own autho∣rity;) he began to imagine it would be convenient to have a Cardinal in his own Fa∣mily, that he might have the better intelligence of the secrets of the Court; and rumi∣nating with himself of this, and of that, the Archbishop came at last into his mind, who was his Cousin by the Mothers side, and carry'd the Name of Nicolo Albergati; so that he entreated his Holiness at his request to confer a Cap upon the said Albergati, but upon condition he should renounce the Name of Albergati, and be call'd Cardinal Ludovisi. His Holiness satisfi'd the desires of the Prince, and dispatch'd away a Brief immediately with the conditions propos'd by the Prince; which Albergati made no difficulty to ac∣cept, and to take upon him the Name of Ludovisi and the Cardinalship together, which in Honour and Nobility exceeded much the Name of Albergati; and these were the degrees by which this person ascended to the Purple. All the expences that are usual in such cases, were defray'd by the Prince, for his own poverty affording him little to spend, he made use of the House of the Prince, his Cousin, as if he had been his own Brother. The Pope having an eye upon his indigence, gave him some other means to sustain him∣self, and among the rest made him Chief Penitentiary, and sent him Apostolick Legate to Florence, to Christen a Son of the Great Dukes. In which Legation he was presented with very fine Arras Hangings, and other curiosities for his Chamber, the Grand Duke very well understanding what he had principally need of. Many believe that in time, being a little ripened with age, he may raise his fortunes in some Conclave or other; and this their opinion is founded upon the exemplanariness
of life which he pretends to (though many suspect it to be but forc'd from the exactness with which he has govern'd his own Church) upon the reputation all his Brothers carry in Bolonia, being esteem'd persons of judgement and integrity, and upon the affection the Spaniards bear to him, whose interest upon all occasion he takes great glory to espouse. These reasons amongst the common people do ascertain him to be Pope, but they that understand him better, and converse with him often, are of another opinion, and do find him uncapable of governing such a Kingdom, by reason of his invincible obstinacy, which is so natural, and so great in him, that amongst many it is counted perfect madness; for he renders himself thereby unacceptable to all that deal with him, especially when they treat of matters of Conscience, he is so refractory, all the arguments in the world are not able o alter his opinion. This is the judgement of him amongst the Cardinals; but it may be when he grows riper in years, this obstacle may be remov'd, for excessive obstinacy is doubtless an ob∣stacle to any that pretend to the Papacy, as may easily be prov'd by the example of Sex∣tus the fifth, who was the most fantastical and gddy headed person in all the Cloysters; yet when he came to be Cardinal, ambitious of fishing in the Sea of Saint Peter, he offer'd violence to his nature, counterfeiting meekness so much, that he was counted ig∣norant, submitting alwayes his own opinion to the judgement of the other Cardinals. If he will do so, the Papacy 'tis possible may fall into his hands, whereas otherwise he will fall out of the hands of the Papacy, as he fell out of the Padronage. When Inno∣cent took his resolution to create a Cardinal Padrone, for his assistance in his Pastoral Cure, the Prince with all the importunity he was able, recommended the said Cardinal Ludovisi his Kinsman; but Innocent knew him too well, deny'd to satisfie the Prince, and promoted Astalli to the peace, not that his Talents were greater than the others; but be∣cause Panzirolo (who had great influence upon his Holiness) had told him, that he was a person able to distinguish betwixt good and evil, that he was solid in his Councils, and not peremptory in his opinions as Ludovisi was; it is enough to say that Ludovisi was laid aside, and Astalli, receiv'd into the place; and indeed it was better for him to have been rejected, than to have run the same fortune with Astalli, which will be memorable in all Ages. ALDARANO CIBO da Massa di Carrara, was promoted to the Cardinalship the 6. of March 1645. Innocent alwayes lov'd him very well, and look'd upon him as worthy of preferment; insomuch, that as soon as he was created Pope, he declar'd him Maggior-domo of the Apostolical Pallace, he having in his Prelacy gain'd some reputation; and afterwards made him Cardinal in the year aforesaid, both for his particular inclination to his person, and a respect he bore him as he was descended from the Noble Family of the Cibo in Genoa, from whence Innocent the eighth was descended. But the principal motive, ac∣cording to the common opinion was, because Innocent was perswaded by Donna Olimpia to get Monsignor Cibo's Palace that was joyning  his own, and laying them together, to make a magnificent one for the Family of Pamfilio: which design being apprehended by Cibo, he made his Holiness a present of it, refuring any consideration. And though the Pope paid for it, would by no means accept it as a gift; yet it left an obligation up∣on him, that he was offer'd it, so that for this reason, and the other, he created him a Cardinal, in which dignity he has comported himself so well, he has the applause of the whole Court, and will increase i dayly, he being esteem'd a person of great justice and integrity; and in his Church di Jsi, where he ordinarily resides, his reputation is so great amongst the people of that Country, that they swear there cannot a more worthy Pastor be found in the whole Universe. In two Lgations that he perform'd, he signaliz'd himself so, that he acquir'd the reputation of a great Statesman, and a person proper for the highest imploy∣ments. He is very studious, and indeed a little too much, for his study makes him something Melancholly; his diversion is Musick, which delights him exceedingly, especially if it be Spiritual Musick. He is Spaniard both in his inclination, and interest, his Family being all under the protection of that Crown.
He is as retir'd, as he can possibly, which makes all people suspect he aspires to the Pa∣pacy, and in my opinion, were merits rightly consider'd, he might obtain it; but the mischief is, in the Conclaves at present, the interest of factions, and nor the merit of the person, carryes it, would the Cardinal satisfie their own Consciences, and give their voices for so worthy a person, there might be some good expected from such an Election, the Church would certainly be better serv'd, and the State better govern'd; provided he chang'd not his humour as Alexander the seventh did, who of a Saint of a Cardinal, be∣came a Devil of a Pope as soon as he receiv'd the Keys; which will make the Cardinals consider for the time to come, before they give their Votes for an honest man, that is, for such an one as counterfits, and pretends honesty only, which I cannot believe of this person. FEDERICO SFORZA a Roman, is a most considerable person in respect of the Nobility of his Family, that have formerly been Dukes of Milan, with the Title of Soveraignty, besides an infinite number of Cardinals, that have render'd it conspicuous with their Scarlet. In the Pontificate of Ʋrban, he took upon him the Habit of a Prelat, with hopes to obtain what he has now got; but he could not reach it in that Popes dayes, nor get any higher than to be Vice-Legal of Avignon, which was given him by Cardinal Antonio, with promise also of a Cap; but that promise vanish'd into smoak, Cardinal Antonio finding excuses enough, to withdraw himself from his word. Innocent the tenth, that so noble a Family might not be without that Purple, created him a Cardinal 1645. and because he knew he was disgusted at the manner of Antonio's proceeding with him, he gave him the office of Chamberlain, which the said Antonio was possess'd of, but rather in despight to Antonio, than affection to Sforza; who (without regard to those benefits, being unable to bridle his nature, that was alwayes inclin'd to speak his Sentiments freely against whoever it was) fell a murmuring against Donna Olimpia the Popes Cousin, with such Satyrical arguments, that she not being able to bear them, was forc'd to put him out of favour with his Holiness, who discharg'd him of his office of Chamberlain (which was no small honour and advantage to him) and oblig'd him to retire to his Bishoprick of Rimini. He was alwayes thought a Frenchman in his humour, by the activity of his spirit, and the liberty of his tongue, besides, that his residence at Avignon, had contributed its share. But for all this, he follow'd the Spanish interest, in which he prosper'd very well; se∣veral were the causes that mov'd him thereto; the first inducement was the rich Ecclesi∣astical preferments that were given him by the Spaniard; the second, in aversion he had to Mazarine, with whom he could not possibly hold correspondence, if he were for the French; the third was, that he could not (as he said himself) go along with the designs of the Cardinal Antonio; and the last, because his Father held several Feuditary Lands, as Heir to a Milanese Lord, that was his Kinsman, in the Dutchy of Milan. The Cardinal Antonio did really show this Cardinal Sforza a Roman trick, and that was the reason of his animosity: he kept him in so sly a suspence for the Cardinalship, that Sforza resolv'd to let him have his Pallace of Sforza, as it were for a song, An∣tonio perswading him he should not fail of his Cap; but the contract being made and secur'd, not a word of the Cap more, which netled Sforza to the quick. At present things seem to be compos'd, yet every time that Sforza looks upon that Palace, that is since given by the Cardinal Antonio to the Crown of France, for a Resi∣dence to the French Ambassadors, it troubles him to the heart. In short, this Cardinal has a head more for a Souldier than a Priest, is fear'd at Court rather than beloved, and given to all kind of pleasure. BENEDETTO ODESCALCO of Como, was promoted with Sforza, and the rest, the 6. of March 1645. His design was from his youth to put himself into the Prelacy, and therefore in the be∣ginning of Ʋrbans Pontificate, he began to court the Cardinal Barbarino, with hopes to obtain the Clerkship di Camera; to which end, he not only gave him moneys by way of advance, but quickn'd and reminded him dayly by some new present or other, so that
Barbarino was oblig'd to procure him that office, in which he left him for a while, and design'd to promote him to the Cardinalship, which was the principal thing Odescalco aim'd at. Pope Ʋrban being dead, ambition augmented in the breast of this person, that could not sleep for contriving which way he should arrive at the Cardinalship; he knew he was well enough provided with wealth, and therefore thought it best to take that way, to ingratiate himself with Donna Olimpia, Cousin to Innocent that succeeded Ʋrban; he presented her several times very nobly, and amongst the rest, he gave her a most stately Cupboard of Silver Plate, which was the thing indeed that open'd the way to his Cardi∣nalship: for Donna Olimpia being oblig'd by his presents, that she might not be tax'd with ingratitude, and that she might give encouragement to other pretendors in the Court, to address themselves to her in the same way, she went to her Cousin the Pope, and begg'd a Cap for Odescalco, which she obtain'd, but not without the intercession of Cardinal Pallotta also. Whilst he was but a Prelate, he took great delight in Comedies, and Balls, and such recreations; but since he has been a Cardinal, he has alter'd his wayes, and taken such as are more necessary and direct for the acquiring the Papacy: many people wonder at the great charge in him, from so great a liberty in his life (yet not to vice) to see him retir'd to that degree, as if he hated now, what he formerly lov'd. He is of the humour of the Lombards, free, and without Hypocrisie, and cannot hold from speaking his mind whether it be good or bad; resembling Cardinal Sforza very much in that point, with whom he is a great correspondent, and is often seen in his company. But Sforza is more fierce and violent, which passion over-masters his judgement, whereas Odescalco is more moderate. He is no great Politician, yet he is wise enough to make use of the policies of other people. The Spaniards love him very well, because he professes himself their true Subject, and in the whole Colledge, I believe he has scarce an Enemy, unless it be the Cardinal Impe∣rial▪ and that by reason he was one of those that decreed his Banishment, upon the at∣tempt that was made upon the French Ambassadour in Rome, which so disgusted Im∣periale, that in the last Conclave he did Odescalco all the mischief that he could, who paid him again in his own Coyn according as he was able. LORENZO RAGGI Bishop of Casania in Sicily, is descended of a new Family in Genoa, not many years since introduc'd into the number of the Noble houses. In the time of Ʋrban the eighth, he had the Treasurership General of the Church given him, at the request of his Unckle Cardinal Raggi, who went under the name of Ottavia∣no, and was one of the most ridiculous persons that ever was seen in the Colledge; he was ignorant, dissolute, and malicious, and so impertment, he order'd a Cardinals Habit to be made for him (before he was promoted to the Cardinalship) and put it on two or three times a day in the presence of his Servants, commanding them to tell him how it sate upon his back, who could do no less than to give him such answers as he would like: animated therefore by an ambition of that dignity, he went to the Pope one night late, in the habit of a Cardinal, who lov'd him very well for several reasons, but especially for the simplicity he observ'd in him: as soon as he came into his presence, and had kiss'd his foot, he told him, Most Holy Father, I beseech you to vouchsafe to gratifie the Old man my Father, and make me a Cardinal, 'tis a thing he desires very much, but I ten times more. In the next Promotion after this gentile visit, Ʋrban created him a Cardinal, where∣upon, as soon as he had receiv'd his Cap, he went immediately to giver his Holiness thanks, and imbrac'd him in the most ridiculous manner in the world. The Pope desir'd him to desist, and told him, That he hurt him, to which he reply'd, I am so glad that I am made a Cardinal, that I could eat you for joy. In short, he that would recount all the impertinencies of this person, would make the best fare in the world, and worthy to be recited at a Carneval. When the Nephew Lorenzo was made Treasurer as aforesaid, he call'd him to him, and in the presence of all his Courtiers told him, Nephew, if you have a desire to arrive at that dignity I am at, you must study, and be sure you follow my steps: which words of his, set not only his Servants a laughing, but the Nephew himself.
This Nephew, who at present is Cardinal Raggi, his Unckle being dead, was by the Barbarini made Superintendant General of the Gabels, through the whole State Eccle∣siastick, and that for no other reason, but because he was known to be a great friend to Parsimony and Thrift: and the Barbarini believing that he being ambitious of a Cap, he would not fail to be a friend to their Coffers; nor were they mistaken, for Monsignor Raggi that he might be serviceable to them in heaping up money, and to satisfie himself in his covetous humour, carry'd himself so ill in his imployment, that he gave occasion to several disorders, and particularly in the raising Armes against the Duke of Parma, and the Princes of the League, at which time the Souldiers could not receive their money, though the Pope had given express order they should have four Musters pay: In so much that the next day after the Election of Innocent the tenth, the Souldiers appointed as a Guard to the Conclave, fell a plundering whatever they met with, and because Raggi would give them but one half of their pay, they took it so ill, they with great fury fell upon the place where their money was, broke up the Chests, and carry'd all away they could find; and in that rage, they assaulted the Palace of Don Tadeo, searching every where up and down for Raggi; but he having notice of their designs, leap'd out of a window to save his life: And indeed so highly were they incens'd, every body was affraid of some popular revolution, which had certainly fallen out, had not Pope Innocent (who was but newly elected) apply'd remedy immediately. Such a business as this, could do no less than give offence to the whole Court, and to imprint a disgust against the person of Raggi, in the breast of the Pope; so that every one believ'd his Office would be taken away, because it was privately hinted to him, that he should offer to resign it: But it happen'd clear contrary, for in the year 1647. in the month of October, he was created Cardinal, to the admiration of the whole Court; though afterwards, when he was promoted to that Dignity, he fram'd himself exceed∣ingly to the Customes of the Court of Rome, which in him appear'd more remarkable than in any other person, because he understood how to accompany them with such Ceremonies, as allure and inveagle the hearts of all such as have business with him. But when it comes to the drawing of his purse-strings, he does no great matter; all that is to be got, is but civility and good words: he has a smattering in Learning, and if he would study more, he would become more considerable. His manners and humour would not be ill, were they not obscured by his ambition and avarice, vices that have too great dominion over him. In the Court he passes for an indifferent person, and is spoken of only as he makes him∣self notorious by his defending the interest of Spain, he being one of the most Spanioliz'd Cardinals of them all. To be short, he is about 45. years of age; he abounds not over much with charity; he is a Genoese, and by consequence out of all hope of being Pope, unless the face of affairs be alter'd. But he seems not to have any ambition for it, because he does not take the right way to arrive at the Papacy; so that though the face of affairs should alter, there would be but little hopes for him. FRANCISCO MALDACHINO, is the Son of Marquess Andrea Maldachino, that was Collateral General to all the State of the Church; he was promoted to the Cardinalship, out of the great affection his Holiness bore to Donna Olimpia, Sister to the said Marquess, and Cousin to the Pope, the seventh of October 1647. to the wonder not only of the Court, but of all Christendom. His Holiness to speak the truth was with great difficulty brought to condescend, for six months together he refus'd all the importunities his Cousin could make, as not willing to burden his Conscience, by admitting such a Monster in Nature, into the num∣ber of so great Princes, and into a Colledge of worthy men; but he could not resist her multiply'd prayers any longer, but as it were blind-fold he created him Cardinal, in the 18th. year of his age. But that which is most strange is, that Donna Olimpia not contented to see her Nephew in Scarlet, (notwithstanding the irregularities both of his person and manners) would needs introduce him to the Government of the Ecclesiastick State, and give him possession of the same credit and authority, that Cardinal Barbarino had, during the Popedom of
Ʋrban the eighth; seeing his Holiness her Cousin resolv'd (that he might have assist∣ance in the sustaining so great a weight) to adopt a counterfeit Nephew, because he could have no real one, since Pamfilio that was his Nephew indeed, had renounc'd the Cardinalship, to marry the Princess of Rosanno, as noble a resolution perhaps as ever fell into the heart of man, though dislik'd both by his Unckle the Pope, and Donna Olimpia his Mother; he having by that marriage perpetuated the Name of Pamfilio, by two little Sons that he has, worthy of such a Princess to their Mother, and which do contri∣bute much to the honour of Rome. Donna Olimpia imploy'd her utmost interest with the Pope, to have made him Car∣dinal Padrone, or Cardinal Nephew; and because his Holiness was I know not how en∣gaged in his affections to this Lady his Kinswoman, and durst not absolutely deny her, so on the other side being unwilling to promise it, he temporiz'd and dally'd with her, that he might not displease her: But she to make all sure, by his Holiness consent, put him under the institution of the Cardinals Panzirolo, and Cherubino, that he might be well instructed in the affairs of Court. But this was no more than to sow Corn upon a Rock; Maldachini had no capacity to receive any thing at all, having brought an incre∣dible stupidity along with him, even from his Mothers belly. Panzirolo that understood very well the humour of Maldachini, and the Popes reso∣lution not to entertain such a Statue into business of State, advis'd his Holiness to create Astalli Cardinal Nephew, and he did so, but with so much dissatisfaction to Donna Olimpia when she heard it, that she fell almost mad upon it, thundering out her male∣dictions and invectives against Panzirolo with such fury, that it was a great cause of her falling out of favour with his Holiness. All the while Innocent liv'd after the Creation of Maldachini, he express'd great re∣gret for having made such a person a Cardinal, and could not endure to have it mention'd upon any occasion. Alexander the seventh was not well pleas'd neither to see him cheek by jowle amongst so many select persons, and therefore gave himself over to use him ill, sending him away without any respect to a place that was a greater distance from Rome; but the rest of the Cardinals looking upon the misusage of his person, as a re∣flection upon the Order in general, they made their complaint to his Holiness, and he was immediately set at liberty. Donna Olimpia perswaded him to espouse the interest of Spain, which he did, but (finding by degrees the little esteem the Spaniards had for him, by their several times neglecting to call him to their Assemblies, in which the intrigues of that Court were transacted, and all because they knew he had not judgement enough to give them any Councel;) he turn'd to the French, who receiv'd him very readily, (if for no other reason) to secure his voice in the Conclave. And this is certain, his negotiating with the French has not a little instructed him in his Complements; it being the general ob∣servation of the Court, that since his Voyage into France, he is grown much more con∣versable than formerly. In the last Conclave of Rospigliosi he suffer'd himself to be transported into some ex∣pressions (rather dictated to him, than spoken by him) against the Spaniards. The Spaniards were nettled, and bit their thumbs (as the Italians use to do) in private, though in publick they seem'd but to laugh at it: Some say the Spanish Ambassador having notice of it from one of the Conclave, who being no great friend of Maldachini's, had told the story a little too sharply, reply'd laughing, The voice of an Ass reaches not to Heaven; which coming likewise to Maldachini's ears, displeas'd him exceedingly, so that he fell a railing against all that belong'd to Spain; which the Spaniards likewise understanding, (for the Spyes in Rome will not fail to do that good office) to mortifie and rebuke him, they resolv'd to stop the Rents of those Abbeys and Benefices that he held in the Kingdom of Naples, and other Catholick States; and he finding himself in this manner necessitated to renounce, has within few months resign'd three Abbeys into the hands of the Pope; one of which is given to Monsignor Strada, the second to Monsignor Polini, both of them of the Privy-Chamber, and the third to a Son of the Marquess Astalli, Nephew to the Cardinal aforesaid, whose Father is of the Faction of Spain. In short, I would not swear this Cardinal should not be Pope, if there
was need of nothing but his own single voice; but otherwise I fear he will dye without it. GIO. FRANCISCO GONDI a Frenchman, call'd Cardinal di Retz, he was pro∣moted to the Cardinalship the 19th. of February▪ in the year 1652. at the instance of the King of France, with whom he was afterwards disgusted, having receiv'd some con∣siderable affronts, though he was Archbishop of Paris. The Court cry'd out exceedingly against Mazarine, who govern'd all at that time, and was the principal cause of the persecuting this person, and that upon good grounds. The Ecclesiasticks pretended, that the greatest Princes that are, cannot repress the power of a Cardinal, when they are treating of matters of State, no though the Cardinals be contriving the ruine or disturbance of the Publique Peace: But this is a doctrine the Princes do but laugh at, and amongst the rest, the Kings of France, who upon any such occasion do fly presently to their Gallican Rites. It was strange to Innocent, that after the Crown of France had with so much instance and importunity, recommended this person to be promoted, and after he was advanc'd to so honourable a Dignity, he should be slighted, and ill used immediately by the same Crown, of which he made frequent complaints to Mazarine, who wanted not his pretences to excuse them. However the Politicians look'd upon it as a great over-sight in Mazarine, to present that person to the Cardinalship, without pre-considering what might follow; and indeed they that understood the Spirit of the man, inclin'd alwayes to disturb and perplex the quiet of his Superiours, were much scandaliz'd to see Maza∣rine instead of keeping him at a distance, by some politick pretence, to endeavour to make him equal in Dignity to himself; and by consequence to give him greater opportunity and encouragement to undertake what in effect he did enterprize. But Mazarine was oblig'd to do what he did, for private and occult reasons, not imagining the said person could have been able to have kindled so great a Conflagration as he did. The timid, though unquiet Nature, with which he observ'd Gondi to be govern'd, perswaded him that he was not to be parted from that Country where he manag'd all; so as the judgement of so great a Head-piece as Mazarine, is many times deceiv'd, he finding by experience, that the most timerous man, if back'd and supported, grows most troublesome and ambitious. The Spaniards endeavour'd what they could to fetch over this Cardinal to their party, promising him, as is reported▪ much more than he could hope for in France; but he that had his aim upon France, and not upon Spain, kept himself close to the interest of that Crown, demonstrating upon several occasions, that his adherance to the Male-contents, was not from any animosity to that Kingdom, but only from a desire to humble the for∣tunes of Cardinal Mazarine. At the time that accident happen'd to the Duke of Crequy in Rome, which was the twentieth of August 63. amongst all the Cardinals there was none that stuck so zealously to the French party as he; to the admiration of every body, that a person that had been turn'd out of his Church, and other Benefices, had been imprison'd, per∣secuted, and banish'd, should appear with such ardour in defence of that interest, that was the cause of his troubles, and (which is worse) resolv'd never to readmit him to the Dignities he had lost. But his proceedings in this point were prudent enough, for having voluntarily disoblig'd his Most Christian Majesty, it was but reason he should be voluntarily oblig'd. And the King of France unwilling to let the constancy, or gene∣rosity of Retz, with which he maintain'd the just Priviledges of his Crown, to go un∣rewarded, he admitted him again into his favour, which he enjoys to this day, but with some conditional limitations, as retaining still in his mind the prejudice he did formerly to the Crown, though he often declar'd, that all his designs were against Mazarine. LƲIGI HOMODEI, from his very first entrance into the Prelacy, had an ambitious hankering after a Cap, and it cost him and his Family no small quantity of money be∣fore he did compass his ends. It was thought very strange, his Family being like to extinguish for want of Heirs,
that he would suffer it to perish, rather than marry; it is reported, that a friend of his advising him to marry, he reply'd, That he had higher thoughts. However, things have succeeded to his desires, and that without any disadvantage to his house, which had Chil∣dren afterwards, and is become one of the most conspicuous, richest, and best ally'd Fa∣milyes in Spain. He had first the Arch-Bishoprick of Milan given him, which was in his own Country, where he was resident for some time, and performed his Pastoral Function like a good Sheepherd; at last, on the nineteenth of February 1652. he was promoted to the Car∣dinalship by Innocent the tenth, a while after discharging himself of his Bishoprick, and in good part, by the means of the Spaniards, who have this for a particular Maxime to make their Cardinals live in Rome as much as possibly they can: and though he was a Spaniard both in respect of his Family, and Inclination, yet in the Conclave of Innocent, where Alexander was created, he went against the judgement of the Spaniards, but they took not much notice of it, because there were so many concern'd in the Conspi∣racy. This Cardinal is in short of a noble Extraction, of an exemplary life, and good man∣ners, having shown himself in all Congregations and Offices, a person of much worth, and one that sticks close to the business that belongs to him. However in his obstinacy he is a  to blame, yet he yeilds if he be press'd with good words; he is otherwise of a merry disposition, and by the sweetness of his Conversation, shews that he has no secret grudge against any body. For which I would not answer, though he be a good Lumbard, which is as much as to say, an enemy to Hypocrisie. He would be no ill Pope, but I much fear he will dye a Cardinal, yet not without some hopes of the Papacy, in which so many of them die. PETRO OTTOBƲONO a noble Venetian, was created Cardinal at the same pro∣motion on the 19. of February 1652. being Clerk of the Chamber; but he was promo∣ted at the instance of the Commonwealth of Venice, and his own, in that promotion in which the Pope was desirous to satisfie all the Catholick Crowns, and Potentates, amongst which, after the two Crowns of France, and Spain, Venice has much the greater place; the Popes being oblig'd to give them as much honour in Rome, as is due to the greatest Crowns, seeing God has made that Commonwealth as a Bulwork to all Christen∣dome. The nature of this Cardinal is, to carry himself with all possible complaisance to his own Republique in whatsoever he is imploy'd. He is not very rich, but indued with good qualities, and his parts are more than or∣dinary. The Venetians look upon him as a person of great worth, but the Court that believes nothing but what they see, have not that opinion of him, as not having had any experience of him in any considerable affair, he having been confin'd as it were to his Church at Brescia, and kept at  distance from the Court, without ever being imploy'd in any Legation. His friends say, that from that very thing proceeding from the envy they have for him at Court, the transcendent worth of his person may be known; which indeed is not unlikely, for Princes trouble not themselves so much to find out persons of any excellent endowments, as to find such weak poor spirited persons as they can com∣mand at their pleasures: from whence it happens, that they which preside, do suffer them to be discontented, that are otherwise in favour. In the Conclave of Alexander, he had a great share in uniting that party that thwarted and cross'd the designs of the Crowns, who were not at all satisfi'd, either with him, or his party. And in this last Conclave of Clements, he had a great part in faci∣litating the Election of that Pope, who as soon as he was possess'd of the Pontificate, to show his gratitude to the Senate, and to Ottobuono, declar'd him Datary, so that the said Ottobuono having been Auditor di Rota, he may execute that charge very well, and de∣monstrate his worth to the Court, he having given them already some Essays of his Virtues. LORENZO IMPERIALE of Genoa, was promoted the second of March 1654▪ being Governour of Rome. It was a great wonder to many people, to see so many per∣sons of much more merit than he, past by, and a person made choice of, that had done so little service for the Church.
But those that look'd deeper into the business, ceas'd immediately to wonder, as know∣ing the riches of his Family, and the great ambition they had to have a Cap: nor was that juncture of time amiss, for Donna Olimpia being again receiv'd into favour, design'd to re-establish her self by getting of moneys, which is all that can be said for his exaltati∣on. He is of an affable and pleasant nature, and of great frankness and candour in his conversation, and doubtless he would be much more acceptable to all that converse with him, were not he a little too tedious in tracing out other peoples thoughts. His judgement could not have been more dexterous in finding out defects, than it is, nor his judgement accompany'd with more prudence in applying seasonable remedies to them, so that from hence it may be argu'd that he is a person fit for the management of great affairs. There are but few so well acquainted with the interest of the Court, as himself, having spent a good time of his Prelacy therein; he is so constant in his resolutions, that it passes almost to obduracy. Yet his judgement being very good, he hardens not himself, but where he has reason on his side, and in that case the whole world cannot move him. Did he design any higher than his Cardinalship, which I can hardly believe he will, he would meet with many rubs in his way: it being almost impossible to succeed, he being known so well by the Kings, Princes, and Cardinals, to be a man of such high thoughts, as would attempt that in a short time, which other Princes have labour'd at for several ages, and without effect; which is sufficient to obstruct his pretensions, were not the Spaniards likewise who are his friends, likely to give him greater impediment, than the French that are his Enemies; the Spaniards being never inclin'd to those persons, that will enterprise too high. In the two last Conclaves, he manag'd himself so with his flying Squadron, that it gave no little disgust to the Crowns, to see such a Combination of Cardinals driving with great resolution at the destruction of their interest, to make the Papacy wholly de∣pendant upon their own. But in the last Conclave, and in the Exaltation of his Nephew Bonetti, he made it more clear than it was before, that he cared not to verefie the Opini∣on the Court had on him, viz. that he was inclin'd to attempt impossibilities, in despight of any body that should oppose him. The affront he receiv'd in his banishment, not only out of the lands of the Church, but out of all Italy, for the Insolencies committed by the Corsi upon the Duke and Dutchess of Crequi, kept him under for a while, all his judgement and sagacity being too weak to clear him of his accusations; the others having found out evasions, and tricks to shift the fault of their own backs, and lay it upon poor Astalli, who was constrain'd to suffer the greatest part of the French indignation towards which King he was forc'd to address himself, by his mediation to obtain the favour of having that sentence revoak'd: and yet for all that, he retains an animosity against the French, though he promis'd his most Christian Majesty to be his particular servant; and accordingly some few months since, with most inconsiderate audacity, and contrary to the judgement of Cardinal Farnese, he oppos'd the validity of the Bull for the incameration of Castro; for which he was suffici∣ently blam'd, and in danger of experimenting the effects of that Kings indignation: which will alwayes be recorded of his manner of proceeding. GIBERTO BORROMEI of Milan, was created Cardinal in the resolution of the Pope, at the promotion on the 19 of Frebruary 1652. with Cardinal Imperiale; but they were not effectively declar'd till the 2d. of March 1654. This Cardinal being great Grandchild to San Carlo Borromeo, he deported himself modestly in all his actions, not at all degenerating from those virtues that are natural to that Noble Family, which has alwayes given conspicuous examples of their goodness. From the time he took upon him the Prelatical Habit, he has in all the offices he has gone thorough, given great Testimonies of his modesty, sincerity, and justice, qualities too rarely visible in persons of that authority and command. In his Legation of Romania, he behav'd himself so well, there was not the least com∣plaint against him; though some of his Court fell into some kind of errours, as having more mind to get money, than reputation: however they abstain'd from many acts of injustice, for very fear of falling into the Legats displeasure, who they knew was averse to such inequitable designs.
In short, the whole Court unanimously gives a good Character of his Sentiments to∣wards the Publique; yet there wants not some Criticks that suspect him of some degree of Hypocrisie. It is enough he would make a Pope answerable to the desires of the Spa∣niard, which is, to keep what they have got, and not trouble themselves to acquire what ever is possible, as too many do. But there is no grat hopes for him whilst Milan is the Spaniards; for in the Con∣clave, they look not so much upon the merits of the person, as the interest of State. MARCELLO SANTA▪ CROCE a Roman, is a person that has added virtue and desert to the Nobility of his Birth; confirming dayly by a hundred examples, the incli∣nations he hath for the publique good, insomuch that in the Congregations and Con∣sistories he is one of those, that laying aside all private passion, devote themselves wholly to the advantage of the Publique; and therefore many are of opinion, in time there will be great hopes for him in the Conclave. He was promoted to the Cardinalship the 19 of Febr. 1652. and the principal reasons that moved Innocent to promote him, were two, a General, and a particular; the Gene∣ral reason was, because the Pope had taken a resolution to re-advance all the Noble Fa∣milies in Rome, that began to lessen and decay in their splendour, that thereby he might render the City more Pompous and Majestick: but whether he was induc'd to this out of pure generosity, or out of an ambition he had to oblige all those reinvigorated Families to his own, I cannot tell; be it one or the other, the design was noble, and had been executed more exactly, had not the importunity of his Cousin diverted him, and forc'd him to sell that which he pretended to give. The particular was, that several occasions being given to Santa Croce, to defend and represent in his Holinesses presence, certain intricate and difficult points, he did it with that plainness and facility, it made such an impression upon the Genius of the Pope, that he thought him worthy of the Cap. And declar'd many times before certain of his Cardinals, that he never gave sentence with less injury to his Conscience, than after he had consulted and been well inform'd by Santa Croce; and yet Innocent was esteem'd a good Lawyer, as he was indeed, yet his understanding was but dull and obtuse, and therefore he lov'd them best that could make things most easie and perspicuous to his ca∣pacity; but whether it was for one reason or the other, this I know his advancing Santa Croce to the Cardinalship, was much commended. FEDERICO d'HASSIA a German, created the 19 of Jan. 1652. is a person of spirit and generosity suitable to the nobleness of his extraction. He is very just and exact in his judgement, distinguishing betwixt good and bad to a hair; so that it may be said with reason, his commendations are without flattery, his reprehensions without envy, because his praises, or rebukes, (void of all passion) are exactly proportion'd to the merits of the Party. He was translated from the Camp to the Cloyster, from the Sword to the Cross, from the Protestant Religion to the Catholick, which at the beginning of his promotion, made several persons believe that he would gain but little honour by the Cardinalship, suppo∣sing he had imbib'd too much of the confus'd principles of the Protestant, and Souldier; but they were undeceiv'd when they saw him give such Testimonies of himself, by ex∣pressing himself a good Catholick, and a true observer of the Maximes of the Court of Rome. However the general opinion is, that his Talent would have been better imploy'd in matters of Arms, than the Gown, which seems to be somthing forc'd and unnatural to him, because impos'd, not generated with him, whereas this inclination to Arms was born with him, and he has retain'd it from his Cradle. The being utterly without, or at least not over-well furnish'd with the ornaments of learning, which do oftentimes work upon the hearts of the Popes, to confe subsidies ex∣traordinary upon such Cardinals as are Forreigners, is the reason that he wants more conveniencies than he enjoys, every one withdrawing himself from his supply, because that to relieve him according to the largeness of his own thoughts, would require too much. The Spaniards themselves, whose Maxime it is to inlarge their hands to persons of that quality, have been close enough as to him, because they see that to maintain him in his original Grandeur, would ask as much as to maintain six others, so as they
have rather chose to oblige many than one; and hence it is that this Cardinal is necessi∣tated to hunt after Foreign assistance, as he did for two years time, that he was in Rome, after the creation of Pope Alexander, so streightned and distress'd by the disappoint∣ment of his Assignments, that were promis'd him but not paid, that to avoid falling into greater, he was forc'd to retire into Germany, to attend some fortune that might put him into a condition to live again according to his desires in Rome; to which he has a great inclination, as thinking that place more pleasant than Germany: But the truth is, when he is in Germany, his inclinations are after Rome, and when in Rome, they are the same for Germany. CARLO BARBARINI a Roman, was design'd in the promotion the 19th. of February 1652. and afterwards declar'd Cardinal alone, on the 25. of June 1653. to the admiration of all the World, that by such an excess of favour, he should admit three Cardinals living at one time, of one Family, a thing never seen nor heard of in former times; and that which magnifi'd their astonishment more was, that they saw them initiated into the favour of that Pope, who look'd upon it as a matter of great impor∣tance to destroy, or at least to debase that Family, as knowing how strong their interest was in gaining the people, and working over the hearts of the discontented to them∣selves. The Reconciliation was brought about by means of an Alliance contriv'd by Donna Olimpia, who fore-seeing the death of the Pope her Cousin approaching, and consider∣ing there was no body of her party that could sustain her, upon any accident or adversity, she having disoblig'd even her own Sons, she resolv'd to undertake something extraor∣dinary, and that was to negotiate an Alliance with the Barbarini. And the Princess her Daughter, that was marry'd to the Prince Justinian, having at that time a Daughter that was marriageable, she entred into treaty with Cardinal Francisco Barbarino, for the Prince di Palestrina their Nephew, and promis'd restitution of whatever had been se∣questred from them. The Barbarini though they had need enough to have businesses accommodated, were not so weak nevertheless as to give them their eldest Son, but they told her, that he was inclin'd to take the Prelacy upon him, (which was as much as to say he desir'd a Cap) and that he would resign his Prefectship to the Abbot his Brother, and take the Abbey to himself, as it afterwards happen'd, with advantage to them both; and in this man∣ner Charles having resigned his Primogeniture to Maffeo Barbarino his Brother, the marriage was concluded, and the said Charles created Cardinal in respect of the said Match. Yet this accumulation of honour upon honour, was not to be blam'd in the Pope, if the excellent qualities of this young Cardinal be consider'd; his modesty is so conspi∣cuous, and his life so unblamable, that he constrains the very Enemies of his Family to love him, and draws respect from every person in the Court. Cardinal Francisco's virtues are visible in the virtues of such a Nephew, who depends so entirely upon the beck of his Unckle, that his obedience appears little less than ado∣ration. The greatest part of the day he addicts either to Study, Devotion, or other Spiritual exercises, retaining some time also for politick affairs, under the direction of his Unckle Cardinal Francisco, a person of great experience in those things, to whose model and ex∣ample he frames himself exactly. In short, he takes the same way with his Predecessors that pretended to the Papacy; but I shall say no more of him, because he is not above forty years old, but in time he may be elected, as soon as the greatest pretender of them all. GIO. BATTISTA SPADA, a Luchese, (otherwise call'd di Santa Ssanna) was in his Prelacy entrusted by Ʋrban the eighth, with certain great and considerable Offices, which he discharg'd to his commendations; yet though Ʋrban promis'd him a Cap, he was not so good as his word. But Innocent being inform'd of the excellency of his qua∣lities, that the services that he had done to the Publique might remain unrewarded no longer, he created him Cardinal the 2. of March 1654. He is a person of great prudence, of a good humour, skill'd well enough in the Law,
and of no small experience in the Court: Cardinal Barbarino (that loves him at his heart) cryes him up for one of the greatest Politicians in the World, and addes many things more then that to his commendations. The Spaniards have great confidence in him, as looking upon him of a quiet nature, and not given to novelties. But his being so strangely united in affection with Barbarino, has given the Grand Duke occasion of Jealousie, and so much the more, because they have espous'd the interest of their Country. In his Legation of Ferrara he was a little faulty, but they were rather of Omission than of Commission, he leaving the Reins too loose to his Ministers to be corrupt, in so much that they who had any business in his Tribunal, complain'd of the rapacity of his Officers, and the too great goodness of the Cardinal. FRANCISCO ALBICI of Cesena, is a well deserving and well affected Servant to the Duke of Tuscany, whose Vassail he is originally, though was born in Cesena, where having exercis'd his pragmatical humour for some time, and according to the usual impe∣tuosity of his nature, he constrain'd a Gentleman of that Country to handle him like a Vassail indeed: and after such an affront, not being able to stay longer in those parts, he came to Rome, and entred himself into the family of Panzirolo, who carry'd him along with him into Spain, in spight of several of his Court that were unwilling to have asso∣ciated with so extravagant a brain. At his return from Spain, he was imploy'd by Innocent in the business of the Jansnists, which he transacted so well, that he was look'd upon as a person of great abilities, and cunning, if for no other reason, for complying so exquisitely with the humour of the Pope, that he made him a Cardinal on the 2d. of March 1654. which otherwise, with all Panzirolo's interest he could never obtain. But the principal cause that some will have for his promotion, was the known animosity betwixt him and Cardinal Maculano, a person exceedingly odious to Donna Olimpia, and the whole house of Pamphilia; pre∣tending that by introducing into the Conclave a person of his temper and vehemence, all the hopes Maculano had, would be dash'd; so that it it may be said, he was not ad∣vanc'd upon the score of his merits, but that he might be an impediment to all such pra∣ctises as should be us'd in favour of the said Maculano. The Tongue of this Cardinal is extremely Satyrical, and he utters many times things that are insufferably sharp; he has utterly disoblig'd the Chigi with his talking, against whom, now they are out of authority, he speaks more frankly than formerly. But he reckons that a virtue in himself, pretending he does it not out of any malevo∣lence, but justice, as being naturally averse to the corruptions of the Age, not of the Court; and therefore he cannot content himself to reprehend the vices of other people at their private meetings, but in his publique Orations he takes delight to ostentate his eloquence in that manner; every body admiring that he (that is not without his de∣fects himself) should give himself over to the censuring of other persons, without any respect. This Satyrical way of proceeding, obscures the lustre of his learning, and the great experience he has in the affairs of the world; for other things he has a very good head, and is therefore hated by the Spaniard, who is alwayes jealous of such persons, as they that by their contrivances are able to disturb the repose of the whole Universe. OTTAVIO AQƲAVIVA a Neopolitan, has a general applause, as a person that has virtue sufficient to render him worthy of that honour, besides that the Nobility of his Birth makes him as illustrious as his virtues. He is very well practis'd in the politicks of the Court, and indeed so much, he needs no addition to qualifie him for the Congregations, or other offices; but as to the Su∣premacy, he could not in any manner attain meerly by that experience he has already; it would be necessary for him to look out for assistance, which he could scarce want ha∣ving no small number of Allies, and Kindred, who (whether good or bad) are they which govern the Church in behalf of the Pope. He retains much of the Neapolitan still, though he has been a long time out of that Countrey, that is, he is liberal of his tongue, but very sparing of his urse. Not that he does no generous actions, but only that he wants judgement to distribute them with
discretion, giving all sometimes to one, and to another nothing, and commonly he offers more than he can give, and then gives less than he promis'd. He obtain'd the Cap the 2d. of March 1654. but I know not whether of Pope Inno∣cent, or of his Cousin Donna Olimpia; For of two persons, one of them was belov'd by the Pope, and hated by Donna Olimpia, and the other belov'd by Donna Olimpia, and abhor'd by his Holiness; this Lady was able to eradicate from the Popes heart the person he affected, and place her own favourite there, sooner than his Holiness could put her friend out of her mind, to make room for his own. But that which gave greatest occasion of wonder to the Court was, to see that Lady that was wont to regard nothing but money, without thinking on the merits of the per∣sons recommended, that she should fix her eye upon a person of his worth and deserts, without a feeling in the hand. Her considerations were politick and good, and so allow'd by Innocent himself, for Donna Olimpia having got money enough, she thought it time to lay about her for friends; and therefore seeing his Holiness declining a pace, she betook her self to her po∣liticks, endeavouring to fortifie her Family and person, by obliging such persons of worth and nobility, as could upon any sinister occasion give them protection. Many believe that this Aquaviva being so generous a person, left not so great a bene∣fit unrewarded; but be it as it will, this is most certain, that upon the bare score of the Cap, there was not the least present made: and if afterward he was created Cardinal, he did any thing in that kind (which I do not believe) it was not for that reason, but some other; for this I am sure of, he knew so well the worth of his Family, that he would a thousand times sooner have been contented to have remain'd without a Cap as he was before, than to have tainted it, with the least thought of Simony. The Spaniards love him, and honour him; but I know not whether they be thorough∣ly satisfi'd with him, or not, because in many things he behaves himself as a Neuter, not expressing that ardour and zeal, he ought to do, as he is a subject to that Crown; besides in the Conclaves he gave them no perfect content. CARLO PIO of Ferrara, was Nephew to the lately deceas'd Cardinal of that name, who by his ill life, left occasion to many people to discourse of him, with no great ad∣vantage to his reputation. This Nephew of whom we are speaking was Tresoriere di Camera, an office that cost eighty thousand Crowns; and therefore in the vacancy of such offices, they advanc'd persons not for their merits, but their moneys. The same case exactly happen'd in the promotion of Carlo Pio, for Innocent decaying daly, his Cousin was still at his elbow, egging and soliciting him perpetually to some new way of drawing more sums to her Coffers; and to give her content, he created him Cardinal the 2d. of March 1654. sel∣ling the Treasurers place to another, and so two several wayes augmenting the Treasury of his Cousin. The Family of this Lord, for its nobility and deserts, might well have deserv'd a Cap, without this manner of dealing; however he did well to come by it as he did, otherwise he might have gone without it as long as he liv'd. Many things might be said of the nature of this person, if the number of them would not confound both the Writer, and Reader; he never injoy'd his health perfectly from his youth, he was troubled with many infirmities, that disabl'd him for several functions; but he finding himself incurable, forc'd his nature by some kind of exercise▪ as much as was possible, and with success above the opinions of those Physitians that go∣vern'd him. He had the Church of Ferrara given him, in consideration rather of his Family than his person; but it would have been better for him to have refus'd it, and continu'd in Rome, than by accepting it to render that pittance and remainder of his health more weak∣ly and infirm, by the labour of his Pastoral Cure, and to let the people of his own Coun∣try know, the quality of his complection. The principal cause that put him upon that resolution, was, that he also had imbib'd that commune Maxim, That the less a Cardinal is present in the Court; with the more case will he in time arrive at the Papacy: which saying, though it be universal▪ bears
no place in the Politicks of the Romans, who being become Masters of experience, they can easily see through their designs that think that way to conceal them, and do give pre∣cedence rather to those that comport themselves handsomely at Court, than those that retire themselves into the Country. This Cardinal therefore observing, that by reason of his Youth, or at least the immaturity of his age for the Popedom, those hopes were too remote from him, he concluded to resign his Church of Ferrara, and to change his principals under pretence that the air of Rome was more agreeable to his health. And now to come to the particulars of his humour, I shall say, that the most politick do think him very blamable, as being excessively severe, and untractable in extremity. He would fain have reform'd all the Clergy in his Diocess, upon the meer authority of a Bishop; beginning not with Fatherly exhortations, so much as with comminations and threatnings, in so much that he has taken a course to publish certain offences, that were but private before, and to divide those he design'd to have united, only to get the reputation of a good Magistrate. But he intended to have done all this to a good end, having an ambition to make him∣self thought an honest man, and zealous for the Church, without observing, that when Zeal is not accompany'd with moral Prudence, to moderate the impulses of Nature, it becomes odious even to good men, and instead of Zeal, discovers it self to be Tyranny. But this is an infirmity peculiar in this present age to those Ecclesiasticks, that if by weakness of Age, or strength of Continence, they forbear those publick scandals of the Flesh, they presently swell, and boast up the excellency of their Nature, with which they come afterwards to a certain heat, and arrogance, they call Zeal: and of this sort is the Zeal of this Cardinal esteem'd, who to speak truth has but few frailties to correct, either that his infirmities do debilitate his Nature, or his virtue over-power it; it is sufficient that there are no considerable faults to be found in him, unless it be that he is but little inclin'd to do kindnesses for any body, and that he is too fierce in the conuta∣tion of him that refuses to yield at the first dash, especially if it be in matters of Consci∣ence, in which he is scrupulous to the highest. As for his Negotiations he cannot expect much, having had no occasion to be exercis'd in great affairs; besides his temper is too tender, and would not suffer him to take such imployments upon him, though perhaps he would force himself rather than be behind the rest, his brain being stimulated by the same thing, that excites the whole Colledge to the Papacy: In time he might make an offer at the Papacy, as others do, I know not whether he would obtain it; but this I know, that many persons inferiour to him have leap'd into the Vatican. CARLO GƲALTIERI of Orvietta, was by the mediation of Donna Olimpia pro∣moted to the Cardinalship, the 2. of March 1654. not that he was a person worthy of a Cap, or that the Pope had made use of him in any considerable affair, but because it was his fortune to be ally'd to the House of Pamphilia. Innocent was really in his own mind averse from introducing persons of so small virtue as this, and Maldachino, into the Sacred Colledge, amongst so many Eminent persons, and so many great Princes. But Donna Olimpia, who was Paramount and did what she pleas'd, cast such a mist before the eyes of that Innocent Pope, that he discern'd not what he did himself, by the promotion of those two persons, uniting them and fixing them upon her, and which is of greater importance, leaving so many persons that for many years together had worn themselves out in the service of the Church; which his poor Holiness forgot, till the errour was committed, and all the Streets of Rome in a tumult to have it remedy'd. If the qualities of Maldachino and Gualtieri were compar'd, Gualtieri's though they are good for little or nothing, are yet less ridiculous than the former. Donna Olimpia imploy'd him in her secret affairs, that is, she made him negotiate the selling of Benefices, in which she did very ill, to entrust things of great importance in the hands of a person of no experience, and less judgement; but as bad as he was, he knew well enough to make his advantages of the Election she gave him, from whom he
learn'd also a great dexterity in shearing of his Flock; and in his Church of Fermo, (of which he is Bishop) he disdains not from time to time to receive presents from his Clerks, not that he demands them, but when they are offer'd he never re∣fuses them. The Pope gave him this Bishoprick, not to recompence any desert he had found in him, nor that he thought him worthy to execute that Pastoral charge, but only to send him packing from Rome, it going against the hair to see in the Consistories and publique meetings, such a creature sitting amongst so many Cardinals of renoun; and he had done better yet, had he by as honourable a banishment sent Maldachino as far from the Court. If there be any thing good in this Gualtieri, it is that he is not envious, and that knowing his own ignorance, he takes kindly the advice of any one that knows more than himself; being very seldome obstinate in his opinion, but in case of anger, or some particular passion. DECIO AZZOLINI is the last Cardinal of the Creation of Innocent the tenth; he is of a Sicilian Race, though born in the City of Fermo in the Marquisat of Ancona, where we have said Gualtieri was Bishop. It would be a long story, if we should set down the whole cause of his Exaltation, and we should be forc'd to repeat much of what has been said already; I shall only say, that being conscious of his incapacity of arriving at that Grandeur his ambition prompted him to, as having no means nor merits to advance him, nor any thing besides a simple Prelature, he took upon him that way which takes very oft in the Court of Rome, and that is in plain terms he turn'd Spy; in which he improv'd himself so well, it was gene∣rally believ'd there was not any one more dexterous in discovering the corruptions of others than he; and this he manifested, when Pope Innocent was in transaction of some∣thing with the Barbarini, upon the acquisition of the Kingdom of Naples, the Barbarini ha∣ving a great thirst after certain Principalities of that Crown, which falling into the hands of the Church, they doubted not by the power of their purse to have a competent share thereof. Cardinal Astalli having notice of all (though the Barbarini had render'd him so suspicious to the Pope, that he was kept at a distance from this design) he gave im∣mediate intelligence to the Spaniard, with whom he kept a strict correspondence. Which being smelt by Azzolini after his wonted manner being Clerk of the Breves, a charge of no ordinary importance, and confidence, he gave a private account of it to the Pope, who us'd Astalli very ill upon it, depriving him (as every body knows) of all he had given him, except his Cap; by way of recompence making Azzolini Cardinal the 2d. of March 1654. and so it was first discover'd, that the ruine and fall of Astalli was oc∣casion'd in great part by the Relations, whether true or false of this person, who has since made the mystery of a Spy so honourable, that at present, in hopes of great re∣wards, there are Prelats of greater reputation than he have undertaken the same way. But most of them find themselves mistaken, every one not being of Innocents mind, to love the Treason and not the Traitor. In the last Conclave he bestirr'd himself very much for the interest of Rospigliosi, to whom he gave relation several times of all the obstructions he met with▪ wherewith Rospi∣gliosi was so well satisfy'd, that the very night of his Election, he declar'd the said Azzo∣lini his Secretary of State, a place of great trust, and which he had executed himself thorough the whole Pontificate of Alexander. The friends of this Azzolini do cry him up for a person of very great judgement and experience in politick affairs; but those that have try'd him in business, do say there is nothing in him extraordinary, but a certain dexterity of the pen, which he has acquir'd by long conversation in the Secretaries place. But if there were any thing in him more than ordinarily conspicuous, it would be eclips'd by certain defects that over-rule him, and particularly by his amours to all kind of Ladies, both Virgins, and Wives, he passing most of his time in carssing of them, not regarding whether the Republique receives any advantage, or no. Of how poor and abject a spirit he is, appears by this, that even whilst he was a Car∣dinal, he hath yeilded himself up to certain Doxeys brought into his Chamber, by a
certain Fryer his Pandor; but since he began to have familiar converse in the Court of the Queen of Sweden, his thoughts are somewhat advanc'd. Alexander not enduring the publiqueness of this Cardinals amours, sent him Legat to Ravenna, rather to remove him out of his sight, than for any thing else; after his de∣parture there were many things discover'd, which gave great occasion of discourse about the Court. Yet it is as true, he was no sooner return'd, but his very presence stopp'd the mouths of the people, if not of the Court. The whole number of Cardinals created by Ʋrban the eight, were 72. which made a good wit of the Court say, That amongst all the Popes of Rome, Ʋrban was the only Vi∣car of Christ; for as Christ had chosen for the service of the Church 72 Disciples, so had Ʋrban call'd 72 Cardinals to the Apostleship; with this difference only, that the first were made by our Saviour to be serviceable to the Christians, but the last to make the Christian serviceable to them: which gives the Protestants occasion to laugh both at Car∣dinals and Pope too. These Cardinals were created in eleven several Ordinations, and to speak the truth, the greatest part of those that were promoted, were but ordinary persons, of no emi∣nence, either for learning, or extraction, having more regard to advance the interest of his own Family, than the Ornament of the Church. True it is, his intention was to have fill'd the Colledge with persons of eminence, but he was either diverted by his Ne∣phews, or repented himself of those inclinations, and gave the Cap to such, as had scarce wit enough to know which way 'twas to be worn. Innocent the tenth made 39 in ten Ordinations, making as many Ordinations in ten years, as Ʋrban did in twenty; yet if the merit of the persons be compar'd that were created in Innocents time, and in Ʋrbans, those that were promoted by Innocent, will doubtless transcend those very much that were created by Ʋrban, though Innocent him∣self had his failings too, and introduc'd persons into the Colledge that were fit to wear the habit of a poor Fryer in a Cloyster, rather than the Robes of a Cardinal in the Col∣ledge. But this is certain, had it not been for Donna Olimpia, Innocent would have cho∣sen such as had been worthy of the Colledge; for those that he created himself, of his own proper motion, and without the advice of his Cousin, were all persons of emi∣nence; whereas all that were promoted by her means (except one or two at the most) were rather to fill up the number, than to adorn the Church. The principal care of the Popes should be to fill up the Colledge with such persons, as should be an honour and reputation to their Robes, and not with such as stand gaping in hopes to receive honour by them. A great shame it is for the Church of Christ to say, that for an age backward, the Popes have had no other design but to make their Grooms and their Footmen Cardinals, and to pass by Princes, and persons of worth, and such as have with so much labour and sweat, endeavour'd the advancement, not of the Nepo∣tismo, but Christianity it self. For my part I cannot see by what policy it is, that the Popes of our dayes (to go no further) have in their Creations of Cardinals, had more regard to the number than the qualifications of them, although their qualities be of much more importance than their number, and of more benefit both to the Church and Pope. Two Cardinal Princes, of quality, of birth, and esteem, are more capable of ador∣ning the Cardinalitial dignity, of defending the interest of the Church, and of adding splendour to the Court, than a dozen such Clowns, as (be it spoken with reverence) are too often to be seen in the Colledge, with the Scarlet upon their shoulders. He that receives a Cap, to do it honour, forces himself what he can to let the world see he is able to do it, and that he be not indebted to his dignity; but he that receives his Robes to be honour'd by them, looks no further than his own interest; it is sufficient to him he is accounted a Cardinal, as if the Cardinalship were in him, not he in the Cardinal∣ship; so great a difference is there betwixt receiving the Purple, and being receiv'd by it. There is no doubt but it would be more for the advantage of the Popes, to create their Cardinals, few in number, and great in worth, than it is to have whole Troops of them, inconsiderable in their qualities, and great only in their number. The principal
end of the Popes (as I have said in another place) in the creation of Cardinals, (unless it be the filling of his purse) is nothing but the supporting the fortunes of his Family, and the leaving his Nephews such Friends in the Conclave and Colledge, as may stand by them in case of persecution, and be Advocates in their causes. Nor is this (if it be consider'd nearly) ill policy; yet it would be much more pro∣fitable, if instead of making inferiour persons Protectors of the Nephews, they would choose such potent Cardinals, as could defend them by the greatness of their own Fa∣milies, and not by the virtue only of another mans Gown. Great persons are alwayes great, and their words are valued accordingly, so that if the Purple be but added, they throw flame and lustre about every thing: Those that are but ordinary, and of but mo∣derate Talents, though they have the honour of the Purple, yet they can do nothing but meanly, because the lustre they cast is unnatural and forc'd, and turns all their glory into smoak. Moreover, it would be much more for the advantage of the Popes, to create few Cardinals, and those Great, than to create many, and those ordinary and mean; when I say Great, I mean Princes, that not only honour the Purple with their persons, but spare the money of the Chamber, (I should have said, of the Popes) whereas poor Cardinals do weaken and disable the Datary, the Popes being oblig'd with Pensions, Benefices, and Bishopricks, to maintain and put them into a capacity of supporting their Cardinalship honourably: But all that money would be reserv'd, either for the Cham∣ber, or for the Nephews, or for the Pope; because Princes receive not the Cap, out of any regard to the profit of the Cardinalship, but by their being Cardinals to adde profit to the Church. On the other side, the Court of Rome is so far Majestick, and reckon'd among the principal of the World, by how far the Cardinals do render it so; for by how much the persons are considerable, that carry the Purple, by so much is the Court more splen∣did and magnificent, because the Court is made magnificent by the Cardinals. To this purpose I remember I was speaking one day with a Foreign Gentleman, of the Grandeur of the Court of Rome, and I having said, that its greatest ornament and glory, consisted in the persons of the Cardinals, who resembling Kings, the Court by consequence was adorn'd with as many Kings, as Cardinals: But he having been in Rome, and holding particular intelligence, had good information of the interests and policies of the Popes, answered me thus; Sir, the habit makes not the Monk, but the Monk the habit: An ill man though he wears a Religious habit, is but an ill man still; but a good man in the worst habit, shall be esteem'd good notwithstanding. In like manner, it is not the Purple that makes the Cardinal, but the Cardinal the Purple; so that the Cardinals would be Kings indeed, if the Popes would choose them amongst the Princes, and not amongst such as they too often do. To speak the truth, how can that Cardinal be an honour to the Court, that cannot read? how can he adde splendor to the Papacy, that cannot write? how can he give Majesty to an Imperial City, that is but the off-spring of a Country Village? how can he merit the Title of a King, that never convers'd but with the vilest of the people? Yet of such kind of stuff the Popes make their Cardinals too often; and then how can that Court be thought great, or serviceable to the Church, if they that serve it are Kings indeed by name, but Scoundrils in fact? Let that Cap be bestow'd on those that know how to wear it; let him be advanc'd to the Cardinalship, that has deserv'd to be a King: In short, those Popes that desire to see the Church and the Court shining in Majesty and splendor, let not them conferr that honour upon the quantity, but the quality of the Persons. Innocent the tenth began his promotions with the greatest glory in the World, ha∣ving open'd his Creation, by giving his first Cap to the most Serene Prince Gio. Carlo di Medici, Brother to the Great Duke of Tuscany, and that on the 14th. of November 1644. a person of that worth, that for those twenty years he liv'd a Cardinal, he may be said to have been the glory of the Colledge. The next year continuing in that good humour, he created Francisco Maria Farnese, Brother to the Duke of Parma; who joyning the Highness of his Birth, to the Eminence of the Cardinalship, added honour to the Order, and had done it more, had not the untimeliness of his death prevented it. The third
year he gave the Cap to Giovanni Casimiro, the King of Polands Brother, which he after∣wards resign'd in the year 1648. being call'd back to receive that Crown in the room of his Brother, that was lately dead; by that means making it clear, that the Purple can produce a Scepter, if the Purple be taken from the Scepters. And last of all, in the last year but one of his Pontificate, ambitious perhaps to immortalize his Name, by ad∣mitting the most Eminent persons into the Colledge, he created Prince Frederick Lantgrave of Hassia Cardinal, of whom we have spoken already in his proper place. Paul the fifth had a particular aim thorow the whole course of his Popedom, to en∣noble the Court, to adde new Majesty to the Colledge, and to select such persons as were proper by their own grandeur, to defend the honour of the Church; and accordingly in three promotions, he advanc'd five Princes of very great quality to the Cardinalship; viz. Mauritio Son to the Duke of Savoy, who renounc'd it afterwards, to marry one of the Neeces, holding it less scandal to subject himself to a Lady, than to be a slave to the Nipotisme of Ʋrban the eighth; Ferdinando, and Vicenzo Gonsaga, both Sons to the Duke of Mantoa; Carlo di Medici, Son to the Duke of Tuscany; and Ferdinando In∣fante di Spagna, who as Histories report, immortaliz'd the honour of the Cardinalship, by fighting for the Faith of Christ. Ʋrban the eighth that lived Pope so long, although he created three Princes Cardinals, viz. Nicolo Francisco, Brother to the Duke of Lorain; Gio. Alberto, Brother to the King of Poland; and Rinald d'Este, Brother to the Duke of Modena; yet for all that he was either diverted by his Kindred afterwards, or else his own inclinations were not fix'd upon such Noble objects, and he endeavour'd to keep at a distance from the Colledge such persons as deserv'd the Cap, not only for the glory of their Birth, but for the many services they had perform'd for the Church: In this manner Ʋrban kept several Princes as far from the Cardinalship as was possible, and amongst the rest Francisco Maria Farnese, Brother to the Duke of Parma, who as many wayes deserv'd it, as any one: But the Pope postponing the publick interest of the Church, to the fancy and Capriccio of his Kindred, depriv'd the Colledge of so Honourable a Member, the Church of so considerable a Protector, his own Family of so potent a support, and his own person of the acquisition of a Fame, more immortal than that of his being Pope: For when the Popes do give occasion and matter to have it immortaliz'd, they immortalize their own Names themselves; nor can they find any more honourable way, than by filling the Cardinalitial Colledge with persons of Honour. But that which is most considerable is, he not only disoblig'd the Cardinal Princes that were created by Paulus, but those few also that he created himself, being forc'd thereto for certain pittifull and poor-spirited reasons, in so much that they were leaving of the Court, and retiring out of Rome, rather than to see the Prerogative of their Births, pro∣stituted to a few persons that had not wit nor education enough to use them civilly, espe∣cially such as had deserv'd their promotion by their other virtues. And it is most certain, (I beg the pardon of their relations that are living, because I write only the common opinion, and what is declar'd in several Histories) the Church would have been in great perplexity, to see it self out of all hopes of being serv'd by Princes, if another Ʋrban had succeeded the former, and not an Innocent. But that God that governs all things, above the comprehension of man, put clear other thoughts into the heart of Innocent, (who by his Divine providence, was call'd to the Papacy) than what were in Ʋrban; for as the one endeavour'd what he could to keep the Purple from the shoulders of the Princes, the more did the other labour to place it there. Alexander the seventh, that began his Pontificate with the zeal of a Saint, and the magnificence of Alexander the Great, express'd a great ambition that he had, to see in his time the Court more Majestick than ever; and he sought out all the wayes he could to adorn it, not only by endeavouring the number of Ambassadors of Foreign Princes might be encreas'd, (who do adde indeed great splendor to a Court) but he declar'd also, he would fill up the Colledge with more Eminent persons, than had ever been seen there before; and at this rate he discours'd frequently, not only with the Cardinals themselves, but with his Familiars and Domesticks, protesting his whole design was to promote half a dozen Princes at the least; which being related to an old Courtier, he
told a Friend of his, that had a mind to a Cap; Sir, till now I look'd upon you as a Cardi∣nal, because Cardinals were made formerly of any thing, but now the Pope is resolv'd to make them of the best only, there is but little hopes for you. I understand you, (reply'd the other) and I had rather wave the services I have done to the Church for the sake of a Prince, than of an ignoble Competitor. To the Marquess of Majetta, Ambassador from the Duke of Savoy, Alexander made no small protestations, that he was very sorry he could not find one person in that Royal Family of the Duke, that was capable of the Cardinalitial Dignity, whereby he might satisfie his natural inclination, of adding new splendor to the Colledge, by introducing persons of that eminence, and extraction. And such pretences as these he us'd to the Ambassadors of other Princes, that is, of such in whose Families he saw no hopes of finding a person proper for so great an honour. But it was known very well, he us'd no such discourses but in meer hypocrisie, because he never made any such Propositions to those Princes that were able to have furnish'd him. And this piece of dissimulation, for which he was suspected at Court, was verified to∣wards his latter end, when as there being two Cardinals of the House of Medici dead, who without doubt had been the greatest Ornament of that Sacred Colledge, and it be∣ing in his power to have immortaliz'd his Name, by the promotion of others out of the same; he shut his eyes, and his ears, against all the overtures that were made, so that in∣stead of re-admitting one at least of the said Family into the vacancy, he fill'd them both up with Sieneses, choosing rather to rob the Church of so great an honour, than deny himself the latitude of his passions, in so much as after his last promotion, which he made dying as it were, and in his Bed, many people began to cry out, that it was but fit the Church should remain a Widdow, without a Pastor, seeing it was his will, the Col∣ledge should remain a Widdow, without any more of the House of Medici. And indeed for a whole age to this time, there has not been found in the Colledge so few Cardinal Princes, as at present, especially of the House of Medici, the Cardinals of which, have not only labour'd by their outward magnificence to preserve the splendor of the Court, but upon several occasions have demonstrated to the Popes, that it was ne∣cessary to continue such persons in the Colledge, for defence of the reputation of the Popedom, and the honour of the Church; and this the House of Chigi above all others would acknowledge, did not their passions blind their belief, for without the assistance of the two Cardinals of the House of Medici, Alexander would have found himself more than once, or twice either, in such a Labyrinth of business, as would have been pre∣judicial not only to his own Family, but to the common good of Christendom; and particularly, in the time of that accident to the Duke of Crequy: But for all that, he re∣garded not to deprive his own House, of the protection of that; it being the custom (by natural instinct) of such as are born Subjects, to kick and repine against their na∣tural Lords; and this was manifest in Pope Alexander, who in the beginning of his Papacy, spake of nothing more in all his Consistories both publick and private, than of the transcendent worth in the House and Person of the Great Duke; but afterwards to∣wards his latter end, having opportunity of shewing the effects of his pretended affection, and the obligations he ought to him, as his Subject, by promoting some person of the House of Medici to the Cardinalship, forgetting what he had talk'd in the beginning, the Grand Duke was the last person in his thoughts. It is most certain, that for these hundred years and more, there has not been a Pope like Alexander in the Church, so little inclin'd to make Cardinal Princes, he not having had the honour to have created one in his whole time, a thing that has not happen'd in a whole age before; some Popes having created two, some three, some more, some less, as is to be seen in the Catalogue of the Popes, only Alexander alone created not one. But this I cannot attribute so much to the ill disposition of Alexander, as to the ill for∣tune of his Pontificate, that could not accommodate the times to the will of Alexander, nor the will of Alexander to the times; in so much that the Church was the greatest sufferer. When the Cardinal Princes dye, the Popes may well mourn, especially if they have not an intention to fill up their places with new Princes.
And now I speak of mourning, I will be bold to say, before I pass any further, that instead of that, the greatest pleasure the Popes receive at any time, is the news of the death of a Cardinal; and on the other side, the Cardinals are as glad at the death of the Pope, and that either out of hopes to arrive at the Popedom themselves, or at least by virtue of their own negotiations, to preferr some person depending upon their amity and beck. The Popes rejoyce to have vacancies in the Colledge, out of a desire to leave great numbers of Creatures oblig'd to follow the interest of the Nipotisme: And because the Cardinal Princes do usually walk in wayes that are independant, and most agreeable to the interest of their own Families, and to the publick advantage of the Church; or rather because they are asham'd to give their Votes at the direction of the Nephews, therefore are the Popes so carefull of their interest, so shy and cautious in promoting them, holding this as a Maxime, that so many Caps as are given to the Princes, so many Votes are given away from the Nephews: And this it is, that inclines them to make Cardinals rather of such persons as will (with Reverence be it spoken) be led by the Nose by the Nipotisme, than of the Princes, that would certainly make the Popes Ne∣phews to follow them. Nor is it a wonder, seeing in truth, the more those Cardinals that are made by the dozens, are oblig'd to follow the Commands of the Nipotisme, the more are the Car∣dinal Princes concern'd to preserve the liberty of the Colledge, and to endeavour that the Nephews do follow their steps. The ordinary Cardinals receive the Cap, because it suits with the interest of the Nipotisme: The Princes receive the Purple, because the Majesty of Christendom, and the reputation of the Sacred Colledge requires it; and besides these are oblig'd to defend the priviledges of the Colledge, and the honour of the Church; whereas the other are ty'd only to gratifie the Nipotisme, and shew themselves slaves as it were to their wills. The Popes therefore being well instructed in this kind of learn∣ing, do for the most part fill up the Colledge with persons fit to be commanded, and in spight of the honour of the Church, keep off those that are able to Command, and that indeed have deserv'd it. At least if the Popes be not inclin'd to the honour of the Church, and the glory of the Cardinalitial Colledge, and do not therefore create them Cardinals that are Princes born; yet they ought to take care to advance such as are learned, for their own private reputations, the Church having great need of them; for seeing the Hereticks write so learnedly against it, it is necessary it should be defended with learning. The Colledge of Cardinals was never so ill provided with learned men, as now; 'tis true, it abounds in imaginary learning enough, every one believing himself wiser than Solomon; and these are not my Sentiments only, but the opinion of such as are daily in Rome, and nearly conversant with the Cardinals themselves, and have frequent opportu∣nities to make the experiment. When I first took a resolution of publishing this Work, which I had before con∣ceiv'd in my mind, I writ several Letters to my Friends in Rome, and in other places, that they should give me a relation of the several Cardinals, and of their virtues and vices; particularly I requested, with reiterated instances, that they would give me ad∣vice, what Learning there was amongst them, which of the Cardinals had the most of it, and whether any of them was more learned than other people. The Answers were different in this particular, but they agreed well enough in the main: One writ me word, That learning was so rare amongst them, that with all the dili∣gence he could use, he could not find the least print of it. Another writ, That there were so many ignorant Cardinals, they would not suffer a learned one to be seen. There was one, and (which is more considerable) a Priest, that sent me word, That he could not find a Cardinal in the Sacred Colledge, that had spent so much time at School, as he had lost in enquiring what improvements they had made by their study. An Academick return'd me this answer; That Literature was out of fashion at Court, because every one pretended to be learned, in so much that the Cardinals valued not to be so, because they look'd upon learning as Pedantique and beneath them. A Roman all wit, and indifferently well learned▪ return'd me this answer, That the Cardinals were created by the Popes, and their Nephews, and they had rather find rich persons, than learned. Not unlike to
this was the answer of one of my greatest Confidents, who writ to me in this manner. SIR, Your humour is not at all corresponding with the humour of the Nephews, they look for money from the Cardinals, and you for learning; but I can assure you the Nephews understand them better than you, because money is easier found amongst them▪ than learning: had the Church the power of electing her Cardinals, I am sure the Colledge would be of ano∣ther mold; but the Nephews having the creation of them at their pleasures, is the reason why there are so many ignorant ones; because they think not so much of the advantage of the Church▪ as of their own. Formerly they chose persons eminent in all sorts of learning, because the genius of that age was inclin'd to virtue, but at present, virtuous men may lye and rot in their studies, it is an age of gold in Rome, I mean for the Popes, who have abso∣lute power to make▪ and unmake, and to bestow his Caps, as he pleases. Forbear I beseech you to inquire after learned Cardinals any further, lest you your self be thought ignorant, for with us everybody knows there is nothing less thought on in Rome. With this Letter, I receiv'd another at the same time, but from another of my friends, that writ thus, Among the Cardinals there are many ignorant to be found, few that un∣derstand latin, but of hose that you call moderately learned, the number is so small, I am asham'd to give you an account on't; nevertheless I would force my self to endure that dis∣couragement (for 'tis certainly a discouragement for a man to seek a thing in a place, where it is not to be found) if their virtue was accompany'd with modesty; for to say the truth, those few Cardinals that have any learning, have so overlay'd it with vice, that ignorance would be more desirable with a good conversation, than the greatest depth of learning with an ill one. And this is the discourse at Rome of the Scholarship of the Cardinals; a thing that brings no small incommodity to the Christian Religion, because it cannot support it self without the assistance of learned men, who are they indeed that serve as banks against the impetuosity of that torrent, that springs dayly from the Fountain of Heresie, by a stream of false opinions, indangering the pollution of that pure Evangelical River, that purles so sweetly and sonorously in the ears of the Faithful. And this is demonstrated by sundry eminent persons, that by the labour of their hands, and the sweat of their brains, have confuted thousand of Heresies; and it is well enough known to our age that has had the fortune to see those two Lamps of learning▪ Bellarmine and Toledo, combating with so much ardour against Hereticks, and spending more sweat in the service of the Church, than can easily be imagin'd. At present, such as they seem to be banish'd out of the Church, as well as from the Consistory of Cardinals, for there is not any one now adayes that undertakes the defence of Christianity against its enemies: yet I am unwilling to think that learning is banish'd out of the Church, but rather out of the hearts of the Popes, who forgetting their duties in the promotions of Cardinals, have no other aim, than to accommodate their own Fami∣lies, before the Church of Christ; so that they not only take no care, to find out learned men, but they dispise them when they are offer'd. This is the reason that all that are in Rome do strive to be aforehand with the world, and to obtain the good will of his Holiness, not by such means as were formerly us'd; for of old, the Popes requir'd nothing but learning of those persons that desir'd to pass to the most conspicuous degree in the Church; and therefore no body durst so much as pre∣tend to any office or dignity, that was not largely endued with that, and the more Scho∣larship they had, the sooner were they receiv'd by his Holiness. At present they have other methods; learning is so ineffectual in the Vatican, that there is no one dares venture to carry it thither, it being much better to batter their Gates that rule the roast now with Gold, than with any thing else, for 'tis that which will open them soonest. It is not many months since, I ask'd a certain Curate that was reading these words, In principio erat Verbum, the cause why ignorance raign'd so much amongst the Priests, and he answered me in these words; Men would be beasts to study to be Priests, whilst the Popes makes Cardinals of Asses: Every body knows, that if it be easie for the beast of a Priest to obtain a Cap, 'twill be much more easie for a Secular Ass to be made a Canon. The Religious, that are in so little request at the Court (I mean those of any reading) retire themselves from their Studies, with hopes, that by forbearing to prosecute and im∣prove
their learning, they shall be able to advance themselves, because they observe 'tis ignorance, not learning, bestows the places in the Vatican. In short, I find the strictest account the Popes are to give at the Tribunal of Gods Justice, is, that they have dis∣courag'd learning, and promoted ignorant. I know all this is better known to the Popes, than to me; but the misery is, they will not know what they are oblig'd to do, and which would immortallize their names much better than the Gold they leave to their Nephews. Their Gold will fail them, but their good names will never, and yet this good name is nothing so dear to the Popes, as the other; but if they would content themselves with a little of both, the business would be something tollerable. If the number of the Cardinals were but six or seven, as they were in the infancy of the Church, the Popes indeed might have some excuse, that might satisfie such Princes as deserve Caps, and such learned persons as the Church have need of; but what can they say now for refusing to introduce learned men, and Princes, into the Colledge? I will not stand here to make an Epilogue, nor recite many places in the History of the Popes, in which they speak of dozens of Cardinals created without so much as one Prince, or one learned man; there being no other design, but the satisfaction of private interest. He that understands the History of the Court of Rome, let him have the curiosity to see whether I lye or not; let him read the description of the Promotions, that would know the quality of the persons that are created Cardinals. Ʋrban the eighth, after he had created seventy and more, towards the latter end of his life resolv'd to make one per∣son a Cardinal, out of pure consideration of his learning, and that was Father Gio. di Lug a Spanish Jesuite; but if the truth were known, there were other reasons beside, for that would have scarcely been sufficient. In short, it is necessary that we pray to Almighty God to inspire the Popes to search out for persons worthy of their Promoti∣ons, and proper by the Majesty of their person, and the excellence of their parts, to de∣fend the Church of Christ, that lyes afflicted both within and without; without by its publique Enemies, and within by its private; without by the Hereticks, that torture her with their false opinion, within by the Nephews, that destroy and devour her. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.
Il CARDINALISMO di Santa Chiesa, OR THE HISTORY OF CARDINALS. In III. Parts. PART II. BOOK III. The Contents. VVherein is discours'd of the birth and advancement of Cardinal Flavio Chigi, Nepew to Pope Alexander. Of the intention of Don Mario his Father to Marry him. Of the arrival of the said Don Mario at Rome. The decla∣ration of a Cardinal Padrone, in the person of Chigi. Of his abilities in the beginning of his Padronship. Of the little covetousness he shew'd to laying up money. Of his Legation into France. Of Cardinal Bonvisi, and of his de∣sign to remove himself to Rome, to try his fortunes. Of his resolutions to keep from the Court. Of the renuntiation of the Prefectship. Of his being declar'd Maestro di Camera, and of his promotion to the Cardinalship. Of his good qualities, and the ill actions of Francisco Bonvisi his Nephew. Of the evident tokens of virtue Cardinal Elci shew'd from his youth. Of the satisfaction that he gave to the Senate, when he was Nuntio at Venice. Of his passage from Venice into Germany. Of the great esteem Innocent the tenth had of the person of Cardinal Farnese. Of what he had done in favour
of the house of Chigi. Of the prejudice he might have had against it, in case of a vacancy. Of his disgust with Cardinal Barbarino. Of the animo∣sity betwixt him and Cardinal Imperiale. Of his great obstinacy in defend∣ing his opinions. Of the promotion of Anthonio Bichi of Siena to the Car∣dinalship. Of the great pains the Chigi took to exclude Prior Bichi from the Colledge, and the reasons of that exclusion. Of the fair entertainment this Cardinal gives to those that have business with him. Of the means by which Cardinal Giacomo Franzone arriv'd at the Purple. Of his offices before he was made a Cardinal. Of his Love to Justice, and of his Charity to the Poor. Of his Kindred in Genoa. Of Cardinal Bonelli. And of the au∣thority Cardinal Imperiale has over him. Of the promotion of Celio Pic∣colomini to the Cardinalship. Of his leaving of Paris. Of what befell him by the way. Of his conference with the Spanish Ambassador. Of a Letter written by Monsignor Tellier. Of the trouble it was to his most Christian Majesty, to be oblig'd to use the Nuntio so severely, and yet it was but just. Of the opinion of the Court, that he would be made a Cardinal as soon as he arriv'd at Rome. Of the deserts and qualities of Cardinal Caraffa. Of the great dexterity wherewith he negotiated the return of the Jesuits to Ve∣nice, when he was Nuntio. Of his Legation of Bolonia. Of Cardinal An∣gelo Celsi a Roman. Of certain faults that he fell into in his Youth. Of his abilities in politick affairs, and how great they are. Of the Family of the Savelli, and how much it is esteem'd. Of Cardinal Paulo Savelli. Of his great knowledge in affairs of State. Of Cardinal Litta, Arch-Bishop of Mi∣lan. Of the excellence of his life. Of the Pique he had to the Spaniards, and of the common opinion about it. Of Cardinal Nerio Corsini a Floren∣tine. Of his qualities. Of his Legation to Ferrara. Of the great pains wherewith Cardinal Paluzzi has serv'd the Church. Of his goodness and de∣crepitage. Of the qualities of Cardinal Rasponi. Of the conclusion of his Nun∣tiature in France. Of his clear and unbyass'd judgement of the Abbot Ras∣poni his Nephew. Of Cardinal Conti, and of the worthy persons that Fa∣mily has afforded several times. Of his qualities that are an ornament to the Ecclesiastical Habit. Of Cardinal Pietro Vidoni of Cremona. Of Cardinal Barbarigo a Venetian. Of Cardinal Pascale d'Aragona a Spaniard. Of Cardinal Mancini a Roman. Of Cardinal Buon Compagni a Bolonese. Of Cardinal Nini of Siena. Of Cardinal Roberti a Roman. Of Cardinal Spi∣nola of Genoa. Of Cardinal Visconti of Milan. Of Cardinal Caraccioli a Neapolitan. Of Cardinal Delfini a Venetian. Of Cardinal Baldo de Tun a German. Of Cardinal Vendosme a Frenchman. Of Cardinal Moncada a Sicilian. Of the last Cardinals made by Clement the ninth, and of some other particulars. I Ought not to omit in this place to enter upon an Anotomy of the customs, qualities, effects, and inclinations of the Cardinals created by Alexander the seventh, for several respects, but more particularly, be∣cause the greatest part of them are but little known in the Court▪ as ha∣ving worn the Cardinalitial habit no long time in Rome, as well as be∣cause they profess there to make their inclinations investigable; how∣ever, having hitherto taken great pains to procure Memoires from all parts, that the work I exhibit might not be altogether imperfect, I shall with that tast taken from the
Memoires that were sent me by several persons actually in the service of Cardinals, pro∣ceed in the relation following in this book; but so, that in the multiplicity of occurren∣ces touching the Cardinals created by Alexander the seventh, I shall endeavour to be short, and that the impression may be the greater in the memory of the Reader, I shall restrain my self only to the most substantial and material things. I shall begin therefore according to the order of precedence with those that were first promoted to the Car∣dinalship. FLAVIO CHIGI Nephew to Alexander the seventh, born in the year 1631. in the City of Siena, was the eldest Son of Don Mario, Brother to Alexander, and Don∣na Berenice a Lady of Siena of the Family of Ciaia, who alwayes had a particular affecti∣on for Flavio her son. Don Mario took what care he could to have him brought up to learning, but his inclinations leading him another way, he made small progress in that; but contrary to the documents of his Father, he apply'd himself to divert amongst other young men, rather than to converse amongst books: and that the more, because he found himself to be the only male of the Family of the Chigi, and therefore was sure he should be married to keep up the house. Don Mario though he was inclin'd for several respects to marry him▪ he endeavour'd nevertheless to ease himself of that charge, by recommending him to his Brother Car∣dinal Chigi, who was afterwards Alexander the seventh, to the end, that being near him he might be instructed in such politick Maximes, as pass'd dayly thorough his hands, as he was Secretary; an office the said Cardinal Chigi, had injoy'd for some time in Rome. But he whose designs were wholly bent upon the Vatican, most hypocritically pre∣tended, not only to shew himself impartial and disinterested to his own Family, but their enemy rather, refusing to admit any of them about him▪ especially his Nephew Flavio, who he knew wanted such parts as were worthy to be seen in the Court of Rome. Don Mario perceiving which way things went, resolv'd by all means possible to provide some advantagious match for his Son, and had several of the most considerable Ladies of Siena in his eye; though he was sure enough in respect of the smalness of his Estate, he was not likely to carry them. In short, Flavio lived there, making of love, Courting of this Lady and of that, and minding nothing but his amours, without the least thought of ever being a Cardinal; and indeed, had any one told him he should one day be one of the principal Cardinals in the Colledge, and provided with so many Benefices and prefer∣ments, he would have thought without doubt he had but droll'd: so small an opinion his Associates had of his person. But fortune that goes far in Rome, and is as it were Arbitrator of all the Families in Siena, chang'd the face of affairs in such manner, that by the help of some small merit that was found in the person of Cardinal Chigi, he was assum'd to the Papacy, under the name of Alexander the seventh. This news was so welcome to Don Mario, he almost ran mad at the hearing it, and would have been marching immediately to Rome; but the Pope (keeping close to his Hypocrisie, as he had promis'd long before he was exalted) declar'd, he would by no means admit any of his Relations into Rome. And this whim∣sey continued for some months to the great displeasure of Don Mario, who went fret∣ting, and distracted up and down, to see his younger Brother the greatest Monarch in the world, abounding in all manner of wealth, and himself to live poorly in Siena with∣out any command or authority. Wherefore, besides his own, he desir'd the prayers of the Religious Mendicants, that God Almighty would change that obstinate humour in his Brother; and accordingly by the Prayers of the one or the other, it was chang'd, and all of them call'd to the Vatican. No sooner did Don Mario appear triumphantly in Rome, with the preheminence that was due to a person so nearly related to the Pope, but he began by the impuion of his own ambitious Spirit, to endeavour the advancement of his Son; he pretended that himself as the most antient, and his Son as the eldest of all the youth of the Family of the Chigi, ought to take upon them the perpetuation of their name; intending thereby to do his tmost that his Son might marry some Princess or other, according to his own re∣quest, who was much more inclin'd to a Wife than a Cap; but the Pope would not hear
of that ear, but commanded Flavio to be contented with a Cap, having resolv'd to find out a Wife for Don Agostino, a Nephew of the Popes likewise, but by another brother, whose memory had more influence with his Holiness, because he had receiv'd greater kindness from him than from Don Mario, and would therefore renew his memory in the person of Don Agostino, whom he declar'd head of the Chigi, to the no small displeasure of Flavio, that was made a Cardinal at the first Promotion, and retain'd in his heart some sparks of envy towards his Cousin; but his Holiness to extinguish them, comported himself so, that by showing them favour alternately, he took away all occasion of Jea∣lousie and emulation. Flavio being declar'd Cardinal, and which is more Cardinal Padrone, with power to give audience to Ambassadors, and with authority to negotiate the greatest affairs of the Church, in case of any indisposition in the Pope; he began by little and little to take upon him exceedingly, and apply himself wholly to the execution of it, But the Pope his Unckle, who understood his debility too well to commit such a charge intirely to him, he left him no liberty at all, but in appearance, dispatching all things himself, and using all possible care to instruct him in such things as were requisite in that place. It seem'd to the Cardinal, that with the authority and superintendency that was given him, he had receiv'd trouble enough to break his brain, a thing he abhorr'd in his very nature; insomuch, that as often as his business increas'd, so often would he be disgusted, and re∣pine at his Cousin Agostino, that injoy'd all the felicities and applauses of the Court, without the least disturbance at all: and therefore without any respect to the admoni∣tions of his Father, who exhorted him to acquaint himself by all possible diligence in the mysteries of the Court, he exercis'd the office of Padrone only, in taking recreations, and turning his back upon all business that would give him any trouble, to the no small dissa∣tisfaction of his Unckle, who was forc'd thereby to swallow more of it himself. In short, he began to be so well known to all the publique Ministers that were resident in the Court, for his weakness and indexterity in politick affairs, that in matters of im∣portance, they thought it better to make their addresses immediately to his Holiness, than to make use of the interposition of the Cardinal Padrone, who for the most part was entertaining himself with his ordinary pastimes, to which he was inclin'd more natu∣rally, than to the troubles of the Court; and indeed all those that had a mind to try their fortunes, and to negotiate with him, lost their labour and their time, he forgetting eve∣ry circumstance of what he was inform'd, so strange an addiction he had to his sports, and so strange an aversion to any thing of business. Towards the latter end of the Pontificate of his Unckle (by reason he was tyr'd with the multitudes of business he had undertaken at the beginning of his Papacy, and began to allow his Nephew more reins) he shew'd himself diligent enough in his office of Pa∣dronancy, but yet without renouncing his ordinary recreations. He is indifferently well vers'd in the History of Italy▪ and discourses of it upon occasion, with some sort of judge∣ment. They that have business, go away contented still, but not satisfi'd, for being ve∣ry civil, and courtly, he sends them off well furnish'd with complements and good words, though in strictness, they signifie nothing: yet some few months before the death of his Unckle, when he had absolute authority to dispose of things as he pleas'd, he precipitated as it were, the businesses that were before him, using at that time more deeds than words, and yet nevertheless the greatest satisfaction any of them had, was fair promises, and ci∣vil usage, he shewing himself indifferent to all, though otherwise he was of a nature that would truckle to the first difficulty that appear'd. In the time of the Padronancy of this Cardinal, he shew'd no great covetousness, but chose rather to spend, than to lay up, and that, as was suppos'd for two reasons; the first, for that he had no other Nephew for his Brother, his branch determining in himself, and envying also on the other side Don Agostino his Cousin, he contented himself to be careless of getting, lest thereby he should render his Cousins branch more considerable. The other reason was, because he saw his Father Don Mario so anxious and greedy, whose Estate he knew would fall to him, as the only Male of his time, as indeed after∣wards it did. But the last year he chang'd his opinion, and gave himself with that fury to the filling his Coffers, as if he car'd not for the ill name he would leave amongst the people.
In his Legation into France, he gave more instances of generosity, then of any thing else, endeavouring to give every body satisfaction; and truly all the French that had any thing to do with him, were well pleas'd with the humanity of his entertainment; though in strictness he kept not his word with his Majesty in the business of Castro, and of the next Conclave. At the beginning of his Unckles Pontificate, not knowing which way was most fit for him to follow, whether the interest of France, or of Spain, he carried himself with a certain indifference to both. But the Spaniards found a way, though not wholly, yet in great part, to gain him, so that in many things he favour'd the Spanish interest, to the utmost of his power, yet so as not to disoblige the French, whom if he did not love, he did not hate at all. But after the attempt upon the Duke of Crequy, he became for the Spaniard clearly at his heart, though he durst not do any thing to provoke the King of France, whose anger he dreads exceedingly. After the death of his Unckle, it was impossible but he must receive some affront both from the people, and the Col∣ledge; yet he knew how to swallow all with prudence, endeavouring with large pre∣sents, to gain the favour of the Nephews regnant. GIROLAMO BONVISI, a Noble man of Lucca, repair'd to Rome with design to try his fortune, as others of his Countrymen were wont; to that end he apply'd himself to the courting of the Barbarini then regnant, with all patience and assiduity, for he knew very well how to gain their affection. Cardinal Antonio knowing him to be inclin'd to secrecy; began to have confidence in him, and to entrust him in matters of no ordinary importance, and particularly in the time of the Wars with the Princes of Italy, he made use of him as of a well-affected Minister; which being ill understood by some Courtiers, they made sport with it in their discourse. He bought the Chiericatura di Camera, in which he gain'd some reputation, especially in the Assemblies da Cameranti, being very well practis'd in matters concerning the pro∣fession of Law. Afterwards being grown into particular favour, he discharg'd himself in several Offices that he executed with good reputation. But being troubled at the in∣constancy of the Court, to see persons preferr'd to eminent degrees, that were less de∣serving than himself, he took a resolution to leave them, and return into his own Coun∣try, as he did afterwards, and remain'd for a long time out of Rome, to the great admira∣tion of many, because he had at first express'd such constancy to the Court. The principal cause of his absence was, because he could not endure that insatiable liberty, that Donna Olimpia us'd in getting of money, with so much diminution of the Treasure of the Church; and particularly, when he saw the bartering for the Taxes upon Provisions, he generously refus'd the Prefecture, that he might not be instrumental in so infamous a business; which Innocent, and Donna Olimpia especially, taking in dudgeon, they began to contrive some way of doing him a displeasure: which he ha∣ving notice of, retired, and thereby escap'd that Rock he might otherwise have fallen upon. This renuntiation of the Prefecture, gave Bonvisi a great reputation in the Court, and made him be look'd upon as a person of great conscience and integrity. But amongst all, Cardinal Chigi took a particular kindness for him, and as soon as he was made Pope, by the name of Alexander the seventh, without any supplication or intercession at all, he call'd him into his service; he being satisfy'd thereby, that Alexander look'd no fur∣ther than the merits, and qualities of the persons, he began to rejoyce, and revive those hopes he thought had been utterly extinct. Being arriv'd at Rome, it was not long before he was declar'd Maestro di Camera to his Holiness; in which he gave so good satisfaction to the Pope, that in the first promo∣tion he (with five others so qualify'd) were created Cardinals, to the great joy of the whole Court. The qualities of this Cardinal are commended every where, he having all the virtues and good parts that are requisite, to make a man esteem'd; he loving, and respecting every one again, endeavouring by the sweetness of his converse to gain the affections of the Court, but of the Princes especially; using all dexterity, and avoiding with all possi∣ble caution to shew himself devoted to either of the Crowns. So that amongst all the Cardinals that desir'd to live in a Neutrality, this may be most properly said to have
manag'd it the best. He negotiates with every body, with great candour, gives audience o such as have business with him, with incredible benignity; and which is more, he endeavours by all means to send them satisfy'd away, at least with good words, in which he do's not a little abound; but not with that flattering and complemental stile that is us'd in Rome, for to that he is a very great enemy, though there be many other Cardi∣nals and Prelates of that Court, which follow nothing else. But all the lustre of his good qualities, is in some measure adumbrated by certain de∣fects that are observ'd in him. He being indispos'd, and naturally disinclin'd to business, loves his ease, and sometimes to the prejudice of affairs, which he pursues not with that vigour and assiduity that is necessary. So that many believe he will scarce arrive at the Papacy, and that the rather because he has a Nephew that he loves exceedingly, call'd Francisco Bonvisi, Maestro di Camera to Chigi, a cruel and barbarous person, full of a thousand vices, who in case of his Unckles exaltation, would be the Protoquamquam in Rome. But for all this Bonvisi may have a pull for it in his turn. SCIPIONE DE CONTI d'ELCI, of Siena, from the beginning of his youth, gave great tokens of his capacity to try his fortune in the habit of a Prelate; by his own in∣clination therefore, and to satisfie his Parents that put him forward, as thinking so great ingenuity would be injur'd in not doing it, he went to Rome, where by degrees he wrought himself into the most conspicuous and most intricate affairs there. He was sent Nuntio to Venice, and carry'd himself so much to the satisfaction of the Senate, that he was ador'd amongst them as an Oracle. Yet his negotiation for the Churches, for provision for the Bishops, succeeded not so well, some of them remain∣ing without Pastors all the time of his Nuntiature, by reason of the differences betwixt the Pope, and the Senate; but this was no small trouble to the Nuntio, especially being by frequent Letters solicited by his Holiness, as if he could have turn'd and wound the Venetians about, as he had pleas'd: but they are too carefull and vigilant, to suffer Rome to set his foot upon any Priviledge of theirs. About the end of his Pontificate, Pope Innocent sent him Nuntio from thence into Germany, whose departure displeas'd the Senate in some measure, as being doubtfull to have some giddy Capriccious Nuntio sent in his place, that would be fitter to foment, than extinguish their differences; whereas Monsignor Elci, had for many years manag'd the business with that prudence, that if the quarrels were not absolutely compos'd, they were at least kept from increasing, by a peculiar and Noble way he had of transacting. He remain'd about two years in Germany, in which time Alexander the seventh his Kinsman, being made Pope, he thought he could not discharge his Conscience, as he de∣clar'd to several, without promoting a person of his worth to the Cardinalship; yet he would not promote him for his Title of Nuntio, but as he was a gratefull man, and wor∣thy of that honour; and besides, he was desirous his Kindred should have their share in that Promotion. This is most certain, this Cardinals qualities do render him worthy not of the Purple only, but of the Popedom; in the obtaining of which, (if the Election happen'd in his time) he could meet no impediment but his being of Siena: for to speak truth, the Court has been glutted with Popes from Siena. He is charitable, kind, and a great lover of his Friend: He intends his business is of great Authority in the Con∣sistory, and his opinion in the Congregations more respected than any ones. His Kindred trouble him not much, but perhaps would do more if he were Pope: He can dissemble well, and seems to take no notice of an injury, though it be written very deep in his heart. GIROLAMO FARNESE a Roman, has made a shift, without any Foreign assistance, to scramble into several Honours. In his youth he was thought wild and un∣constant, and he was so indeed; but he grew more discreet, and prudently by degrees wrought off all those imputations that might hurt him, reserving only, or endeavouring to acquire, those virtues that are necessary in Rome to the gaining of a Cap; which design breaks the sleep of many a good Prelate. Innocent the tenth, who was so difficult to accommodate with another mans opinion, had so great an esteem for this person, that in all his affairs he would have his judgement
still, and pris'd it so, as to preferr it to his own; and which is more, to give him further credit in the Court, he declar'd publiquely to all that he convers'd with, that the Coun∣sels of that man were worthy to be embrac'd by any Pope whatsoever, because they were deliver'd with prudence, integrity, and learning, which are in effect the virtues that ought to illustrate the Councellors of a Pope. This great affection of the Pope, gave no small jealousie to the rest of the Prelats who pretended to have deserv'd better than those for which Farnese was call'd to the new Car∣dinalship, every body being assur'd that Pope Innocent would promote him. But this I shall say more, that some wits that envy'd his good fortune, made Libels on him, calling him most commonly the fifth Evangelist. But those persons that were sounder in their judgements, did but laugh at these re∣ports, and the reputation Farnese had amongst the people; knowing the inconstancy of his Spirit, they were patient, and cry'd still, observe the end. And indeed it succeeded as they presag'd, for Innocent being disgusted by him, that he had before look'd upon as an Oracle, either because he would not sing as he would have him, or that Donna Olim∣pia had given him a lift, or for other considerations unknown, he not only made no use of him in his affairs, but turn'd his love into disdain, reviling that person as extravagantly as ever he had commended him. Alexander the seventh, that pretended to understand the merits of a man, as well as any body, and was resolv'd to use no mans judgement but his own in the Election of his Cardinals, was no sooner leap'd into the Chair, but he made him his Maggior domo; and because he knew this person to have a brain capable to dispatch several businesses at once, he gave him a hundred employments, there being never a Congregation; where there was any affair of importance to be transacted, but he was present, and yet he dis∣charg'd exactly his duty, as he was Maggior domo, to the satisfaction of the Pope, en∣deavouring with might and main to secure himself of the affection of the house of Chigi, by whose favour he facilitated the acquisition of the Terra Farnese, which was his own jurisdiction, and found out a way to exclude the Duke of Parma, who was to succeed him in case the right line fail'd. All these things consider'd, the Pope resolv'd to give him a Cap, and at the same time sent him Legat to Bologna, in which, he carry'd himself to his Holinesses satisfaction; but he found things well dispos'd, by the good management of Lomelini his Predecessor, who had govern'd that City to the incredible satisfaction of the People. He is a man of a very great brain, which perhaps would be a prejudice to him if the Chair was vacant, because they all know too much wind does more hurt to a Ship, than too little. In all his Negotiations he has behav'd himself like a true Roman. It is a hard matter to find a man so devoted to business as he. He administers justice with such ex∣actness, that it appears severity. He is old, and of a weakly complection, and yet of a strange extravagant life, going to supper, either when other people rise, or go to bed. He is not much inclin'd to Piety, nor Charity; he gives Almes sometimes, but 'tis more out of policy, than any thing else: all the injuries that are done him, stick close at his heart, so that he does best that offends him not at all, and so much the rather, because he can dissemble his malice so well. For some months past, he has forborn coming to the Congregations del Annona, upon a disgust that Cardinal Barbarino gave him, by obstructing some resolutions of his, under pretence that it was necessary to stay till the Abbot Rospigliosi was present; but he had a greater quarrel with Imperiale, because he oppos'd himself in one of the Congre∣gations against Farnese, about the validity of the Bull for the Incameration of Castro, for which Imperiale had no great thanks, he having thereby expos'd himself to the indigna∣tion of the Crown of France. In short, Farnese is something refractory in his opinion, and is angry with every body, when things go not as he advises; and sometimes he is angry alone. He has but few Kindred, and those he has, have so little esteem for him, that they do not care to trouble him; yet some suspect that all is but Hypocrisie, and like that of Alexander the sevenths, who alwayes express great alienation to his, till he was Pope, and then he chang'd his mind to some purpose, so that the more he hated them when he
was a Cardinal, the more he lov'd them when he was Pope; and just so it is believ'd Farnese would do, were he in that quality. He is moreover no great rewarder of his Servants, nor do his Friends receive much benefit by his protection, he showing himself but indifferent in the affairs of his greatest Confidents. ANTHONIO BICHI of Siena, is Nephew to the Sister of Alexander the se∣venth, and Brother to Prior Bichi, a Knight of Malta, and one that has the commenda∣tions of a very worthy man. The Popes design was to make a Cardinal of the Knight, and to leave the other alone in his Bishoprick of Osimo; but to prevent that, the whole Family of the Chigi conspir'd, I mean the branches of Don Mario, and Don A∣gostino. The Knight had intelligence of all, and made all imaginable submission to redintigrate with Cardinal Flavio, and Don Agostino, and such as perhaps the worst Servant he had would have scorn'd to have done; but ambition was too predominant in his heart, and the extreme desire he had to be a Cardinal, would have made him do ten times worse to obtain it. However he was not so fortunate, for the Chigi were too positive for his ex∣clusion, though they seem'd well enough satisfi'd with his obsequiousness. The principal cause of this opposition of the Nephews, proceeded from a suspition they had, that if that Cousin of theirs should arrive at the Cardinalship, that is, into such an eminent degree, as would authorize him to speak his mind freely, he would not fail to create some differences betwixt them, and that the rather, because they had already more jealousies of one another, than the Pope, or their Conanguinity would allow: nor indeed was their fear without reason; for though he be outwardly civil, he has a strange dexterity at setting other people by the ears. In this manner the Cavalier being excluded, with no little satisfaction to the Chigi, who thought they had atchiev'd a great matter; the other Brothers interest was set on foot, against which the Chigi made not only no opposition, but recommended him to his Holiness, who to revive the memory of his Sister, was resolv'd to make of them a Cardi∣nal. Alexander having resolv'd from the beginning of his Papacy to give the Cavalier a Cap, could not without some repugnancy be perswaded to quit that resolution, and give it to the other Brother, that he never intended; nor was it a wonder, for the Ca∣valier knew well enough by acts of submission, and obsequiousness of behaviour, how to gain upon his Unckle: whereas the other remaining as it were shut up in his Church at Osnno, had not those opportunities to ingratiate with him that had the power to ad∣vance him to the degree he is now in, perhaps by the ill fate of his Brother the Ca∣valier. Whilst he was Bishop of Osimo, he gave good demonstration of his ability in governing the Church; having wrought himself into the hearts of all people, especially the Clergy, who magnifi'd him for one of the best Bishops that ever was in that place. After he was promoted to the Cardinalship, his Holiness began to employ him in several important and politick affairs. But in a short time it was plain, that what credit he got in his Pasto∣ral Cure, he lost in his Negotiations, insomuch that in many Congregations he was al∣most ridiculous. The Pope understood very well, that his parts were but indifferent, and therefore he gave him some leaure to improve himself, which he has done so effectually, that if in the Congregations his Vote be not the first, it is not most certainly the last, he having grown to a capacity of penetrating into the good and bad of an affair, and of choosing the best when he has done. He receives all persons that come to him, with great civility, and endeavours to ingra∣tiate with the Ministers of Princes, without giving occasion of jealonie either to one or other. He seems a great enemy to tumults and noise, yet fails not upon occasion to speak his own sence, and that with some violence of words. He was very devout and pious when he was a Bishop, and they are much increas'd since he was made a Cardinal. In short, he also is driving at the Popedom, but I fear he will miscarry, as all the rest have done that have taken his way. GIACOMO FRANZONI of Genoa, Cardinal with the Title of Santa Maria in Aquino, advanc'd himself to the Cardinalship by the same means which are com∣monly us'd by his Countrymen. In the Popedom of Innocent he had several Offices, be∣sides
the Tesorieria della Camera, which he bought with ready money; for the Pope either at the request of his Cousin, or because he knew him a person of worth, would not suffer him to be idle, but heap'd Governments upon him continually: He was made General of the Holy Church, Keeper of the Castle of Saint Angels, General of the Popes Gallies, and Commissioner for the Armes, all of them executed by him at a time. By reason his Imployments were so many, he was thought by some to be too tedious in his resolutions, and not unjustly, he himself not knowing sometimes which way to turn him, but mistaking his business, he dispatch'd that which was last, having forgot what was before. By this many people suffer'd not a little in their affairs, and complain'd much of his delay, which proceeded not so much from any ill principle in him, as from a torrent of business that overwhelm'd him, and left him scarce time to take his breath: in one Scene, like a Comedian, acting two persons, the Souldier and the Prelate, not only to the admiration of the people, but the indignation of other persons of merit, that were left idle, without any imployment at all. This Cardinal in all the Congregations where he came, was very doubtfull and irre∣solute, and all from a certain subtilty that he has, in penetrating into the affairs that are before him, sifting and deliberating what is to be done, without considering it will be determin'd without him. He is a great lover of Justice, very zealous, and a particular favourer of the poor, in so much that when he was Legate of Ferrara, (which he exercis'd to his praise) he recommended daily to the Judges, that they should have special regard, that the Poor should not be oppress'd by the Potent, in their Tryals at Law; and hearing upon a time that there was a Suit betwixt a Noble man, and a Commoner, he would not trust it to the Judges, but took it into his own hands, least the Noble man some way or other might have wrought upon the Judges to have given sentence in his favour. This Cardinal has store of good qualities, he is a person of a good Conscience, candid, subtil, and has not those scruples, that make other Cardinals be thought hypocrites, rather than honest men; he is very well read in the Rules of Friendship, studies what he can to preserve it, and it is good therefore to have him for one Friend. He is very chast, and therefore it was never heard that he committed any sensual sin: Towards the Princes he is indifferent, keeping himself equally betwixt both the Crowns, and without giving the least token or inclination of depending more upon one than the other, keeping the middle way. He is not prodigal, but liberal enough in rewarding his Servants. In short, he is not over covetous, though he be a Genoese. The Ecclesiastical habit sits well upon his back, because his manners and humour is proper to ennoble it; he is imploy'd in rectify∣ing the abuses in his Bishoprick of Camerino. His age is about 55. and he is not much subject to infirmities. As to his Kindred, he has two Brothers, one married, the other not; he has a Nephew also, the Son of the elder of the two Brothers, who is call'd Anfrano Franzoni, a youth of good humour, studious, and much addicted to Learning. Of the two Brothers one of them is call'd Agostino Franzoni, a person of good conversation too, particularly intent upon the discharge of such Offices as are given him by that Republique, and very curious in the liberal Arts; but he spends his money alla Genoese. The other Brother is call'd Paulo Geronimo, and wholly devoted to the interest of that Commonwealth. I will not say whether this Cardinal aims at the Ppoedom, because he is a Genoese, which is as much as to say, he does not. CARLO BONELLI corresponds in great part with his Name, which signifies little goodness; he offends in many things, more out of an affected simplicity that he pretends to, to be counted Holy, than for any thing else: But he has one great fault indeed, and that is, that he suffers himself to be led by the Nose in matters of greatest consequence, and in trifles and things of no importance he is so peremptory, fifty yoak of Oxon can∣not remove him. Cardinal Imperiale his Unckle manages him, as a Rider does a great Horse, making him gallop, and change as he pleases, so that his Vote depends clearly on his Unckle, to whom to speak truth, Bonelli is bound by all obligations to be obsequious, because it was by his contrivance and intercession the Cap fell upon Bonelli's head, he never being able
to have obtain'd it himself. This is certain, there has not been a relation to be found that has shewn more zeal in the advancement of another, than Imperiale has demon∣strated to Bonelli; for as if he were not contented to have made him a Cardinal, he endeavour'd what he could to make him Pope, and if he had succeeded, Bonelli would have had the honour, but Imperiale would have gone away with the profit. This Cardinal before he obtain'd his Cap, was put very young upon the principal im∣ployments of the Court; he was made Governour, and sent Nuntio into Spain, more at the instance and intercession of Imperiale, who had a great interest at that time, than for any merits of his own. In which charges he neither diminish'd, nor encreas'd his repu∣tation amongst them that knew him. And indeed his parts are as small, as his stature, though Imperiale cryes him up for one of the greatest Politicians in the Court. Alex∣ander had never any great opinion of him, nevertheless he created him in the quality of Cardinal Nuntio▪ under the Title of Santa Anastasia. CELIO PICCOLOMINI, of a very good Family in Siena, is descended of a Pon∣tifical branch, though its leaves are much fallen. In the Popedom of Innocent, he went up and down courting those with great submission, that were in any esteem with the Pope, to advance himself to the place he is now in. He obtain'd some charges which he executed well; his talent is but small; he is full of good words, but loves alwayes to cross the stream; he sticks close enough to his Relations, but has not the liberality to give them any thing; he has no faults that make him unworthy of his honour, the Ec∣clesiastical Habit sitting well upon his back▪ Most of his Countrymen envy him, and es∣pecially they that have not prosper'd so well: he departed from his Nuntiature of France with no little disgust, of which it will not be impertinent to give a short description. The 20th. of August, there arriv'd a Courier from the French Ambassador, the Duke of Crequy, with an account of the accident that happen'd betwixt his Excellences Ser∣vants, and the Corsi. The King of France call'd a Councel immediately, which lasted for two hours and more, after which, the Comti di Brienne was sent to the Nuntio in his Majesties name to command him to leave Paris the next morning, and to retire to Meaux, and not to stir from thence till further order from his Majesty; pretending it as an expedient to secure his person▪ against some such tumult as happen'd in Rome. Piccolomini reply'd with all possible respect, that he would obey his Majesties order but he desir'd first to be heard, and went therefore that very night to Court; but being heard with nobody but Mounsieur Lyon, he declar'd the Sentiments of the Pope, the or∣der he had taken for the punishment of the offendors, the demonstrations of kindness the Pope had made to the Ambassador; endeavouring with all the art of Rhetorick, to clear the business, and by contrary relations to what came before, to let him understand he could not receive a Relegation. The next morning, the Nuntio retir'd to Saint Germans, and stirr'd not out of the Castle, that he might not seem to disobey the Orders of the King. Mounsieur Tellier came to speak with him by his Majesties permission, but being stiff and inflexible to the requests of the Nuntio, who by all his submissions, by laying before him the reflection, the ill usage of his person, would have upon the Church, not be∣ing able to prevail for the Protraction of his departure, as soon as he was return'd to his house, he writ him this Letter. Most Excellent Sir, I Can by no means admit that the Kings religation of me is a favour, if it be said that 'tis in order to my security, how great a reflection will it have upon the Grandeur of his Majesty, when it is reported that an innocent person, and his Holinesses Nuntio, could not be safe in Paris Let it be lawfull therefore for me with all due reverence and submission to say, that indeed it is at the Kings pleasure to retein or command me whither he pleases, but it is not in my power to consent without particular permission from his Holiness, or at least an apparent necessity for me to do it: His Majesty cannot ascribe it to any want of pro∣found Obedience in me▪ which for my part I shall alwayes shew with the greatest demonstra∣tions of humility and service I am able, and therefore I conceive he cannot in justice impose
any penalty upon a Nuntio, for so contingent an accident, especially his Holiness having already declar'd his resolution to chastise the offendors, and begun to execute that resolution. I hope your Excellence will have so much compassion, as in this case to endeavour the pro∣tection of Yours The Nuntio persisted that there ought to be an apparent and precise necessity for his departure; and accordingly on the 31. he receiv'd Letters from Monsieur de Lion, with reiterated orders from his Majesty, for his removal to Meaux; so that all the intercessi∣on of Foreign Ministers, who endeavour'd to mittigate the business, being in vain, by their advice he went out of Paris, but went instead of Meaux, to Saint Dennis, that he might not seem to consent to his dismission, and by the mediation of the Ministers about the King, and the interposition of Foreign Representatives, he obtain'd, that his resolution was allow'd at Court, without further irritation to his Majesty. It was re∣ported at first, that the Duke of Crequy had orders to be gone out of the Territories of the Church, and to retire to Siena; and when that order should be known to be execu∣ted, the Nuntio was to be dispatch'd likewise out of France. On the seventh of September, the Nuntio found himself beset by a party of forty Souldiers a horseback, drawn by order out of his Majesties Musquetoons, who guarded all the passages into the Covent of the Dominicans, where he lodg'd, and accompany'd the Nuntio and all his Servants when ever they went forth. He complain'd to the Court of this action, but he was answer'd that they knew nothing of it. The Nuntio dissembling the business, pretended to take no notice of it, but gave orders that the Souldiers as strangers should be invited to dinner, and to what civilities the house could afford, but they accepted not the invitation, but refus'd it with reciprocal civility. The same night there arriv'd a Courrier to the Nuntio from Rome, with his Holiness his first Breve written to the King, with more distinct information of what was past against the delinquents there by the Popes orders, as the price that was set upon their heads, the deputation of two Congregations, the visit Cardinal Chigi made to the Duke of Crequy, and a long Letter of narration to Monsieur de Lyon. The next morning the Nuntio dispatch'd it to Monsieur Lyon, with a Billet of his own, desiring him to present the Breve to his Majesty, give him an account of the rest, and to prevail that the Nuntio might be admitted to speak with himself. Monsieur Lyon re∣ceiving the Billet, said he could do no less; he carry'd both the one and the other to his Majesty, expecting what he would please to command; after he had read the Breve to his Majesty, he return'd him this answer, That he should read the rest of the dispatch that day to his Majesty; and accordingly he appointed a Conference with the Nuntio at Turrene, whether the Nuntio pass'd the same night attended by 40. Musquetiers. The Conference was long, the Nuntio laying before him, what upon the foundation of truth, reason, and the paternal inclination of his Holiness, was like to mittigate his Majesty. The Sieur de Lyon assur'd the Nuntio that he had endeavour'd to quench, not to kindle the fire. That his Majesty at the reading of the Brief, express'd much sa∣tisfaction to see his Holiness so well dispos'd to an accommodation, and at last it was con∣cluded, that on Sunday the tenth of December he should have an answer. The Nuntio had intelligence, that the Brief being read in Councel, they began to be appeas'd; but at the same time a Gentleman arriving from the Duke of Crequy, with advice that he was commanded out of the Territories of the Church, incens'd his Majesty so much, that as soon as he was gone out of the Councel, orders were dispatch'd immediately to the Nun∣tio to depart that Kingdom the next day; and though he sent another Breve from his Holiness, and an answer to Mr. Lyon from himself, there was no further Treaty to be had. The Letters from the Nuntio to Seignour Lyon and Tellier, were not open'd at all. The 14 in the morning before he departed, he made another overture, but could not be heard, so that then he prepar'd himself to obey, and accordingly departed under the conduct of 50 Musquetiers on horse-back, 25 before his Coach, and as many behind, not suffering him to discourse with any body, forcing him to march ten leagues a day,
and carrying him every night out of the Road, without acquainting him which way he was to pass. In ten dayes time he arriv'd in Savoy, and staid there for some time in the Chambery, till he could receive further orders from his Holiness, to whom he had given particular advice of all that had past. Whilst the Nuntio was marching in this posture, the Marquis de Fuentes, Ambassador from the Crown of Spain, came to give him a visit, but the guards deny'd him admissi∣on; Fuentes persisted, and press'd very hard, but all that he could get, was liberty to enter with two guards with him, who understanding neither Italian nor Spanish would needs have oblig'd the Nuntio and Fuentes to have spoken in French; but they could not be perswaded, but discours'd three hours together in the presence of the guards, that un∣derstood not a word that they said. The news that was brought by the Gentleman from the Duke of Crequy, was, that he was forc'd to go out of Rome for the security of his per∣son, that he was limited in his Victuals, and ty'd up to a certain allowance every day; but this in time was found to be false, and only an invention to exasperate his Majesty the more. His Majesty was troubl'd to find himself in a necessity of using the Nuntio accordingly, because he had been not a little pleas'd with his proceedings during his Nuntiature. Ma∣ny believ'd, that as soon as these difficulties should be compos'd, and due satisfaction be given to the King, that Piccolomini would be remanded into France; but with this ge∣neral opinion, the policy of the Ecclesiasticks did not agree: it was imagin'd likewise, that the Pope (for his own reputation, and to recompence the Nuntio's disgrace in be∣ing turn'd out of France) would send him a Cap before his entrance into Rome, which would have been very acceptable to Piccolomini. But there were other reasons that di∣verted his Holiness from such thoughts; however he was with other Nuntio's promoted to the Cardinaship 1664 with the Title of San Pietro al Monte d'oro. Were he better furnish'd with humility, it would be better for him, for he is generally reckon'd a very proud man. CARLO CARAFF A a Neapolitan, is a person of great parts, and worthy of high∣er advancement, did not the memory of Paul the fourth (who was not at all propitious to the Spaniard) give some obstruction to the maturity of his years, he being yet fresh, healthful, and vigorous. He was sent Nuntio to Venice by Innocent the tenth, and con∣firm'd by Alexander the seventh, who imploy'd him in a business of the greatest diffi∣culty perhaps, that ever Nuntio was imployd in; and that was the re-establishment of the Jesuits in the State of Venice, which the said Alexander recommended to him with the greatest earnestness imaginable. Caraffa to satisfie the ardency of the Popes desire, undertook that Negotiation, but he met with so many obstacles, he despair'd of it himself, though in his Letter to Rome, he dissembl'd it as much as he could, writing alwayes ambiguously, least he should put his Holiness too into despair, who had a great fancy he should weather that point. In short, he behav'd himself so subtilly in the Senate, and knew so well how to manage his affairs, that he brought the Venetian to his Luer, and willingly to condescend to the importunities of the Pope. In this transaction, Caraffa's parts, and dexterity in great affairs, was very well known: he having receiv'd several testimonies of commendation from the Pope himself. But yet things did not follow the expectations of the Court; where it was reported, that if he happen'd to effect the re-establishment of the Jesuite sin Venice, the Pope would without doubt reward him with a Cap; and this was writ in a Letter from Rome, to one of the principal in the Nuntio's Court. But the Jesuites were restor'd, the Pope pleas'd, and the Senate satisfy'd, yet the Nuntio uncapt for some time, and not one word to be heard of his promotion. From Venice, he was sent Nuntio to the Emperour of Germany; where he met like∣wise with several difficult affairs, but they lasted not long, because he knew very well how to disintangle himself with honour; and certainly he is a person sufficiently dexte∣rous, active, and proper for the management of the most considerable transactions. Though he be pleasant alwayes, and merry in the conversation of Ladies; he lies under no great imputation of vice; he protects his friends cheerfully, and rejoyces to do good
offices for all that desire him; he has many Kindred in Naples, and not few in Rome: if he transgresses any way, 'tis in his severity, his justice having too often more of rigour than mercy. He was promoted with the other Nuntii, 1664. with the Title of Santa Su∣sanna. At present he is Legate at Bolognia, from whence it is hop'd he will come away with the applause of the people, he having given already an essay of his good Govern∣ment. ANGELO CELSI a Roman, was created Cardinal with the Title of Saint George in the year 1664. being Auditor di Rota, in which office he made himself some Enemies, thing for no considerable reasons. In his youth he fell into some faults, suitable but lit∣tle wore the Ecclesiastical habit which he wore; for though he was a Priest, he could not abstain from several sensualities, many people believing him given over so much to luxu∣ry, that he was fitter to have been a Husband than a Priest. However he now restrains his natural inclinations with great prudence, or at least transgresses in secret. He is very much inclin'd to revenge, but has not the faculty to dissemble it, for where he is an enemy, he professes it, and where he is a friend, he does the same. He is anti∣ent, but of a strong complection, though subject to infirmities. He is severe in his na∣ture, and inclin'd to justice with too much punctilio. In certain Congregations, his Voe has been almost Tyrannical, and all to do justice, so as the concern'd and offended parties have said, that he was a Phalaris, or a person of a cruel and carnal nature; because or∣dinarily they go together, and your cruel people are observ'd to be most carnal. Many are of opinion, that if his life corresponded to his parts, there would not be a more worthy person in the whole Colledge. He has certainly a sound judgement, a brain capable of any thing; he is more learned than ordinary, curious in all kind of History, politick, dextrous in treaties and business, assiduous in what he undertakes, not obstinate in his opinion; in short, he is a person of general parts, which in the Congregations, and Consistories, he dayly discovers. He has but one Brother, an antient man too, but inclin'd as much to pleasure, as this is to severity. He has great store of friends and adherents in Rome; his nearest are Ca∣raffelli, and Capranica, with whom he holds very good correspondence; the great affection he bears to Ravizza (a person odious to the Romans) has given some check to his reputation, and the rather, because he appear'd in his defence against Cardinal Chigi. PAƲLO SAVELLI a Roman, is the Nephew of the late Cardinal Fabrisio Savelli, that serv'd a long time in the wars of Germany, in the quality of General. This Family is the most considerable in Rome, and that not only for its antientness and nobility, but for the great Prerogatives it enjoys, as the office of Marisciallo di Santa Chiesa, and to that Marshalship, belongs the keeping of the Conclave. During the vacation of the See, the said Savelli has no small authority and jurisdiction in Rome. He may raise Souldiers for a Guard for himself, at the charge of the Apostolical Chamber, upon any emer∣gency or apprehension, and chastise those that transgress the orders of the Conclave; as he did in the Conclave of Ʋrban the eight, when he sent several little Clarks to the Galeys, for conveying Letters to the Cardinals in the Conclave, and threatned others with death. Though this Family has had two Popes of it, and a great number of Cardinals, yet it has been in great danger of falling; and this is most certain, had it not been for the inhe∣ritance of Montalto, it would have been very low. But so opulent an estate falling to them by a marriage contracted with a Sister of Montalto, (that happen'd to be the last of the house of Perretii) and the Prince Savelli, was sufficient to make him lift up his head again, though to speak truth, he had never abated of his usual splendour, unless in some small retrenchments of his Court. This Paulo that we speak of, purchas'd the Chiericatura di Camera, with firm confi∣dence, to be chosen a Cardinal, as indeed it fell out; for Alexander retaining the same inclination to the Roman Families, as Innocent had▪ that he might not see so honoura∣ble a house without a Cap, at the death of Cardinal Fabritio, he made him a Cardinal 1664. with the Title of Santa Maria della Scala. This Cardinal has no great knowledge in the most considerable affairs of State; but
he has capacity enough to inform himself. If he would read History a little more, he would do much better in the Congregations, though his judgement already is none of the worst. He is a Spaniard, but concerns not himself too farr in defence of that Crown. His Conversation is good, and grateful, yet some there are that think him proud, but I could never see but he was humble enough. ALPHONSO LITTA a Milanese, has been imploy'd in several important affairs, in which he has alwayes express'd himself by the honourableness of his success, a man of great parts, and experience. He is certainly a man very proper for business, in∣defatigable in searching and perpending of every thing he undertakes, that he may not afterward be at a loss, when he comes to give his judgement or vote; so that this is most sure, that he that loses any thing in his presence, may be satisfy'd very well, for he is not us'd to do things blindfold, as others do even in Rome it self. He has given tokens of his parts and good life from his very youth, yet he fell into some light miscarriages, but not considerable; he is a person of good learning, great practice, no ordinary experience, and has a strange head for solid and profound business. Whilst he was Archbishop of Milan, he shew'd himself an excellent Pastor, conciliating the affection of the whole people there; but for all this, some there be that believe that he fail'd in a little punctilio of prudence, when he appear'd so stiff for the immunities of the Church, and other things, in which he might have wink'd with more discretion. In short, he has so much disoblig'd the Spaniards, that they are grown his implacable enemies, and doubtless were not their fortune at present so low, they would handle him so, as to force him to leave the Church, as they have done before to other Prelats in the Kingdom of Naples. Did things therefore go as they would have, they would not fail to give him a lift; for it is not their custom, to pardon till they be reveng'd. His promotion to the Cardinalship, was no welcome news to the Spaniards, who had not concern'd themselves at all in his assistance, but rather by their private suggestions done what they could to obstruct it. But Pope Alexander knowing his deserts very well, and the high services he had done the Church, that he being Pope might not seem un∣grateful, the last promotion but one he made him a Cardinal, with the Title di Santa Croce in Jerusalem, giving him the Archbishoprick with it. Very few Cardinals there have been, that have attain'd that dignity upon the bare account of their merits, as this person has done to his immortal reputation. He holds the same Maxime with other people, that to be Pope, it is necessary to be at odds with the Spaniard; and therefore being Cardinal, he is the more incens'd against them. Don Lewis d'Haro, Governour of Milan, with whom he had some variance, writ several Letters to the Spanish Ambassador at Rome in the time of the vacancy of the See, against the promotion of Litta; insomuch that it is the opinion of many wise men, that a Cardinal that is born a Subject to a Prince, and has considerable dignities in his Principalities, cannot but be thought imprudent, if he quarrels and contends with that Prince. But for my part, I do not question but there were many considerable reasons to work a person of his discretion and worth to such a resolution. NERIO CORSINI a Florentine, was Treasurer, and afterwards Cardinal, with the Title of Santi Neri Achillo; which Title was given him for its correspondence with his name. His Kindred are but of indifferent quality, but he endeavours what he can to advance them upon all occasions. The Great Duke loves him very well, but imployes him not in any business of consequence, perhaps for his private interest. In his Treasurer∣ship, he got the reputation of a person of no ordinary Talent; but it is not so much as it ought to have been, for when he drove at the Cardinalship, he was fain to worship and fawn upon those at the Helme, and it succeeded as well as he could wish. In the Congregations, he has shewn himself a person of worth, a good politician, and impartial in all matters of consequence; and indeed he has a great capacity, and some good learning. He is not over rigid, and severe, yet he suffers not himself to be led by the Nose too much, as loving his own fancy and capriccio, especially if he knows he has reason on his side. At present he is Legat of Ferrara, a considerable Legation, and of great trust, because upon the Confines. He will have great opportunity of shewing his parts there, of which he has given good essay already, though it is not above three
months since he arriv'd. Every body is in expectation of the success of this Legation; for my part I do not doubt but he will come off honourably, if his servants do not make him transgress, for to speak the truth, he is sometimes too indulgent. PALƲZZO PALƲZZI a Roman, has serv'd the Church above forty years with extraordinary diligence, yet had never any remuneration from Pope Innocent, though he knew what pains he had taken very well; so that it was no small wonder to see many per∣sons of less merit than he, that had not done half the service he had done for the Church, advanc'd before him, and which is more, in so difficult conjunctures. Yet Innocent would confess that this Prelats shoulders deserv'd the Purple, but that his tongue spoil'd them; and truly he has too little Phlegm, and is too fierce in con∣demning the actions of others, without any regard to the quality of their persons, inso∣much that speaking in publique, and with too much liberty, of the actions of the favou∣rites at Court, he has retarded the progress of his fortunes. Yet his way of Mutining is not without its grace, for he pricks them with honey, and kindles the fire in the Cen∣ser, to burn the hands of the Priest, under pretence of doing it for the benefit and glory of the Altar. This I will say, he is as zealous in all his expressions, as is imaginable; but he does it not upon any particular interest, but for the publick advantage. But he is out in his politicks now, because this age is for nothing but dissembling at Rome; zeal in∣deed is good with respect to the time and the place, but not when it will be taken for faction and repining. Many people observing that he was old, and had no Cap, concluded for certain he would never have any; and indeed he did not look for it himself. But Alexander con∣sidering, that to leave a person who for so long time had been serviceable to the Church, without any reward, would but discourage and intepidate the rest, he resolv'd to take away that scandal, and created him Cardinal with the Title of Basilica degli dodei A∣postoli. He is an honest man, well vers'd in the Canons, and not a little in the Civil Prudence, but improper for the Cadinalitial Function in respect of his blindness, which suffer'd him to come but very seldom into the Congregations; but he was present in the last Con∣clave, and gave his voice. In brief, he is so decrepid, that he looks every moment for death, and therefore has but little regard for the things of this world. CESARE RASPONI of Ravenna, has by his handsome designs insinuated him∣self at Court, in such manner, that he is arriv'd at that honourable degree he deserves, as being a person worthy of the Cardinalitial dignity. He has alwayes had a great am∣bition to advance himself in offices and employments, but he has had the prudence to con∣ceal it; he is very obsequious to such as have any abilities to assist him, yet so as not to fall into any extravagant flattery. He was made Secretary of the Councel, and in many Controversies with those Pre∣lates, he gave good demonstration of his parts. And because that charge is a charge of great confidence, with the Cardinal Padrone, he found out a way to satisfie the Chigi, without receding from the Priviledge of his place. Alexander had a good opinion of him, and therefore in several of his businesses of importance, he took his judgement along with him, which he willingly, and with his wonted modesty deliver'd, so that Alexander left this advice to Chigi his Nephew, that in all intricate matters he should make use of the judgement of Monsignor Rasponi. A few months after the fatal disaster, as one may call it, that happen'd to the Duke of Crequy in Rome, he was sent Nuntio Extraordinary into France, to endeavour to accom∣modate the business, to satisfie the King of France, but without diminution to the Ma∣jesty of the Pope. This was an affair of great consequence, and therefore his Holiness several dayes together consulted with his Cardinals about the election of a fit person for such an imployment; after the nomination of several, and the rejection of all, Rasponi was judg'd the most proper and habile person, from whence may be argu'd the reputation he had amongst the Prelates of the Court. At the very beginning of his Legation, there happen'd a certain difference that con∣strain'd him to depart from Lyons, where he was arriv'd, and to return into Savoy, to some Neutral place; But his Negotiation had no great success, so that the Duke of
Crequy return'd to Paris, and he to Rome; nevertheless Rasponi had so well accommo∣dated things to his Majesties satisfaction, that he had almost pardon'd the affront offer'd to his Ambassador: But the business of Castro, which the King would have compriz'd in that Treaty, and without which he was resolv'd to have none, put all things into a sus∣pence. For all that, the Pope was so well satisfi'd with the transaction of Rasponi, that to recompence him for it, and his other services to the Church, he created him Cardinal in his first promotion, with the Title of San Giovanni in Porta Latina. This Cardinal has a sound judgement, and great dexterity in business, and that the more, because he is not too much inamour'd with his own opinions, nor adheres too much to them as others do, who though they know another mans advice be more ade∣quate and beneficial to the matter in hand, yet in despight of all reason, will defend their own judgements, be they never so false; he carries himself indifferently, and labours much to be counted impartial His Kindred are of condition good enough, but not rich, and in particular a Nephew that is call'd the Abbot Rasponi, which being but a youth of 27-years of age, he carry'd into France with him, being a person of good behaviour, and great generosity; and though he abounds not with any extraordinary Learning, yet his judgement is so good, that with a little exercise he may very well go through the most important affairs. This Cardinal may with maturity of years make a pass in the Con∣clave, as well as any of the rest. GIO. NICOLA CONTI is a Roman, of an antient Family, that has several times afforded illustrious persons to the Church, and by whom it has been serv'd with all punctuality and honour. This Lord has had several ordinary imployments, and dis∣charg'd himself indifferently well: The greatest of his Offices was the Government of Rome, which he began to exercise with great severity, having declar'd to his Holiness himself, that he would proceed in an exact way of Justice, without partiality to any body. But in a short time he had chang'd his opinion, and was observ'd to follow other things instead of severity, especially if any thing relating to the satisfaction of the Ne∣phews was in debate; for he was grown very carefull of giving them any disgust, as complying in every thing there, though with never so much injury to Justice: Besides this, he is thought to have been too indulgent to the recommendations of the Cardinals, and Nobility of Rome, that are his Friends and Relations, at whose instances he has dis∣charg'd several Prisoners that were more worthy to have been corrected. Not that he can be charg'd with Bribery, his hands are clean enough from that, though he be none of the liberalest persons about the Court. It cannot be deny'd but there are several good qualities in him, that may make him capable of being an Ornament to his Dignity, although he fell into some frailties (be∣fore he took the Prelacy upon him) that are not worthy to be remembred, though he be now prudent enough to make the goodness of his deportment, satisfie for the evil that is past. He fails not to endeavour to raise himself as much as he can, and he takes that way that is most likely to give him reputation in the Conclave. He deals with the French and the Spaniards so, that when he is arrived at a competent age, if there be occa∣sion, he may incline them both to be his Friends. He has many Relations both Souldiers and Prelates, that would not be at all offended to see him Pope. Alexander had several reasons for his Creation, but the chief was to fortifie his own Family, by obliging of a person of so great Alliance in Rome; he made him Cardinal with the Title of Santa Maria in Traspontina. GIACOMO NINI of Siena, has been scrambling after Honours and Offices from the time he took the Ecclesiastical habit upon him, and has left no stone unturn'd to arrive at his designs. His ambition put him forward so, that he several times attempted to have been made Nuntio, but his insufficiency was too well known at Court, to succeed therein, he having but little of the Politicks that are necessary to make a good Minister of State, as failing often rather out of honesty, than any thing else. Yet he thinks himself able to deal with the greatest Politicians in Rome, because he has a little smattering in Learning, and an obliging way with his Complements, and fair words, which in reality signifie not much, for he speaks oftner with his tongue, than his heart, because he has no great foun∣dation of reason, though he wants not some ordinary Maximes.
Alexander the 7th. in consideration of his Country, and other things, made him Maggior domo of the Apostolical Pallace, after he had honour'd him with other offices, and finally created him Cardinal in his last Promotion but one, with the Title of Santa Maria della pace, which Promotion gave great disgust to the Cavalier della Ciaia Unckle to Chigi, that at the same time pretended to the Cardinalship, and seeing Nini preferr'd, was ready to run mad. But though Nini had scarce merits enough for a Cap, yet he deserv'd more than Ciaia. The report was at first, that Cardinal Chigi was the person that had driven on the interest of Nini, and made him a Cardinal; but it appear'd afterwards, that it pro∣ceeded from the meer pleasure and inclination of the Pope. Before his death there hap∣pen'd some differences betwixt Chigi and Nini, but by the interposition of the Conclave, Chigi was oblig'd to reconcile himself with Nini after the best manner he could, which he did. When Cardinal Anthonio Barbarino went thorough France to the possession of his Arch-Bishoprick, he left his Vineyard near San Pancratio, to Cardinal Nini, during his absence, which gave the Spaniard great suspition that he was inclining to the interest of the French. GREGORIO BARBARIGO a Venetian, was created at the nomination of the State of Venice, with the Title of San Tomaso in Parione. Nor did the Pope make any diffi∣culty in the Promotion of so worthy a person, that had given continual testimonies of an excellent Prelate, from the very time he first enter'd into the Ecclesiastical habit, and has confirm'd them since by the exemplariness of his life, free from those scandals that at present are so numerous in Rome. Amongst the rest of his virtues, which are considerable and proper for a person of his dignity; one eminent one is, his Cordial affection for his Countrey, by which he ob∣liges that wise Senate (that is seldome ungrateful) to continue a grateful correspon∣dence with him upon all occasions. After the death of Monsignour Giorgio Cornaro, the Bishoprick of Padoa was conferr'd upon him, which is one of the best Bishopricks, I will not say in that State, for they have no other like it, but in all Italy; and because his Predecessor (being a great Ca∣valier, and of one the most renowned Family in Venice) had suffer'd some abuses to grow, till they had obscur'd in great part the glory of the Clergy; Barbarigo not be∣ing able to see so considerable a Church under such enormities, he instituted a Congre∣gation of pious and good Priests to reform them; giving them ample authority to effect it. This new manner of Congregation, unknown to the rest of the Bishops, was at first ill interpreted at Rome; so that some envious people spake of it after a pungent and satyrical way; but the Pope commended it much, and exhorted them to follow so good an example. The Clergy of Padoa that were dissolute and loose, thought that resoluti∣on too severe, but those of any Piety or Religion, commended it to the Skyes. In short, this Cardinal was alwayes full of zeal both to his Church and to his Coun∣trey. PIETRO VIDONI of Cremona, made up his fortunes, not so much by the exem∣plarity of his life, as by the subtlety of his wit. His mind was alwayes inclinable o holy Orders, and averse to Matrimony, though not altogether free from such Carnal affecti∣ons as are too common in the Clergy of our dayes. In the beginning of his Prelacy, he fell into certain little errours, but he knew well enough how to excuse himself, and to stop the mouths of all such as spake any thing to his prejudice. In the beginning of Innocents Pontificate, he was imploy'd in certain offices, but they were of no considerable trust; and though he endeavour'd all he could to hit the humour of his Holiness, yet he had not the success he desir'd. In his Nuntiature in Polonia (which is usually the touchstone whereon they try the ability of their wits) he met with such rubs in certain businesses committed to him by his Holiness, that he was very near losing of that reputation he gain'd in the beginning of his Nuntiature. But he disintangl'd himself with such prudence, that he receiv'd thanks from his Holiness for what he had done, for the advantage of the Catholick Reli∣gion,
and the ease of the Catholick Princes in that Kingdom; King Casimir recommen∣ded him very earnestly to the Pope, and favour'd him much at his Court; so that the Pope, who was inclinable enough to reward the deserts of such persons, as had done best service to the Church, created him Cardinal, with the Title of Saint Calisto. Nor was this creation displeasing to the Spaniard, his Eminence being as it were a Subject to that Crown, and one that had alwayes held a fair correspondence with it, but without dis∣gusting the French, using such dexterity, that he oblig'd the one, without giving jealou∣sie to the other. In the Congregations he did alwayes very well, and what he said, was upon good foundation: yet he might have been a little more short and succinct in his dis∣courses, for he would amplifie so much, he would often lose his way, not knowing how to get back to his Post; but in things of higher importance, he took more time and con∣sideration. He neither exceeds in clemency, nor rigour, but keeps a middle way betwixt both; only in certain cases where the interest of his own or his friends is concern'd he will mistake sometimes, and be rigid, where he should be merciful, and merciful, where he should be severe; at Court he has but an ordinary reputation. PASCALE d'ARAGONA is a natural Spaniard, of one of the most illustrious Families in Spain, if not of the Royal; he was made Cardinal at the nomination of the King of Spain, with the Title of Santa Balbina; before his Creation he had serv'd his Majesty in very considerable imployments, and much to the advantage and satisfaction of that Crown. In Rome where he receiv'd the Cap from his Holinesses own hands, he was certain months in the character of Ambassador; but in a short time he was declar'd Vice-Roy of Naples, which is one of the greatest Governments that depend upon that Crown, substituting Don Pietro d'Aragona his Brother, Ambassador in his place; he went from Rome to take possession of his new Government, where he was receiv'd with all imagi∣nable Pomp by those people, to whom he express'd all the tokens of integrity and justice, taking off at first dash several of their Grievances and Gabels; though he was afterwards enforc'd to lay others in their room, which he did without any way disgust∣ing the people. The King of Spain dying in the mean time, this Cardinal was declar'd one of the Prin∣cipal Counsellors to the Queen Dowager, call'd back into Spain to assist in the Govern∣ment of that Monarchy, and his Brother Don Pietro, declar'd Vice-Roy in his stead; but rather in consideration of the Cardinal, than the proper merits of Don Pietro, who was indeed, next him, the most worthy of that charge, which he doth still execute with ho∣nour to himself, and satisfaction to the people. Whilst he was Vice-Roy, the dignity of Sopremo Inquisitore was conferr'd upon him; but he held it not long, resigning it to the Queens chief Confessor in exchange for the Arch-Bishoprick of Toledo, which he has in possession at this time. This Cardinal is certainly a person of great intelligence in politick affairs; generous upon many occasi∣ons, but not upon all; he delights in certain magnificencies and pastimes, provided they be honourable. The Queen has him in great esteem, and makes use, not of his publick Counsels only, but his private; insomuch that there are many Grandees in the Court that envy him exceedingly, calling him the Spanish Mazarine; but they are very much mistaken. FRANCISCO MARIA MANCINI a Roman, was made Cardinal by Alex∣ander, at the nomination of the most Christian King, with the Title of Santi Visto, e Modesto. Cardinal Mazarine, who was his Cousin, and resolv'd to make all his Rela∣tions considerable both in wealth and preheminence, seeing his Brother Cardinal Mi∣chele Mazarine was dead, for whose exaltation, he had set his authority upon the Ten∣terhooks, he began immediately to bend his mind to the ingrandizing this Kinsman; and to that end he conferr'd honours upon him, and introduc'd him into the service of the King, that he might not seem to exalt a person to the Cardinalship (though his design was no other) by the intercession of the Crown of France, till he had given some testi∣mony of his affection to his Majesties service; and he had reason, for when by his ser∣vices to the Crown of France, he had prevail'd with his Majesty to recommend his Bro∣ther Michele for a Cap. Pope Ʋrban refus'd for some time to consent, and either stimu∣lated
by the Spaniards, or induc'd by some other reasons, he excus'd himself, by pre∣tending that his Majesty ought not to interpose for a person, that had done no service for his Crown. But be it as it will, he obtain'd it at last, though he enjoy'd it but a few months, death taking him out of the World without regard to the power of Mazarine, who was much afflicted at the news thereof. And that Mazarine might not have it again cast in his dish, that he made the Crown of France nominate another Cardinal of no merit nor desert, he put forth his hand to this Gentleman also, and gave him oppor∣tunity of serving his Majesty, in things that redounded more to the honour of Mancini himself, than to the service of that Crown; for Mazarine performing many things by his own great and fortunate brain, afterwards gave out that all was perform'd by the conduct and affection of Mancini, who perhaps knew nothing thereof himself, though he wanted no will nor desire to serve well. Alexander (that envyed the great Autho∣rity of Mazarine in France, and in his Nuntiature to Colen had taken some ill impressi∣ons against him, as supposing him the great obstructer of the Peace) lik'd not this Exal∣tation of his Cousin, but endeavour'd under-hand what he could to defeat it; but finding the inconveniences that would follow, he created him, and seem'd to do that willingly, that he could not prevent. This Cardinal is not ingratefull to the Crown that gave him his Cap, having carry'd himself alwayes with great fervour in defence of its interest. But he has not that head∣piece that is necessary for them that undertake the protection of Crowns. In the Con∣gregations he shews himself a person of indifferent judgement, delivering his opinion temperately and modestly, though he be naturally subject to choller. He would be glad to take any way would bring him to the Papacy, but knowing that those Cardinals that have been propos'd by the Crowns, do but lose their times to think on't, he alters his mind, and contents himself to be counted a good Cardinal, as he is indeed, having very few vices or defects, but forces himself what he can to preserve the reputation of his Dignity. In the Sacred Colledge he has more Friends than Enemies, and amongst all the Cardinals that follow the interest of France, he is the least hated by the Spaniard, though he be Cousin to Mazarine, a Name that is odious to Spain to this day, for his great fortune in the time of the Wars, and for the cunning he shew'd at the surrendring of Cassal. He converses civilly with every body, he is generous upon occasion, but not over-much; he protects all willingly that are recommended to him; he loves Learned men well enough, and 'tis no fault of his if he obliges not all of them. GIROLAMO BƲONCOMPAGNI of Bolonia, is Gregory the thirteenths Great Nephew; that Pope was very well inclin'd to the advancement of his own Fa∣mily, from the time he was admitted to the Papacy in the year 1572. in so much that in the twelve years he was Pope, he brought the Buoncompagni to that grandeur, that for above thirty years they liv'd like Princes. Giacomo Buoncompagni, General for the Church, and Grandfather to the Cardinal we are now a speaking of, left several Sons, all very rich, and well ally'd; yet in a short time after, though there was not any pro∣digal in the whole Family, all was dispers'd and gone; besides though some of them were Cardinals still, and had considerable Offices, yet they left their Families worse and worse in respect of their Estate; and had not two Marriages sustain'd it, and put them into a moderate degree of subsistance, in respect of what they were in before, without doubt they would have run a great hazard of being in a worse condition. Girolamo Buoncompagni took the Ecclesiastical habit upon him for no other end, but to see if he could advance his Fmily again to its former grandeur, by the acquisition of a Cap: for amongst the Italians they that fall to any decay, have no other hopes to re∣establish themselves, but by taking the Priests habit upon them, as knowing very well the Church has eminent wayes enough to raise them that use the right means. In the time of Innocent, he courted and insinuated what he could, to work himself into some considerable imployment, but he could not effect it, for several reasons, but especially in respect of his youth, which in Rome is usually a great impediment; besides Innocent looking on him as a person but of indifferent parts, and small experience in matters of consequence, durst not trust him, least he should not come off with that honour
that he ought to do: However he imploy'd him in such Offices as might exercise him, and by degrees he instructed him in greater affairs, doing what he could possibly to make him conceiv'd a man of abilities, and worthy of greater preferment. Alexander that had a mind alwayes to be esteem'd a Pope that was zealous for the publique honour of the Church, having created Cardinal Farnese that was Maggiordomo of the Apostolick Palace, with design to advance some other person of equal merits to the place he resigned; he declar'd Buoncompagni Maggiordomo, who began in a short time to execute it exactly, though it was joyn'd with a hundred several imployments; he knew very well how to comport himself with the two branches of the Chigi, with∣out giving occasion of jealousie to the one or the other, obliging them so that they made no scruple to recommend him to the Pope, especially Cardinal Chigi did him good offices, as glorying that he had amongst his Creatures, so considerable a person; so that Alex∣ander perswaded by their arguments, created him Cardinal in his third Promotion, with the Title of San Pietro, e Marcellino. A while after the said Alexander gave him the Archbishoprick of Bolonia, in which this Cardinal gave great proofs of his making an excellent Prelate; he is charitable to the poor, benigne to all that have business with him, impartial to the highest degree, and free and unbyass'd in his judgement. The Sacred Colledge has so great an esteem for him, there is not a Cardinal has any considerable animosity against him; so that if he encreases in goodness, as he may do in years, he may have no small party in the Conclave. CARLO ROBERTI a Roman, has labour'd might and main, that he might not come behind the rest, and has made courtship to more than two or three, that he might the better advance himself; for he discern'd the necessity wherein his Family stood of considerable assistance, and how ambitious it was to have a Cap amongst them. Innocent imploy'd him in some places of ordinary importance, and though he did what he could to gain the reputation of having well serv'd the Church, yet (whether it was that the Court was then forming extravagant Scenes of their own, or whether it was that he could not hit the humour of the Pope) there was little or no notice taken of him. But in the Popedom of Alexander, being imploy'd in greater affairs, he began to gain some reputation both with People and Pope, who spake of him often to his relations, as of a person adorn'd with several good qualities, and fit to serve the Church in the most troublesome and calamitous times. After the pacification betwixt the Pope and the King of France, upon the rupture about the Duke of Crequy, this Roberti was created Nuntio, and sent into France in the room of Piccolomini that was driven from thence; which is an evident sign his Holi∣ness had a good opinion of him, when he put that Nuntiature into his hands, that re∣quired so great prudence and dexterity to manage it: For though the gross of the quarrel was compos'd by the Treaty at Pisa, yet there were certain reliques remaining, that without good management might have unravell'd all again; above all, his Holiness gave Roberti in charge, that he should as much as possible redintegrate into the favour of his Majesty, and the principal Officers in his Court, the opinion the Chigi had lost in France, and that he should endeavour to make them appear innocent, and full of affecti∣on for that Crown. Which said orders were observ'd by the Nuntio, according as they ought to be, he having in a short time gain'd the reputation of an excellent and impartial Minister in that Court. At length in his last promotion, Alex∣ander made him a Cardinal with the rest of the Nuntioes, and sent him his Cap to Paris. Before his Nuntiature into France, this Prelate was much inclin'd to the interest of Spain, but after he began to be acquainted with the Christian Kings manner of Entertain∣ment, and the civility of the French Court, he chang'd his mind, and follow'd the humour of the French. The Cardinals of that Kings faction, endeavour'd what they could to gain him, though but extrinsecally, whilst they discover'd what was intrinse∣cally in him; however they gain'd but little upon him, their discourses being only in general terms.
It is not known what good success he would have had in the management of the Congregations, because he stay'd not long in Rome after the assumption of Clement the ninth, being immediately sent Legat to Romagna, where he order'd his affairs with great regularity, and justice; but 'tis suppos'd he would have done very well, because he is a person of sound judgement, modest in his opinion, and one that will give both God and Caesar their due, which is as much as to say, he is both a good States-man, and a good Church-man too, and would be much better, were he not addicted so much to the bene∣fit of his own Family. GIƲLIO SPINOLA a Genoese, is a person of excellent parts, generous, magnani∣mous, and full of civility, and meekness; he is an enemy to prodigality, yet loves not covetousness; the darling of his Country-men. He arriv'ed at the Prelacy (though he was otherwise deserving enough) by the ordinary way of the Genoeses, who have taken an oath as it were to buy all the offices that are to be sold in Rome by the Church. In his very first imployments, he express'd himself a person of worth; and indeed he is not a little learned, nor a little conversant amongst learned men; his delight is to be discours∣ing amongst such as are experienc'd in Politicks, and Ecclesiastical affairs, observing with great diligence, which way he may make the most profit of them; and this he loves as his Recreations. In his youth he was not so chast altogether as he should have been, having suffer'd him∣self to be carry'd away too much with the love of Women, to the scandal of all that had affection for him; but since he took the habit of a Prelate upon him, he has been more circumspect, and if he has not girt himself so close with the girdle of Chastity, as he ought, yet he has brought himself to so formal and exterior modesty, and so seeming a prudence, in covering those frailties which cannot be forsaken by those that carry them along with them, that at present he is esteem'd chast, whether he be so or no. He (being a person descended from a Family so famous through all Europe in several respects, particularly in consideration of the Marquiss Spinola the great Captain, and Car∣dinal Agostino Spinola, a most noble person, and very beneficial to the poor) had no great difficulty to obtain a reputation at Court, which every body is ambitious of at Rome; many people admir'd rather that he was imploy'd no sooner in more considerable affairs, seeing that to the Nobility of his Birth, he wanted not the good endowments of mind. Alexander having experienc'd him in some intricate business, and found him a person of worth, he sent him Nuntio into Germany, in Caraffa's place, who was created Cardinal. In which he comported himself so well, to the satisfaction both of the Empe∣rour and Pope, especially in matters of Religion, and the differences betwixt the Catho∣lick and Protestant, that in the last Promotion of Pope Alexander, he deservedly ob∣tain'd a Cap; and a while after, he left the Imperial Court, to be present at the Con∣clave in Rome. His voice will alwayes be in favour of the house of Austria, as well from his natural inclination, as from the obligations the Family of Spinola has alwayes receiv'd from the Catholick Crown; from whence it acknowledges the greatest part of its fortunes. He delights much in walking, in Comedyes, and Balls, and perhaps his dignity has alter'd his humours; however he is assiduous enough in business, and is very sincere and affectio∣nate in what eyer he undertakes: he is very apt to be angry, if things succeed not ac∣cording to his designs: he looks closely enough to the people of his Court, and allows them not such latitude, as other Prelates and Cardinals do allow to their Courts. 'Tis suppos'd he would do very well in the management of some Legation, which he might have, if there was any regard had of the desert of a person; but in those cases, the Popes aim no further than to satisfie them they are pleas'd with, not those that deserve it. He uses great prudence in gaining upon such Princes Ministers, as are resident in Rome; and speaks of the merit of his Countrey so, as gives occasion of jealousie to all that envy them. VITALIANO VISCONTI of Milan, is a Gentleman of an illustrious Family, and descended from the antient Dukes of Milan. He devotes himself to the service of the Church, that sometime or other he may come to the Cardinalship, for which he had al∣wayes a particular fancy. His friends did what they could to have perswaded him to the
Warrs, but he lik'd the Cross better, as that which brings ordinarily more profit, more honour, and less danger. The beginning of his Prelacy was not so successful as he look'd for, so that he was often changing his profession, being weary as he said, to see things go on so slowly; but he had no reason, for he thought honours would have been shower'd down upon his head, though it came as fast as he could reasonably expect. Pope Alexander, who had the first occasion to try him in matters of trust, did it in his Papacy, honouring and loading him with offices, till that when Monsignour Bonelli that was Nuntio in Spain, was created Cardinal; he gave that Nuntiature to Visconti, though there were others that put hard for it. But the Pope, who knew well enough the merits of the cause, declar'd Visconti Nuntio, at one blow satisfying his own inclination, and the Spaniards too, who were not displeas'd to have for their Nuntio, a Prelate not only born their Subject, but bound by many obligations to the Catholick Crown. In this Nuntiature which lasted but three years, Philip the fourth King of Spain dy'd, up∣on which occasion, the Nuntio shew'd himself both a faithfull Pastor, and a great Poli∣tician, assisting in many things with favour to the Church, and without any prejudice to the Crown of Spain. Before he ended his dayes, Alexander thought good to promote him to the Cardinalship, as well to recompence his services to the Church, as that he might not see so honourable a Family without the dignity of a Cardinal, which had had heretofore the Soveraignty of Milan. From the advice of his Promotion resolv'd, to the news of the unhappy and dying con∣dition of the Pope, there were but few dayes past; so that (either out of his own de∣sire to be in the Conclave, or otherwise to comply with the importunity of the Spanish Ambassador at Rome, who press'd him earnestly to make hast, that the Spanish interest might be made stronger thereby) he resolv'd to take Post, and make his journey by land. But the Counsel of Madrid would not admit his Auditor to propose it, and therefore he was forc'd to stay in Spain, and expect new orders from the new Pope, with great disgust to the Ambassador at Rome. The Spaniards caress him much, hoping he will do them some important service, as well because he is born their Subject, as because he has a particular inclination for them. He is a person of good qualities, liberal of his promises, generous to a certain proportion, for he loves not to cast away too much of his own; affable, benigne, and of such a Ma∣jesty, as appears pride outwardly, but in effect is no such thing. INNICO CARACCIOLI a Neapolitane, although he is descended of a Noble house, and the chief of Nido in Naples; he was forc'd for all that, to dig his fortunes from under-ground, that is to say, to acquire the reputation of the Prelacy by buying of offices, and by his courtesie and obsequiousness, obliging this Popeling sometimes, and sometimes that. He is of a nature to dissemble very well, and like a true Neapoli∣tane, entertards the fury of his heart, and the ebullition of his bloud, with a counter∣feit medesty and goodness. From hence it is, some men conceive him a person of an un∣setled head, capriccious, and giddy; and indeed he will talk sometime of this thing, and sometimes of that; sometimes of the reformation, sometimes of the decorum of the Church; now he defends its frailties, anon he would be Pope, and reform them. Others will have him as honest, and as able, as his age will bear; but be it one way or the other, this is most certain, he has a heart of Steel, cover'd over with Gold, that in case of necessity, would be able to withstand all the comminations, and violences of other people, and with humility make his arguments prevail, inspight of all their con∣tradictions. The Chigi had alwayes an affection for him, and held him imploy'd in many businesses of trust, till at last Alexander towards his latter end, either to recompence so deserving a person, or to have the office of Auditor di Camera void again, created him Cardinal, and gave him the Cap with his own hands the 16 of March 1667. injoyning him ear∣nestly to hold fair correspondency with Cardinal Chigi his Nephew, who treated him at his Pallace that day at dinner with great magnificence. He seems to be more inclin'd to the service of Spain, than the other Neapolitane Car∣dinals, and Subjects of that Crown, have formerly been; and indeed the Spaniards reckon him in the number of their Confidents, though to his great dissatisfaction they
trust him not, as they ought to do. But many are of opinion, that he is not of an hu∣mour to continue long in that correspondence with the Spaniards, because he is suppos'd to be of the nature of the late Cardinal Filomarino, that had a perfect hatred for the Ministers of Spain, and as great an affection for the King, towards whom he carry'd himself with the greatest humility, but to his Ministers with the greatest pride. Some say 'tis better to treat with him now he is a Cardinal, than it was before, when he was but Auditor di Camera: He was then an exactor of certain punctilioes, but now he shews great ripeness and dexterity in the Congregations, perhaps with design to advance himself higher yet, when his years will make him capable. He has Kindred good store, but being all of them persons of quality, they do not trouble him; however he does not fail to assist them that are of the Church: He loves the divertisement of Comedies, and such other recreations, but so as to give no scandal, as much as he can. GIO. DELFINI a Venetian, has alwayes express'd himself a good Prelate, and maintain'd the Ecclesiastical habit with great Decorum, in so much as that Republique taking notice of his merits, having a convenient occasion, they recommended him to Pope Alexander, who was resolv'd to do that honour to those Princes, who had for a long time a right of nominating one of their Subjects, as well as any of the Crowns. For this reason resolving not to fail in a business of that consequence, amongst the rest that were recommended, he chose Monsignor Delfini, and created him Cardinal with the rest that were recommended by the Crowns, in March 1667. his Holiness having dispatch'd Monsignor Falconieri his Chamberlain of Honour, to present him with the Cap, whose arrival was celebrated with the publique solemnity of Fire-works, Balls, and Festivals, for three dayes together; particularly the House of Delfini, that is of the antientest Nobility, made great expression of their joy, by their charity to the poor, and their Fountains running with Wine, to give the people entertainment; though to speak the truth, the Venetians are too near the Water, to be much given to Wine. The Republique of Venice according to their usual generosity, order'd him six thou∣sand Ducats, as they are wont to give every Cardinal of that Nation, as soon as they are promoted, towards their expences, and to put them into an Equipage proportionable to their Dignity. He has as yet no great reputation at Court, but he may in a short time, having a particular way of civility, whereby he obliges all such as have any affairs with him; and he has already shewn such manifest tokens of it in some of the Con∣gregations, that he has discover'd himself to be much more capable, than the common sort of Cardinals do imagine. He has declar'd, that he will keep fair correspondence with all the Ministers that are resident in Rome, provided the interest of his Country ob∣liges him not to the contrary; for to speak truth, he bears as cordial an affection to his Country, as can be expected from the best of Subjects, postponing his private interest, to the publique service of the Senate, though he be not quite void of affection to his own. Amongst his other virtues, the modesty of his language is such, he suffers not himself to be transported to any body. GƲIDO BALDO DE TƲN a German, and Archbishop of Salsburg, was made Cardinal at the instance of the Emperor, and by him dispatch'd with all speed to Rome, to be present at the Conclave, to fortifie the Spanish interest in the election of a new Pope. The Duke Altemps invited him to take his Lodgings in his Palace, but he excus'd himself, upon pretence that he desir'd rather to lodge in the German Colledge, where he had been sometimes a Student, and had given hopes of those excellent qualities, which he discover'd more plainly, after he had taken the Ecclesiastical habit upon him, by restraining himself as much as possibly he could, from giving any publique scandal. The people of his Diocess hold him very honest, an excellent Pastor, and one that leaves no stone unturn'd that may make his Clergy serviceable, and assiduous in the Divine Worship. The Emperor caresses him very much, as a person of desert, and as a person of Estate; his Treasure being so vast, that upon an exigence he can furnish him abundantly, not by way of Benevolence, but Loan. The greatest defect the Germans observe in him, is his Covetousness, adhering with great affection to his own interests: yet for all that it cannot be said, that he ever committed any unworthy action, to accu∣mulate
wealth, his wayes were rational, and by frugality: Yet some Germans have told me, that upon occasion he has spent with great generosity, and especially at the Em∣presses arrival in Germany, he shew'd himself as liberal and magnificent as the best. Whilst he was but a Prelate, he distributed his Almes with a little too much temperance, but since he has been a Cardinal, his heart is enlarg'd proportionable to his Dignity: He is a person of a sound judgement, and one that traces Corruption to the bottom, though in appearance he seems no such person. But that which is more considerable is, the candor which is natural to his Countrymen; he is never transported with passion, but blames or commends people impartially, as they deserve. He is slow in his Nego∣tiations, advancing like a Tortoise, so that 'tis thought he would be a fitter Minister for Spain, than for Germany: He speaks his mind freely, and is not troubled to be contra∣dicted, provided they bring reasons enough to oppose him. LEWIS Duke of VENDOSME a Frenchman, is descended from a Natural Son of Henry the 4th. who marrying with Frances of Lorain Dutchess of Mercoeur, had this Lewis by her. He had no great inclination to the Ecclesiastical habit, his mind running more after Matrimony, and the affairs of the World. Accordingly when he was arriv'd at a competent age, he married a Neice of Cardinal Mazarines, who was then the Dominus fac totum in France, hoping by means of his favour, to open a way to some honourable imployment. This Lady was of the same stock with Cardinal Mancini, that is now living, but lived not many years with her Husband the Duke, to whom she left two very hopefull Sons, but not old enough to know, or lament, the loss of so incomparable a Mother. No sooner was this Lord fallen into the condition of a Widdower, but he chang'd his mind, and as when he was young, he was all for Matrimony, so now he is altogether for the Ecclesiastical habit, not in any penitential way, but only to capacitate him for the Cardinalship, which is that he has alwayes aim'd at, and with all industry endeavours. Finally, his most Christian Majesty, according to the Prerogative of his Crown, being to nominate a person in the last promotion of Alexander, presented this as a person of great merit, and fit to be an Ornament both to the Colledge and Cap; and the rather, because in his Vice-Royship in Catalonia, and in his Government of Provence, he had shewn great assiduity in his Majesties service. A few dayes after he had receiv'd his Cap, the tydings of the languishing condition of his Holiness arriv'd; so that with directions from the King, he parted immediately for Rome, to be present at the new Conclave, where he met exactly with the rest of the French Cardinals. In this Conclave he behav'd himself with great prudence, and per∣haps more than was expected by the elder Cardinals, that had been a long time acquain∣ted with the intrigues of the Conclaves. The Election being made, he prepar'd for his return into France, but first he recommended to his Holiness, the interests of his Master, particularly in the business of the disincameration of Castro, according to the Treaty at Pisa; during his stay at Rome, he gave great evidences of his generosity, dispatching all that came to him with great satisfaction. The Republique of Genoa, which is not backward in obliging the Subjects of his most Christian Majesty, and his Cardinals much more, endeavour'd what they could to find out away to oblige this; and being in his way at Savona, where he was complemented by the Governour with all due respect, they sent him six Corsaires of Provence, that had been condemn'd to the Galleys, and were set at liberty at the instance of that Car∣dinal, for which he express'd great satisfaction, and thankfulness to that Commonwealth. In short, this Cardinal is not to undertake any matters of great importance, though his judgement is well enough, and he manages indifferent things to a hair. LEWIS MONCADA is a Sicilian, and the last Cardinal created by Alexander the seventh; he was promoted at the instance of the King of Spain, with three others, nominated by the Emperour, the King of France, and the State of Venice. The Spani∣ards design in the nomination of this person, was not so much to remunerate the ser∣vices he had done to that Crown upon several occasions, as that they might have in the Sacred Colledge, a Cardinal considerable both in Birth and Authority, of which the Spaniards have great need at this time, considering the lowness and languor of their con∣dition,
especially in Rome, where they are regarded by the Ecclesiasticks for nothing but the profit and authority they receive from the Catholick States, and that King: so that their authority must needs lessen, and their Revenews diminish, if the Ecclesiasticks do withdraw themselves from their affection to Spain. He has a great reputation in the Court of Spain, but not so much for the integrity of his manners, or the goodness of his life, (for he is but a man, and subject to frailties, though he be prudent, and abstains from such scandals, as are offensive to his gravity) but for his exquisite knowledge in Government, which he signaliz'd in several charges com∣mitted to him by his Catholick Majesty. Yet he would scarce make so good a Pastor in the Government of the Church, having had but little converse in Ecclesiastical affairs, especially in certain Spiritual matters, he has had little or no occasion to know, as one that has been drawn away by matters of State Policy of greatest importance, the myste∣ries and intrigues of which, he understands very well, and will be alwayes faithfull to the Spaniard; and indeed his vigilance is so great, they must rise betimes that deceive him. It is suppos'd the intelligence betwixt him, and the Cardinal of Aragon, is not very good, which last, looking upon himself as a person that has been longer imploy'd in the affairs of that Crown, would pretend to do all; and this, who professes to act with all sincerity and affection in his Majesties service, will not be brought to condescend to re∣ceive orders from the Cardinal of Aragon; Especially their humours being different, for though they are both Spaniards born, yet one retains the manners of a Sici∣lian. In Rome, which is the touchstone of wits, they speak not as yet either good or bad of Moncada, because they have not seen him in his Scarlet, which the Romans do very much desire. A German Lord that is acquainted with him, told me, that he is of a most extream jealous nature, not much liberal, though not much covetous, grave in his au∣diences, majestick in his words, outwardly charitable, and full of Spanish Maximes. Here ends the Colledge of Alexanders Cardinals, who are now living, some of his Creatures being dead, as Cardinal Bagni, Pallavicino, Bandinelli, and Vecchiarelli, of which I shall speak something by the bye, because as yet their memory is fresh. In the death of Cardinal Bagni, it may be said, and said truly, the Church receiv'd no great loss, because he was so old before he receiv'd the Purple, that it was talk'd up and down in Rome, that the Cap was bestow'd on him, in hopes he would not keep it long; but in other respects his death has made a great breach in the Colledge, for he was certainly a learned man, of great experience in the Arts both of Warr and Peace; so that Alex∣ander with great judgement, not only promoted him amongst the rest, but admitted him amongst the greatest of his Confidents, and receiv'd the news of his death with great sor∣row, and affliction. The same may be said of Cardinal Bandinelli a Genoese, a person indeed of no profound learning, yet of great practice and experience in the mysteries of Court, which Alexander understood very well, when he made him a Cardinal, to the general satisfaction of the Court, that look'd upon him as worthy of the highest com∣mand; but he dying just in the nick of the vacancy of the See, depriv'd the Conclave of a person they talk'd much of at that time, and perhaps he might have succeeded. Whe∣ther the Church sustain'd any great loss by the death of Cardinal Pallavicino, may be argu'd from his qualities, for indeed he was an honest man, bent wholly upon the bene∣fit of the Church, in which he alwayes express'd great sincerity. He was very well read, both in Divinity, Morality, and speculative Philosophy, but principally in Morality; and therefore his Holiness conferr'd with him still, in all matters of Theology, and Mo∣rality, in which he was so perfect, there was not one amongst all the Cardinals did equal him His Holiness consulted him likewise in matters of State, not but that he was sen∣sible enough of his inexperience therein; but he did it to shew him honour, and to ma∣nifest his confidence in him: not sticking alwayes to his opinion, because he found him a little too rigid, and zealous for the Ecclesiastical Laws, and subject to those errors, which those persons do ordinarily fall into, who stand so stiffly to the punctilio's of reformati∣on, and will go no way but their own; and these in plain terms are they, that are ob∣stinate, and intractible in their opinions, be they good or bad. His name survives in the History of the Councel of Trent, written to the shame of what Father Paulo
Servita had publish'd; for which reason the Venetians thought themselves oblig'd to prohibit it in their Dominions. His manner of life, was like a Fryar, or rather like a Jesuite; he never visited Ladies, not so much as the Wives of Ambassadors; and therefore they consider'd him no further, than as a good Cardinal. He dy'd likewise in the vacancy of the Chair, and so poor, he scarce left wherewithal to bury him; inso∣much that Cardinal Chigi, as if he design'd to make him sensible of his liberality, even after his death, order'd a thousand Crowns to be laid out in the Celebration of this Fu∣neral, which was perform'd in the Jesuites Church: Odoardo Vecchiarelli da Ricti, that had been Auditor di Camera before his Promotion to the Cardinalship, had the honour, or good fortune, to see the Conclave, and be present at the Election of a new Pope, and afterwards to dye, which was more than Pallavicino and Bandanelli had. The death of this Cardinal was not so resented by the Court, because he was not of any extraordina∣ry parts, though otherwise well enough practis'd in the business of the world: and not altogether unskilfull in Ecclesiastical affairs, though not well enough to give Counsel, yet sufficiently to speak his mind frankly in the Congregations; but the greatest loss the Church sustain'd, was in the death of Cardinal Farnese, who at this very time, I have notice dy'd, the last Sunday but one in February 1668. but because I have said enough of him already, I shall speak no further, only that as soon as Cardinal Chigi had the news of his death, he turn'd about to his Friends that were with him, and said, Had we made Farnese Pope, as Grimaldi would have had us, we should have been now striving again to elect a new one. And now it is time we come to Clement the ninth, and speak something of the Car∣dinals created by him: But first it will not be amiss, to premise something about his Go∣vernment of the Church, which can be no great matter, because he is but newly entred as it were into the Papacy. And certainly to apply himself wholly to business, is a most worthy humour in his Holiness: He gives Audience daily to every body, without re∣gard to the weakness or infirmities of his Nature; whilst he was Cardinal he was re∣tir'd, shun'd all conversation as much as was possible, and would admit of no imploy∣ment but his Charge; but now the Scene is chang'd, and he converses with more free∣dome; and that which is most considerable, he does not decline those persons that come to negotiate with him about publique affairs. At the happy beginning of his Papacy, he caus'd Medals to be made, and gave them about to his Friends, with this inscription, Constantia Silveri ad imitandum proposita. Which by the Wits of the Court was interpreted thus, That as San Silverio the Pope, though depos'd from the Apostolick Chair, and for some time a Prisoner to the Empe∣ror, could never be brought to renounce any thing, that justly belong'd to his Prede∣cessor, so Clement the ninth was never to be perswaded to the discameration of Castro; and indeed it has appear'd so since, for all the art they could use, could never bring him to the execution of the Treaty at Pisa, in which it is articled, That Castro should be de∣liver'd. Nor can all the instances of the Ambassador of France, nor his pressing that that Treaty was subscrib'd by the greatest part of the Cardinals, work upon his resolutions. And yet for all this, the King of France has invited him to be a Godfather to a young Princess his Daughter. And the Pope has sent a Bull to Cardinal Vendosme, declaring him Legate a latere, and thereby qualifying him for that Function, which is to be sud∣denly perform'd with all magnificence imaginable. This Pope would not go the way of his Predecessor Alexander, and keep his Kindred so many months out of Rome, to acquire the Epithite of Holy. Clement knew very well it was but formality, and so reckon'd by the people, and therefore that they might not be deceiv'd in him, he call'd in his Relations immediately to the Court, that is, his Bro∣ther, and his Nephews, and Nieces, assigning the same preheminences to all of them, that his Predecessors had given to theirs. True it is, there happen'd some disgusts be∣twixt the Pope, and the State of Malta; for the Pope having an eye (as was but rea∣sonable) that nothing should scape his hands, that might aggrandize his Nephews, gave to Fra Vincenzo his Nephew, (a Cavalier of Malta) the Priory of Santa Eufemia, which by Seniority belong'd to Brancacci, another of the Knights: at which, the Grand Master being disgusted, threatned to turn the Inquisitor out of the Island, and
gave him other tokens of his Resentment; but all was compos'd by the good conduct of his Holiness, in such manner, that Brancaccio was satisfi'd, by the perswasion of a Cardinal of that name, that for the Popes interest, and his Nephews, accommo∣dated all. The Nobility of his Holiness, and the Family of the Rospigliosi, is as considerable as the City of Pistoia can make it; it is reckon'd amongst the most antient of that place, and has not oy maintain'd it self in the principal Honours that Town could afford, and ally'd it self with Families their equals, but has in all ages afforded eminent men in Tuscany, and elsewhere, so as it may well stand in competition with any that enveighs it, in several respects; his Holiness however, aims to aggrandize his Family in spight of them all, especially in the person of the new Cardinal his Nephew, whom we shall yet consider as Abbot Rospigliosi; and indeed, there are many Provisions and Offices suspen∣ded till the said Abbot arrives in Rome, who by unhappy accident sell sick by the way; all people being big with expectation, parturiunt montes, but they know not whether they may say, nascetur ridiculus Mus, or laugh out as is hop'd, nascetur ingens Elephas. His Holiness in the mean time, being alwayes intent upon the easing and indulging of the people under his Care, has order'd it to be publish'd in all the Parishes, and to all the Ecclesiastick Ministers within the district of Rome, that the several Diocesans be call'd, to the end that if they find themselves aggriev'd by the Roman Barons; or other Go∣vernours, they should appeal immediately to him, and he would relieve them with all possible justice But all was but shew, as many believ'd, it being the property of the Romans to complain, with excess of ill Government, and to call what is good, but Hypo∣crisie; so that this benignity of his Holiness, was look'd upon but as a Copy of his Countenance. He was reported likewise to be too easie in granting favours to the Ladies, but that report was rais'd upon the Lady Marchess of Paleotti's prevailing (by her insinuations, and the prettiness of her discourse) with his Holiness to bestow upon her Father the Duke of Nortumbia, a Pension of five hundred Crowns a year, with this additional favour, that it might be paid from time to time by the Congrega∣tion de propaganda side. From this bounty of the Popes, the Romans took occasion to say, that his Holiness was very ready to gratifie the Ladies in any thing; but the con∣trary appears in the person of the very same Lady, who thinking to find the same easi∣ness as she did in the Pension, she adventur'd so far as to desire to be divorc'd from her Husband; but she found his Holiness impenetrable as to that, who reproving her for her demand, sent her away much discontented. The Pope was highly accus'd upon the resolution he took as soon as he was leap'd into the Vatican, to confirm the Invenstiture of the Prefectship of Rome, given by Ʋrban the eighth to Don Tadco, and to his third Generation, although Innocent and Alexander, his Predecessors, had refus'd to confirm the same to Don Mato his Son, the Prince of Palestrina; however Clement was willing to gratifie him, in remembrance of the obligations he had alwayes profess'd to the Barbarini, but with this condition not∣withstanding, that the said Prefect should give place to the Ambassadors of Crowns only, allowing them precedence not only before all Roman Barons, but even before the Popes Nephews pro tempore. A business that did not please the Barons at all, and gave great disgust to the Historiographers, who all of them knowing this Minister to be a second Emperor, and that all the former Popes (except Ʋrban for his own interest) had endeavour'd, out of a politick maxime, to abolish the very memory of it, did wonder to see Clement confirming it, at his very first entrance into the Chair. The first of his Nephews that came to Rome, were two, one of them call'd Fra Vin∣cenzo a Knight of Malta, and the other Tomaso: They were persons of no great noise, but resolute, modest, courteous, and full of humility, in a word, not unlike their Unckle in their modesty, who though he had call'd them to Rome, declar'd notwithstanding that he would not suffer them to fix their Families in Rome, nor take any other Titles upon them, than what belong'd to their Births: But that resolution was of no long continu∣ance, for he left them at liberty to their Titles, and whatever preheminence they pleas'd,
in so much that his Holiness one day did solemnly rebuke Seignour Giacinto del Bufalo, Mastro di Camera to Fra. Vincent, because he had made Gio. Battista Vallasi to stay at dinner with the said Cavalier, and his brother, as a person that not being of Noble Ex∣traction, did not deserve to dine with his Holinesses Nephews; a clear sign he intended to render them Majestique: having given likewise eighty thousand Crowns toward the furnishing of Ludovisi's Pallace, designed for the residence of the Nephews, besides thirty thousand he sent the Abbot at one time, and above fifty thousand at another, to help to defray his charges in his Journey. I shall now pass to the Promotion of Cardinals by Clement the ninth, about the end of Decemb. 1667. and the first that presents himself, is Prince Leopald di Medici brother to the Grand Duke. Whilst Alexander was living, several instances were made to him, that he would do the Colledge of Cardinals that honour, as to bestow a Cap upon such a Prince as this, of a Family that was of a Neighbour State, and had deserv'd well of the Church; but Alexander reserving it for his Successor, deny'd himself that glory: as it happen'd after∣wards indeed; for no sooner was Clement got into the Vatican, but, either moved by the na∣tural merit of his person, or by a desire to do good, he declar'd he would promote the said Prince Leopald to the Cardinalship, without attending the Grand Dukes mediation; which fell out afterwards, but rather to preserve I know not what kind of right of nomination the Grand Duke pretended to, than for any thing else. The Popes having ordinarily contended to satisfie the instances of the Great Dukes, by the Promotion of some person of the house of Medici, as well for the benefit of the Church, as the State Ec∣clesiastick. From this new Prince Cardinal, and call'd Cardinal in quality of a Prince, there can be nothing expected but good actions, favourable, propitious, and equitable to the com∣mon good of Italy, as the rest of the Cardinals of the house of Medici's, have upon all occasions express'd: particularly Gio. Carlo, and Carlo that dyed last, who with great prudence promoted the advantage of all Italy, as zealously, as the benefit of their own Families: so that it is believed this Cardinal will not prove inferiour, either to his Unckle, or Brother, as having, besides his generosity and natural Majesty, talents suffi∣cient for the management of State affairs; besides a competent skill in matters Ecclesi∣astick and Military; but in the first especially, as having from his youth been curious in History, and very serious in making reflections to his advantage. In a word there can∣not, nor ought not any thing to be said, but that this Cardinal is a great and most excel∣lent Prince. GIACOMO ROSPIGLIOSI is his Holinesses Nephew, with that Title created Car∣dinal, and which is of more importance, Cardinal Padrone; he is the eldest Son of Seignour Camillo Rospigliosi, the Popes Brother, a person that deserves to be Brother to the greatest Monarch in the Universe. The great expressions of joy that he made at the exaltation of his Brother, was nothing but a liberal distribution of provisions to the poor, benignity and charity to the distressed, being his natural endowments; nor was it the poor of Pistoia only, that participated of his alms, but the poor of the whole Eccle∣siastical State almost, for in his journey from Pistoia to Rome, he dispens'd so largely amongst them all, that it was much admir'd from whence that Treasure should come; which indeed was his own, for he had not began to suck the honey of the Church. In the Castle of Gondolfo, which was the first place in which he presented himself to his Holiness, his Magnificence and Piety to the Poor, and to the Religious, was most conspicuous; for besides, that at his arrival he open'd the prisons, dismiss'd the Debtors, and with his own money satisfy'd their debts; he restor'd those Criminals that were re∣strain'd upon any honourable accounts, and reliev'd all such of the poor, as were in∣clin'd by the great noise, and report of his Charity, to come to that place, having re∣liev'd the Church of the Mendicants in like manner, so that the acclamations were too great to be express'd in Paper: many there were nevertheless, that thought all this but hypocrisie, and a design upon the popular applause, that he might afterwards have the management of the Treasure of the Church with more liberty; and this opinion in∣creas'd much, when it was consider'd that in the beginning he deny'd to go so suddenly to Rome, that he had refus'd to take the charge of General of the Holy Church upon him,
which was usually conserr'd upon the Brother, or next Kinsman to the Pope; and upon his refusal, it was accepted by the Duke of Sermoneta, who out of his natural bounty offer'd to execute it without pay, and to set out that for the payment of the debts of the Chamber: yet he alter'd his mind nevertheless, and got possession of the said command, and of all the other opulent offices that were vacant by the death of Don Mario Chigi. But be things as they will, he is most certainly a generous, charitable, and noble person, and as yet not so much given to covetousness as several others are. The Mother of the Cardinal, and Wife to Don Camillo, of the house Cellisi, and own Sister to the Cavalier Cellisi, of the order of Malta, is a Lady of good judgement, and well experienc'd in the Government of her own Family; but being born in a pittifull Ci∣ty, out of all courtship, and entertainment, she seems to be discompos'd with the multi∣tude of her visits, so that the Nephews do strive to instruct and render her the more gen∣tile a Princess, which thing is feasible enough, for Donna Beruice Wife to Don Mario, had no better breeding than this Lady when she came first to Rome, and yet in a short time she became so exquisite in all the formalities of the Court, that she out did all them that were born in Rome. The Cardinal has three Brothers besides, the first is Vincenzo, a Knight of Malta, about thirty years old, of indifferent parts, civil, and something Lordly in his deport∣ment. The second is Don Thomaso, about twenty five years of age, but not so crafty as his Brother, though his humour be busie and cunning likewise. The other Brother that is but young, is called Don Gregorio, who without doubt in time will be the most skilfull of any of them in the affairs of Rome, as having opportunity to acquaint himself there∣with, even now in his youth. It is believ'd if his Holiness lives another year, he will without fail make one of these three a Cardinal, as Ʋrban the eight did, who notwith∣standing all the Decres of the Councels, created two Brothers Cardinals; but in those dayes they thought of-nothing but heaping up wealth without measure. The Cardinal has two Sisters likewise, one of them marryed to a Nobleman of the house of Pangiatici, and the other, to a Noble man of the house of Banchieri, whom they likewise instruct in the manners of the Court. The Abbot Rospigliosi had alwayes a particular inclination to follow the Ecclesiastical habit, and the person of his Unckle, who being admitted into the Prelacy, began to make himself taken notice of for a person of great hopes; and on the other side his Unckle, who had alwayes a great affection for his Brother Don Camillo, who had alrea∣dy a numerous Family; to ease him of those cares that Sons do usually give their Pa∣rents, and that he might have one of his own blood to be near him, for his Confident, and that he might instruct him in publick affairs, he writ to his Brother Camillo, that he should send Giacomo his eldest Nephew to him; which he did, and he arriv'd in his Unckles Palace, in a very youthfull and brisk age. About this time Monsignour Rospigliosi being declar'd Nuntio to Spain, was in great doubt whether he should carry his Nephew along with him so young, for he was not then past 15; but knowing the good Genius of his Nephew very well, and that he was given to no vice that might rob him of the bounty of his Unckle; but that on the other side, his age being consider'd, he was endu'd with a modest gentleness, that gave him great hopes: being advis'd therefore by his friends, and dispos'd by his own inclinations, he resolv'd to take him along, with intention to improve his studyes at Salamanca: and indeed he was no sooner arriv'd in Spain, but he sent him thither, where he took his de∣gree of Doctorship before came away. Rospigliosi being created Cardinal, and first Secretary of State, and being return'd from Spain, took his Nephew Giacomo with him, employing him first in drawing Let∣ters of no great importance; for great business he deserv'd wholly to himself. In brief, this Abbot whilst he bore that Title, as young as he was, did great honour to his Unckles Family; who slipt no opportunity on his side to advance him, as he did in making him Cupbearer to Cardinal Chigi, in which employment, he gain'd much upon the affections of Chigi, who held him for a youth of no ordinary knowledge. About this time the accident happen'd to the Duke of Crequy, of which we have spoke sufficiently before: and Chigi having satisfy'd his Unckle the Pope, that it was necessary to send some
person of worth to the French Ambassador that was then retir'd to Saint Quirico, in the Grand Dukes Dominions; the Abbot Rospigliosi was pitch'd upon, both by the Pope and his Nephew, to be the man into whose hands they would put the first overtures of ac∣commodation; so that from hence may be argued the opinion the Court had of him, when they dispatch'd him immediately with their Orders, or rather their necessary Me∣moires, as may be seen in the following Letter written by the Cardinal, to the Ambassa∣dor, who was then at Quirico, as aforesaid. Most Illustrious, and most Excellent Lord, I Ʋnderstand by Mounsieur Burlemont, and by word of mouth from the Tuscan Am∣bassador, that your Excellence has receiv'd from his most Christian Majesty an ample faculty and power in order to the composure of what has happen'd by the exorbitance of the Corsies, and that if a person were sent from hence to understand his Majesties resolutions, they should immediately be imparted; upon this information, which his Holiness receiv'd with very great pleasure. I have dispatch'd my Cup bearer, the Abbot Rospigliosi, to re∣ceive from your Excellence what part you shall think fit to communicate of his Majesties mind and desires, not doubting but they are such, as will evidence to the World his Ma∣jesties great piety, and your Excellences most singular prudence and respect towards the Holy See, as Mounsieur Burlemont has assur'd me: To the end I may have a happy oppor∣tunity of operating with his Holiness for his Majesties service, as I am bound to do alwayes to my utmost, I beseech your Excellence to believe whatever the said Abbot sayes of my desire to serve you. And thus committing the rest to him, I do with all my heart kiss your Excellences hands. Rome the 3d. of Octob. 1662. The Ambassador receiv'd the Abbot very kindly, but entred not into any discourse with him about the Accommodation, upon pretence that he could not negotiate with him, he having brought no Orders along with him from his Holiness to that purpose. His answer to the Cardinal was thus. Most Eminent, and most Reverend Lord, I Have receiv'd your Eminences Letter, which you were pleas'd to write to me the third instant, from the hands of Seignor Abbot Rospigliosi, but it appearing to me, he had no Order from his Holiness to treat with me about satisfaction due to the King my Master, I could not believe I had any opportunity of entring into any such debate with him: I have desir'd the Abbot to assure your Eminence of my just intentions, and so I most humbly kiss your hands. Whilst things were thus tending to a composure, the Abbot was declar'd Inter∣nuntio to Brussels, having been alwayes inclin'd to hold a good correspondence with the Spaniard, ever since he was so long in Spain: It being in his way to Brussels, Cardinal Chigi carry'd him along with him in his Legation to France, in which journey he did the Cardinal good service, and gave great satisfaction to the French. The Spaniards esteem'd very well of him at Brussels, in as much as in the management of his Charge, he gave particular evidence of his prudence. About this time the Cardinals Unckle being advanc'd to the Papacy, and he having dispatches and advices from all parts, but particularly from the Great Duke, who sent a Courier with all speed on purpose, who was receiv'd with that affection by the Abbot, that he gave him not only a Billet for a thousand Ducats, but a Carcanet of Gold worth five hundred Crowns, and a purse of fifty Ducats for his journey. But he would not stir from Brussels without order from his Holiness, who being resolv'd to imploy him in the Peace betwixt the two Crowns, that were in a new rupture of late. He commanded the said Abbot his Nephew, to negotiate with his most Christian Majesty about the differences in Flanders, and the rather, because the Spaniards did earnestly beg it of the Pope. The Abbot went accordingly into France, and that sooner for the convenience of
his passage, than to begin his Negotiations, which requir'd great time and assiduity. His Majesty receiv'd him with all imaginable benignity, giving Orders that he should be treated like a Nephew of the regnant Pope: and it is most certain, that his passage from Brussels to Rome, was like a continued triumph almost, all Ambassadors, Ministers of Princes, and Prelates, making him their Visits. He fell sick by the way, and was forc'd for some time to take up at Susa, where he experimented the generosity of the Royal House of Savoy. The Cardinal Antonio that was then passing into France, and had shewn his affection to the person of the Abbot in Rome, having left a deed of resignati∣on of the Arch-Priestship of Santa Maria Maggiore, and the Prefecture of the signa∣ture of Grace, in favour of the said Rospigliosi, he past from Savona to Susa to visit him, and to communicate some important affairs with him: being something recover'd, though still feavourish, he embarqu'd upon the River Poc, in his voyage to Rome, be∣cause his Holiness expected him with impatience, being desirous to make him a Cardinal suddenly, as it followed; for as soon as he was arrived at Rome, and received with all possible magnificence, he staid but a few days before he was created Cardinal, with the Title of Padrone, and with all due preheminence. His Holiness left him not so large an authority as he would have had, with which he was not over-well satisfy'd: he endeavour'd by all means to cashier all those that were in favour with his Unkle, that he himself might remain absolute; as it appear'd a while since, when coming to make his Holiness a visit, his Holiness askt him what they said of him in the Court; To which he reply'd immediately, that he was applauded in eve∣ry thing, but one, and that was, that he was too prodigal of his favours to Paulus Strada, which the said Paul sold afterwards at a very dear rate: His Holiness with a severe brow returned him this answer, That he wondred he would be the Messenger of such news, Strada being the best Minister he ever had yet, that he could not believe Strada would do such unjust things; and that otherwise he took great pleasure in Strada's advantages: To which he subjoyn'd, (and indeed that was it that netled the Cardinals) That if he himself who was his Nephew, would have any favour from him, he should sooner obtain it by the intercession of Paulus Strada: At which words the Cardinal shrinking up his shoulders, departed very melancholly, that he could not compass his designs. However he cannot complain that he has not full liberty to aggrandize and n∣rich himself; because, no sooner is any good Benesice or Abbey void, but 'tis immedi∣ately bestow'd on him: and indeed he is already so well provided, that let his Holiness dye as soon as he pleases, he is sure to be left rich enough. The Romans that are al∣ways prying upon the actions of the Nephews, are better pleas'd with the Father than with the Son; and this is most certain, that in charity, and in his charge, Don Camillo exceeds him far. It seem'd strange to the Court to see the said Cardinal going abroad at first dash with Cardinal Sigismond Chigi and Don Agostino in his Coach, without any other Cardinal or Prelate: whereas at first, the Cardinal Nephews appear with great trains of Principal persons, and not with inferiour Cardinals: from hence they inferr the lowness of his mind: But the wiser sort see well enough into the design, which is, that both Unkle and Nephew are resolv'd to tye an indivisible knot betwixt the two Fa∣milies, and to render themselves invincible to the rest, by redoubling of marriages. And of this dayly proof is to be seen, his Holiness having commended the friendship of the Chigi to all his own friends, perswading them they are bound to kiss the place where the Chigi set their feet. As far as may be guest by outward appearance, 'tis a great trouble to the Cardinal that he has so many Brothers, because the multitude of Nephews lessens the authority he would have wholly to himself; insomuch that there has been already some disgusts betwixt him, and his Brother Vincenzo, about I know not what reducement of the Light-horse, Vincenzo telling him with some bitterness, that it did not belong to him to wind and insinuate himself into such affairs, seeing he did not concern himself in Ec∣clesiastick; But the greatest obstacle in his Eyes, is Paulus Strada; for to speak truth, his Holiness consults him from morning to night, and follows his advice as if he were an Oracle. The Ministers of Princes that are resident in Rome, have not yet had experience of the
Cardinals worth in business: for knowing that his Holiness follows other peoples advice, and not his Nephews, they apply themselves immediately to the Pope, till they shall see the Cardinal a little more setled in his Padronancy; but the Cardinal being naturally am∣bitious of authority, thrusts himself many times upon things he is not call'd to: and his Holiness to satisfie him, more than any thing else, gives him liberty to give audience to some of the Ministers of Princes; which he performs, both receiving, and dispatching them with very good Complements, in which he abounds perhaps beyond any of the antientest Courtiers; whereupon an Ambassador from a King being in discourse about this Cardinal Padrone, said, That he believ'd his Eminences virtues consisted not n any thing besides complements and fair words; To which it was reply'd, That he would have made a better Master of the Coremonies, than Cardinal Padrone. He is of an humour very contrary to Cardinal Chigi, who shuns all business that may disorder his mind, betaking himself only to his recreations, and leaving the most diffi∣cult affairs to be dispatch'd by other people; whereas Rospigliosi on the other side, (though he be not so void of humanity, but that he loves likewise to pass the time ho∣nourably, and divert himself as well as other people) yet he would gdly have all diffi∣cult affairs go thorough his hands, and be thought the person of greatest authority, which may happen for ought I know in a short time; because his Holiness will not fail to lay upon him as many of his troublesome affairs as he can undertake, as well for the ease of his own age and indisposition, as to give opportunity to his Nephew to do all, which is the only thing he desires. A few dayes since he made his solemn Cavalcade to go and take possession of his Arch-Priestship of Santa Maria Maggiore, and a while after his Holiness introduc'd him in∣to the Signatura di gratia; open'd his mouth (as the custom is) in the Publick Con∣sistory, and gave him the Title of San Sisto, which his said Holiness had himself when he was a Cardinal. But at the same time hemet with some kind of dissatisfaction, because his Holiness being desirous to accomodate his Adjutants of the Chamber, gave order to the Datary, to dispatch upon the first vacancy, Bulls for 200 Crowns a piece, to the three Chamberlains; and one of them of 1300 Crowns falling void, the Datary drew the said three Bulls, and afterwards another for the remaining 700 Crowns, in favour of Rospigliosi; which his Holines observing, order'd the Bull for the 700 Crowns to be torn, and that the three other, one of 200 for Cardinal Nini, another of 200 for Azolini, and a third of 300 for the Datary himself, should be paid: of which Rospigliosi had no reason to complain; for the Pope, 'tis true, takes away the Crums as it were that would be lost betwixt his teeth, but he gives him the substantial Morses which will stick by the Ribs, and satiate the Appetite, whereas the other do but provoke it. The Cardinals have not that affliction, and perplexity they were us'd to have in the beginning of other Popes Pontificates, when they were constrain'd to be subject to cer∣tain Cardinal Nephews, who by their inexperience, knew not which way so much as to honour the Sacred Colledge. And truly it is above 10 years since any Pope had a Car∣dinal Nephew so well practis'd, and of so mature an age; for other Nephews never sur∣pass'd 25, and this is 35 at least; and which is more, most of them has been imploy'd in instructing himself in the most considerable affairs of Court; he being a person alwayes very curious in matters of State. There is a great desire in him of gaining the good word of the people, and to keep fair correspondence with the Roman Princes, though as yet it is not known upon what design. The unhappy rupture betwixt the Palestrina, and Don Agostino, in the Pallace of Don Camillo, set the Cardinal Padrone a work, (without shewing any interest or partiality) to endeavour to pacifie them; and having confin'd them both to their houses, he sent the Marquiss Luigi Matti to negotiate the peace, which follow'd indeed, but so, that it is suppos'd there will alwayes be some difference betwixt those two persons, about precedence. The Cardinal took some distast at this accident, and amongst some of his Domesticks, spake with some heat in defence of Don Agostino, which being understood by the Prince Palestrina, he also gave out some expressions of resentment, upbraiding the Car∣dinal of ingratitude; but it was in private, amongst his most intimate friends: and in∣deed the Rospigliosi must needs own more obligation to the house of Barbarini, than to
the Chigi, because Ʋrban the eight, was the first that open'd the door to the honour of the present Pope; and Francisco Barbarino was a great favourer of him in the time of In∣nocent the tenth, using all his art to advance him into some great office; whereas Alex∣ander gave him only a Cap: for which the house of Chigi have been paid in their own Coin, in Don Sigismonds having another, with this difference only, that Alexander gave his Cap to one that had serv'd the Church with great honour for a long time, and that he could not but promote him, without doing an affront both to himself and the Church: whereas Clement gave the Cap to a Youth, who though he was indeed qua∣lify'd very well; yet he had no merit, nor any service to promote him, but meerly the good fortune to be Nephew to the Pope. But be it how it will, there is great likely∣hood the Rospigliosi, will be more for the Chigi, than the Barbarini; though in the Con∣clave Cardinal Barbarino bestirr'd himself much more for Rospigliosi, than Cardinal Chigi did. The Spaniards having observ'd him a little too favourable to the French Ambassador, begin to be a little jealous of the Cardinal Padrone, as doubting his journey into France where he was so honourably receiv'd, may have corrupted his mind, and cool'd that affection he had alwayes for Spain; which it is possible may be true: yet the most learned, are of opinion he runs along with the Fide, not caring to ingage in disputes; and will do what he can to have a suck at the honey without the sting, and the rather, because he will not budge from the Councels and designs of his Unckle the Pope; for this is most certain, he that has the Pope on his side, has his Nephew also, unless something hap∣pens that renders his Holiness infirm, and then the Cardinal is Commander in chief. The Avignon Ambassadors that came out of France, to congratulate his Holiness, had their conference with the Cardinal Nephew, who was declar'd Legat of Avignon, a Ti∣tle that he receiv'd with the highest satisfaction, and express'd it, by a most magnificent Feast. All the time of this Carnival, this Cardinal had great entertainments in his house, to which he invited most part of the Prelates of the Court; and Don Camillo did the same, with design to delight the people by their Comedies and Musick, for which, his Holiness had order'd ten thousand Crowns to be disburs'd; yet there wanted not those that libell'd their liberality, but without reason, for they distributed great store of Alms amongst the poor, that they might have their share in the Carnival: and besides they paid off all the Workmen which were imploy'd about Don Camillo's house, a thing which the Relations of other Popes never did willingly; but with great clutter and noise, they would make them be contented with half what was due. So that thus far all goes well enough, seeing the Air of Rome changes not now the nature of persons, as it has for∣mery done many times. SIGISMONDO CHIGI has the last place amongst the Cardinals, as he that was last promoted by Clement, with the Title of Santa Maria in Dominica: he is Brother to Don Agostino, and Cousin by consequence to Cardinal Chigi. Don Agostino sus∣pecting he would marry, and by dividing the Estate, weaken the fortune of the Family, he labour'd night and day to make him a Cardinal, by that means to quiet his mind, which every body began to be afraid of; but in this point Alexander would not gratifie him, either that he would not put a Youth of his age into the Sacred Colledge, or that he otherwise presag'd what did afterwards follow. In short, he left him in a little ob∣scurity, but provided with Abbeys and Pensions good Store. Clement the ninth, as soon as he was receiv'd to the Papacy, as well for the obligations he alwayes profess'd to Alexander, and the house of Chigi, as also because it was become an usual custom in the Church, for the Pope to resign his Cap, to the Relation of that Pope that promoted him: and there being no other person of the Family of the Chigi's capable of the Car∣dinalship, he resolv'd to place his Habit upon the shoulders of this young Lord, thereby obliging at one stroke all the Relations of the late Pope; but especially Don Agostino, and Cardinal Chigi, to see their party re-inforc'd again by a new Cardinal, inspight of all those, who envious of their good fortune, desir'd to see that Family the most incon∣siderable of all the Papal Familyes. If the age of this Cardinal be seriously consider'd (who to difference him from the other Chigi, was call'd Sigismond, as is usual amongst the Barbarini, amongst whom,
one only bears the name of the Family, the others distinguishing themselves by their Christian names) it will appear a defect in his Holiness to introduce amongst so many reverend and grave Cardinals, a Youth that had not then reach'd nineteen years. But if on the other side, the wit, and judgement, and virtue of the young man be consider'd, the resolution is not so much to be condemn'd: his Holiness in that case may answer with the Ambassador who was upbraided by his youth, That Virtue consisted not in the Beard. And would to God that all the Cardinals that are created with their white Beards, were but as well provided with judgement and zeal, as this young Gentleman that has nothing to be charg'd with, but his minority. In the year 1660. his Unckle Alexander the Pope sent for him to Rome, (being as yet but about twelve years of age) about the same time that the Cardinals Sister appear'd there, and that to take away all occasion of jealousie; because he saw the branch of Don Mario was well enough pleas'd to see the Sister of Cardinal Chigi entertain'd lie Princesses of the Popes own blood, to the end that he might not suspect himself less be∣lov'd by Don Agostino his Cousin, though he solicited might and main, to have the youn∣ger Brother to Rome, out of a desire to put him into the Clergy. Don Mario, and the Cardinal were much pleas'd, to see this little Nipotisme at Rome, and Don Agostino forc'd himself to dissemble the jealousie, that lay gnawing in his Breast, and to caress his Cousins with all appearances of joy to see them there. The Pope himself that distributed his favours indifferently, could not but rejoyce to see Si∣gismond in his his presence, and so like his brother in his features. At his first arrival, he ask'd him several questions, to which he answer'd so appositely, his Unckle was as well satisfy'd with his replyes, that he wept for very tenderness, and gave immediate orders he should be furnish'd with such experienc'd Masters, as might instruct him in all manner of learning. The people of Rome were much surpris'd to see the disparity of humours in these two brothers Agostino and Sigismondo, and that they should love one another so intirely, when the one was as proud as the other was humble. And indeed Agostino, (either be∣cause his present felicity had made him forget his primitive condition, or that the levity of his nature, produc'd higher thoughts in his heart) is so lofty and high, he will scarce vouchsafe to salute those again that salute him, though otherwise he is civil enough, and gentile in his conversation, if not with every body, at least with his friends; but he begins now to abate a little, but without desertion of his ordinary Grandeur, because he ob∣serves his Holiness so much affected to the house of Chigi. Don Sigismond however has another way, and has pleas'd himself still to converse familiarly with all people, and ci∣villy to salute the ordinariest person about the Pope; but with Majesty enough too, which makes him be belov'd, and respected, not as a Nephew of the Popes only, but as a per∣son of worth. He was alwayes observ'd to be highly prudent, but especially at the death of his Unckle, when the people being inrag'd against the Family of Chigi, ran up and down the Streets exclaiming against them in such bitter language, that the Chigi being netled, threatned nothing but revenge upon the persons that were the occasions of those insolen∣cies. But Sigismond who had ambition after the Cardinalship, dissembled all, and kept himself from all such discourse, that he might have no occasion to quarrel, and this he did either out of the design aforesaid, or out of the na∣tural benignity, wherewith he is so abundantly stor'd. The truth is, the branch of Don Agostino had no reason to be troubl'd at the people, for they troubl'd themselves not much either with him, nor his brother Sigismond; but rather with Don Mario and the Cardinal, against whom their Insolencies ran very high: but for all this, all things are quiet, and they seeing the inclination of the present Pope to that Family, the people do now honour and esteem them more than ever. In this Scene there were many extrava∣gancies to be seen, the nature of Metamorphoses being too obvious at Rome; for Cle∣ment, either that he reserv'd his other designs, or that he counterfited, to the end that he might not draw upon himself the odium of the People, by the defence of a Family they hated so much; at the beginning of the Pontificate he pretended a longius ire, and abstain'd from conferring any honour, or shewing the least appearance of affection to
the Chigi, in so much that it was the general discourse of the City, that Don Mario was thinking to retire to Siena, Don Agostino and Don Sigismond to Riccia, and Cardinal Chigi under pretence of visiting his Abbeys, would withdraw himself from Court for some time in discontent: whereupon many of the Wits went up and down the Streets dispersing of these Inscriptions. SEDENTE CLEMENTE NONO, PONTIFICE OPTIMO MAXIMO, NOVO ROMANAE REIPƲBLICAE REPARA∣TORE, DE CHISIO SEMINE TARQƲINII PƲBLICAE QƲIETIS, APERTO JANO AB ƲRBE EXƲLARƲNT. Anno Domini 1667. Of all these extravagancies of fortune, Don Agostino, who is the least hated by the people, felt the most trouble, as holding now all his hopes desperate, of ever seeing his Brother Sigismond a Cardinal, upon which all his designs depended. Cardinal Chigi that had got all the money all this while, did but laugh, or at least pretend to laugh at the business, expecting to see the fury of the people, to cool by degrees, as it did in a short time; his Holiness with great prudence taking off some of the Gabels, made them forget their animosity to the Chigi, who were the Authors of laying them on. How∣ever there were thousands of Libels and Satyrs flew abroad, against Don Mario and the Cardinal his Son, but not one against Don Agostino, or his Brother: But as soon as Don Mario dyed, the odium of the people dyed with him, and seem'd to be buried in his Grave. About the same time his Holiness began to shew his partiality to the Family of the Chigi, giving Don Sigismond hopes of a Cap, and turning his ear to the proposition of Matrimony, betwixt the Princess Chigi, and his Holiness his Nephew, which is be∣liev'd already concluded, or at least in a very fair way. The people rejoyc'd exceedingly at the promotion of Don Sigismond, and much more than the Family of the Chigi did expect. Seignor Agostino, and Cardinal Chigi, solem∣niz'd it with great Feasts, as well to express their own joy, as to comply with the congra∣tulations of other people. The Visits were innumerable, and the whole World amaz'd at the Magnificence. The Ambassadors, Cardinals, Prelates, and Noblemen of Rome, though the most of them were acquainted with him when he was but a private person, yet upon this occasion they took no ordinary delight, to see with what Majesty and Decorum his new Cardinalship receiv'd his Visits, corresponding with every body, and satisfying them not so much with multiplicity, as with the materiality of his Complements, which is a quality remarkable in him ever since his coming to Rome. It is generally believ'd he will be assiduous in the Congregations, because he has shewn himself so in his Domestick and Scholastick Exercises; besides which he gives great signs of good nature and affection, in whatever he undertakes, nor are the poor in the last place with him; he is often seen in publick, as if he took delight to ostentate his Purple: yet he does it not out of pride, being as humble as is necessary, and no more. He speaks his mind freely, but is never transported, correcting himself still when he finds himself in the wrong, which he is in but very seldom, In short, he would do all that is possible, would he but endeavour to suppress certain passionate effluctions from his youth, that make him ambitious of being thought the best Cardinal in the Court, that he may arrive at a higher fortune thereby. The Spaniards caress him, and begin to make use of their Statagems to get him over to their party, which may be compass'd in several respects, but especially because Don Agostino is a Fudatary to the Empire. It will be now necessary we expect the success of the other promotions of Clement the ninth, whose intention of filling the Sacred Colledge with persons of Eminency as well in Name as in Action, is honourable and good: he has declar'd he will be very vigilant, that no passion of his may adumbrate that Holy resolution, but to speak the truth, there have been infinite of other Popes that have arriv'd at the Vatican with the same thoughts, who in a short time have alter'd their minds, and chosen their Cardinals winking, if not blindfold, suffering themselves to be overswayed by their own passions, or by their Nephews. The World is certainly corrupt all over, and inferiour people
prevail sooner for Preferments, than their superiours, especially in Rome, where the Ec∣clesiasticks are but men as in other places. The Court murmurs exceedingly to see so many deserving persons stand idle with∣out imployment, and yet his Holiness has taken many Offices from some, to bestow them upon others, according as Cardinal Albici advises him, who has a great share in his affection. There are two reasons may be the cause of it, either that the number of the meritorious is very great, or his Holinesses capacity of discerning them very small: Let it be which way it will, 'tis our duty to pray to God to inspire him with judgement to select persons of piety for the service of the Church, and that he will fill up the Sacred Colledge with Cardinals, illustrious by their Blood, their Virtues, and their Bounty.
THE ITALIAN PRINTER TO THE READER. THE absence of the Author has been the occasion that cer∣tain little Errors (if you will not Christen them great ones) have slip'd in this Third Part. The truth is, when the Author sent the Manuscript to my hands, by one of his Friends, we being at great distance from one another, I promis'd to do my endeavour to Correct it; and I was as good as my word, doing all that I was able, though my good will was above my abilities; yet I believe there is scarce any Error to be found, which your discretion may not correct in the reading, and that is it I do most humbly intreat. I am oblig'd also in the behalf of the Author to admonish, that if you find any palpable Error in point of History, you would dispence with it, because the time was so short from the Composition to the Printing. The curio∣sity and impatience of some persons, made me snatch the Manu∣script out of the hands of the Corrector, and perhaps some of my Workmen printed some of them, before he saw them at all. I am to desire you likewise from the Author himself, that you would not censure him, that he has inserted into this Third Part some things which have been written by other men, he believ'd he has done for the best, and truly I am of opinion you will not say the contrary, there being no reason a thing should be left out, where it will stand well, because it was in another place where perhaps it stood worse: Your Bricklayers, and your Writers, are in my judgement alike, or rather, your Writers and your Bricklayers; the Bricklayers think Old Materials much better to build with than New, as finishing more exquisitely with a mixture of Old and New: The Old is New to him that begins, and the New is Old to him that finishes. Whilst this whole Work was a Print∣ing, I gave it leaf by leaf to a Friend of mine (very well vers'd in the greatest Curiosities) to peruse: He told me, this Third
Part was the best, and more necessary to be publish'd than all the rest; and I do easily perswade my self you will be of his opi∣nion: But you must read it impartially, or it will scarce turn to accompt. Have a care of doing as he did, who read Books only to satisfie his Friend: Yet in this Work I shall be oblig'd to you, if you will correct the Errors of the Press as you go along. The Conclave of Clement the 9th. (after which the Politick Apho∣risms do follow) was taken out of the hands of a Conclavist who indeed had no intention to publish them, but only to shew it to his Friends; I suppose it is conformable to the truth of the History, being the person who collected it is very impartial. I had two of them in my hands, which I shew'd to a Friend of mine, a Virtuoso, and well skill'd in the Interests of the Court of Rome, that he might judge which of the two were the best, and most proper to be publish'd; having kept them some dayes in his hands, he return'd them both to me, with his opinion in writing, that this was to be preferr'd. Those who know already how passages have gone, may read it for Observation, and those who know nothing, for their Curiosity. Of the Politick Apho∣risms I shall say nothing, because they carry their Subtilty, and Excellence in the very Name of the Author: Some would have had the Author taken pains to make a Table of the most Consi∣derable Matters, with reference to the several Pages; but the Author did not think it convenient to lengthen it out unnecessa∣rily with another Table, seeing in every Book there was one large enough before. However I have made an Index of some proper Names, especially of the Cardinals, and Popes, but left out (for the greater ease of the Reader) some such Sirnames, and Names, as are many times multiply'd according to the necessity of the History. If you find no satisfaction in this Cardinalisme, you will find it perhaps in his EƲROPA MORTA, which the Author has promis'd a while ago, and I do promise on my part to use my utmost endeavours to facilitate the Reading, by a care∣full and faithfull Correction of the Press. May you live happy in the mean time, and be as candid in Correcting the Errors, as I am affectionate in declaring my self, Your Servant.
Il CARDINALISMO di Santa Chiesa, OF THE HISTORY OF CARDINALS. In III. Parts. PART III. BOOK I. The Contents. In which is discours'd of the resemblance of the Church, to a Ship, and the rea∣son why. Of the City of Rome born to Lord it over other Nations. Of what is requisite for the understanding of the Pontifical Election. Of the age of Ho∣liness in the Church. Of the reasons why there were no difficulties in the infancy of the Church, about the Election of Popes. Of a Pidgeon that sate upon the head of Fabianus Romanus, and made him be declar'd Pope. The reason why Sanctity decay'd in the Church. Of the felicity of Peace experi∣mented by the Ecclesiasticks. Of the introduction of Pride. Of the Empe∣rours, and how little they regarded the Spiritual affairs of the Church. Of a dissention at the Election of Pope Simacus. Of certain scandals which sprang up during Pope Bonifaces vacancy of the See. Of Pelagius Romanus, and his succeeding of Virgilius. Of certain Priviledges granted by the Pope to Attila King of the Goths, call'd FLAGELLUM DEI. Of the authority
assum'd by the Emperours in the Election of the Pope. Of the Reception given by the Emperour to Constantine the first at Constantinople. Of the great hatred Philippus call'd Bardono, bore to the Pontifical Grandeur. Of the Election of Pope Zachary a Grecian, without any Communication with the Emperour. Of the deposal of Chilperick by the Pope, his being stripp'd of all Title to the kingdome of France, and the reason wherefore. Of the Em∣perours being declared, excluded from all right in the Pontifical Election. Of Berrha's (the Widdow of Charlemains) journey to Rome, to demand justice of the Pope, and of the success of her journey. Of a particular alli∣ance betwixt Charles the Great, and the Pope. Of a popular tumult that happen'd in Rome against the person of Pope Adrian. Of the Creation of Pope Stephen by the people, against the consent of the Emperour. Of the Popes journey into France, to clear himself to that King of the accusations against him. Of the industry Pope Pascal us'd to increase his authority. Of the Election of Eugenius the second, a most eloquent man. Of the threatnings of King Lewis against the Pope. Of the reason why the Popes chang'd their Names at first. Of the desire the Romans had to shake off the Yoke of the Empire. Of two Popes, successors to Adrian. Of Adrian the third's Bull against the Emperour. Of Otho's seeking revenge for the said Bull. Of the deposal of John the XIII. from the Papacy, and of his restauration to the See. Of Pope Benedict's banishment to Hambourg by the Emperour. Of Leo's restauration to the Papacy, after he had been deprived by the people. Of a Declaration of Leo's against the priviledges of Charles the Great. Of the hatred conceiv'd thereupon by the Romans against the Pope. Of the Popes being imprison'd by the people, and of the revenge the Emperour took upon the Authors thereof. Of the Popes imbezzlement of the Treasure of St. Peter. Of his flight to Constantinople. Of the Election of the Pope return'd into the hands of the people. Of the Emperours resolution to have one of his kinsmen Pope. Of Pope Gregories being driven out of Rome by the fury of the people, and what follow'd thereupon. Of the Election of the Empe∣rour transferr'd by Pope Gregory upon certain Princes of Germany, and upon what grounds. Of the exclusion of the people from the Pontifical Election. Of the Creation of three Popes at once. Of the Schism appeas'd by Pope Alexander. Of the Election of the Pope remaining only in the hands of the Cardinals. Of the Assumption ef Pope Alexander, and the Schisms in his time. Of the service the Venetian did to the Church against the Em∣perour. Of the obligation the Popes do profess to the Venetian. Of the ab∣soluteness of the Cardinals authority in the Pontifical Election. Of the place where they assembled to Elect. Of the manner of their proceeding in the Election, and the ill consequences thereupon. Of a two years and nine months vacancy of the See. Of the Assumption of Pope Gregory the X. Of the Reconciliation of the Venetian and Genoese. Of the Conclave in∣troduc'd by Gregory the X. Of certain tumults in Viterbo. Of the A∣postolick See, being transferr'd into France by Clement the V. Of Saint Bridgets Letter to Gregory the XI. Of the return of the Apostolick See into Italy. Of the indignation of the Italians to see the Pontificate so long in the hands of the French. Of a Schism that lasted 15. years. Of certain accidents in the Papacy of Eugenius. Of Amadeo Duke of Savoy's Crea∣tion.
Of his virtues, and renuntiation of the Papacy. Of what happen'd in the Conclave of Eugenius, and of the exaltation of Nicholas the V. Of the Assumption of Calisto the III, and of his death. Of many politick dis∣courses at the Creation of Eneas Piccolomini, who was afterward Pius the II. And of some particulars in relation thereunto. THE Church has been (and not improperly) resembled in the first cryes of its Infancy, to a Ship tumbl'd by the Waves, and batter'd by the Winds, because She was to be nourish'd and brought up in the midst of the proud Billows of so many Ecclesiastical Disputes, so ma∣ny Theological Opinions, so many Dissentions, and Politick Reasons, and expos'd by the ambitions of their own Mariners, to thousands of Dangers and Storms, which Schisme and Heresie have constantly produc'd with such fury, as would have doubtless not only hindred her happy and victorious entrance into the Haven of Safety, but have hazarded to have sunk and overwhelm'd her in those very Waves, had not a favourable Gate of Protection been oppos'd by that Redeemer, who has not, nor will not endure to see that Vessel pe∣rish, which he built (at the expence of three and thirty years sweat) with the Wood of his own Cross; joyn'd together, and rivetted with the Nails of his Hands and Feet; cemented it with his Divine Blood; (which by the blows and stripes that they gave him, was become pitch in the hands of the Jews) setting up that Spear that pierc'd his side, for a Mast; stretching out that Linnen in which his most Sacred body was involved, for its Sails; recommending it to the Vigilance and Government of the Apostles, and their Successors; and finally for their greater incouragement to Lanch out into the Sea of this World, he not only offer'd himself to become a Lanthorn to their feet, but gave them a Motto worthy of such a Builder; Et Portae inferi non praevalebunt adver∣sus eam. But though the Gates of Hell have had no power to destroy her, they have been suffi∣cient notwithstanding to give her great tryals, that by her agitations and tempests in this world, her victories and triumphs might be the more glorious in Heaven, and that by those wrecks and persecutions, the Church Militant and Triumphant might be distin∣guish'd. The greatest Calamities this great Ship of Christianity has suffer'd, have (by the judgement of the most pious and devout persons) proceeded from the investiture of the Supreme dignity in the persons of the Ecclesiasticks, who being ambitious of ad∣vancing themselves one above another, and being sensible, upon the score of their own merits, they cannot obtain the charges they pretend too, they have betaken themselves to compass the end of their pretensions, by imploring the recommendations of Secular Princes. Which tend to mix Heaven and Earth together. Rome, which was built as it were to Lord it over all the Nations in the Universe, and give an ample testimony and relation of thousands of wrecks the Church has suffer'd, by the recourse the Ecclesiasticks have almost alwayes had to the Seculars; and from hence it is, that in these times, there is a certain natural instinct and inclination in the minds of all Politicians, to inform themselves distinctly of all particularities in the Court of Rome; as if a man could not any way render himself more acceptable in his conversation, than by his discourses of that. And indeed, the Pontifical dignity, which is the most conside∣rable, the Majesty of so many Cardinals, who are the Senators of the Christian Com∣monwealth; the splendour of so many Bishops, who receive all their aliment from the Popes, do render it worthy to be numbred amongst the most famous Cities of the world, and to be call'd the true Mother of Nations. By this means, the Popes being ingrandiz'd, and rais'd to so eminent a degree, as to be acknowledg'd above all other Monarchs whatsoever: every one endeavours to inform himself of the quality of the great jurisdiction the Popes do at present enjoy; in so much that the greatest part of the Writers now adayes, do tire themselves out with relations of the Pontifical State.
From the mutations and evil events which have follow'd the Election of Popes, I will not say in Rome, but in all Christendome, it may be clearly argued of what moment the said Election is, seeing that for so many ages, with her private interests, and her publick, she has oblig'd the principal Monarchies of the Universe, to interpose with the whole power, both of their Pen and their Sword. In the Infancy of the Church, there was nothing desir'd of Rome, but Prayers and Orations, and Preachings, and Administrati∣on of the Sacraments, because Rome expected nothing from the faithfull, but the zeal of a good Conscience, the safety of their Souls, and to be frequent in Holy Duties. The first Pastors of the Church rejoyc'd to keep themselves at a distance from the In∣terests of Princes, as fearing to defile the Innocent Purity of the Flock of Christ, with the Diabolical pollutions of Secular policies. But their Successors beginning to be curi∣ous, and to pry into the most occult and private policies of Princes, they would not suffer the Court of Rome to be medling there, but gave themselves over to endeavour the introduction of their own Interests, into the Cabinet of the Interests of the Popes. For certain ages, Rome was free from those intricacies that are familiar in Temporal States, contenting it self to conduct the Flock of Christ to the Fold, with her Pastoral Sheephook only, I mean her Spiritual Arms; but no sooner was she become greedy of Principality and Dominion, but the Princes (observing her Crosier to be chang'd into a Sword, and the Book of the Gospel, into an Epitomy of Politicks) began also to imi∣tate Rome, seeing Rome following their Rules in Temporal Affairs. For three hundred years and upwards, the Primitive Church continu'd in a most Holy decorum, without the least obstacle in the Election of her Popes, they being then con∣tented with the bare Title of Bishops of Rome. The Elections were not made by the In∣terest of Princes, or the Capriccio of Nephews, as they are now; but by a Holy Zeal in the Bowels of the Electors, who us'd to meet sometimes in this place, sometimes in that, and many times in the Woods, by reason of the cruelty of those Tyrants, that en∣vy'd the tranquility of the Christians. They had in those dayes no secret nor private Votes, because the inward designs of those Primitive Chistians, were suitable and correspondent to their outward zeal and profession of good works. The Deacons (that is they who endued with greater Cha∣rity and Devotion, serv'd the Church, sometimes in collecting of Alms for the common necessities, sometimes in distributing Relief to the necessities of the poor) were admitted to the Election, together with such Priests and Curats as were nearest to the City of Rome. With what simplicity and integrity they proceeded to the Election of Popes, in the Primitive times of the Church, may be argued, from what happen'd in the Va∣cancy of Pope Anthero, who dyed according to Eusebius's calculation in the year 243. The Holy Fathers were met according to their usual custom, to consult about a Suc∣cessor, and whilst they were discoursing of the virtues, of this man, and the abilities of another, it happen'd that Fabiano Romano pass'd by near the place of their Assembly, in order to the looking to some grounds of his, which he did not disdain to cultivate many times with his own hands. He was no sooner come over against the place wherein the Electors were met, but a Pidgeon from a Neigbouring Dove-house alighting upon his Shoulder, gave occasion to the Fathers to arise from their Seats, at the first notice of it, and esteeming it a Prodigye, they proclaim'd him Pope unanimously, every one being confident, it was the intention of the Holy Ghost, who was represented in that Dove. Fabianus, who thought of nothing less than to be chosen Pope, was astonish'd at the business, and not judging himself worthy of so great a Ministry, he begg▪d upon his knees to be excus'd; but his humility being overcome by the perswasion of the Electors, he at ast embrac'd the Pastoral Cure of the Church, in which, after he had exercis'd it for the space of seven years, with great advantage to the Christians, he ended his dayes under the Tyranny of the barbarous Emperour Decius, who at that time us'd great cruelty to the Christians, constraining them from the City into the Woods, which they were glad to make their houses of God, seeing that the Emperour was pleas'd to make Cities, places for wild Beasts, and for Devils.
The Popedome was not ambition'd, but avoided by the Ecclesiasticks, because it com∣monly lost them their lives that exercis'd it. He that found himself too weak and time∣rous to suffer Martyrdome, renounc'd the Papacy, and confess'd the imbecility of his nature; and indeed, who would ever have receiv'd, much less, have sought an office, which brought no other advantages along with it, than the persecution of Tyrants. Now adayes, what broyls, what intrigues, what differences are there at the creation of Popes; where is he, who would desire Votes to be made a Martyr? For my part I dare affirm, the Church would be as Holy in these times, and perhaps more, now we are as it were in the latter end of it, than it was then in its beginning; if the Popes were call'd to Pover∣ty, and not Riches; to Martyrdom, not Magnificence; and to the care of the Church, and not of Governments. But whether do my thoughts transport me? Let us return to our business, and assert, that the Church was Holy, without Discord, or Schism, or Heresie, to the dayes of San Silvester, which were about the year 325. till that time the Popes having been Elected with tranquility and peace, and no small satisfaction both to the Electors and Elected. The Holiness of the Church, (I mean that Holiness that respects the Election of Popes) began to cease under the Emperour Constantine, because the Persecution of the Christians ceas'd; Constantine suffer'd the Church to enjoy Peace, that is of the body possibly, but with greater torture to their minds; for with the ease and wealth which he bestow'd upon the Ecclesiasticks; with the conveniences of Houses, and the Govern∣ment of Cities, which he assign'd to the Popes, Charity began to grow cold, Zeal to be weaken'd, and Devotion to be lost, and those Ecclesiasticks who formerly imploy'd their whole times in heaping up Penitencies and Fastings, by those good works to purchase the Glory of Heaven, began after that time to apply themselves to the acquisition of money, to the begging of Abbeys, and Bishopricks, by those means to procure the glo∣ry of the world. As soon then as Riches were introduc'd into the Church, Schism and Heresie were intro∣duc'd amongst the Clergy, and Pride which began then to spread, and worm it self into the hearts of those who were formerly meek and humble, and sc as shunn'd dignity, and hid themselves from preferments; insomuch as that Papacy which was avoided by every body, as a thing that brought nothing but persecutions along with it, began to be aspir'd too, as soon as they perceiv'd their fear turn'd into security, their flight into re∣pose, and their torments into happiness. For if formerly, by reason of the poverty of the Popedome, they were subject to Tyrants, they believ'd afterwards by virtue of their wealth, to make Martyrs even of the Tyrants themselves. No sooner did the Popes appear with their Miters of Gold, and with their Scepters in their hands, commanding the people, but all of them design'd the destruction of the Secular Power, to ingrandize the Pontifical Majesty, to make themselves courted by the Vulgar, and honour'd by the Great ones: but the Emperours growing jealous of them, began to open their eyes, and watch over their actions, that they might not be taken at un∣awares; endeavouring to defend that Jurisdiction, which the Popes began by degrees to usurp, with the Spiritual Arms of the Cross: so that though they thought not before of the Interest of the Church, they found themselves oblig'd afterwards, to have an eye upon those of the Popes; yet not so much out of any inclination of their own, as because the Popes had the same designs upon them. Notwithstanding all this, whether it was out of respect to the memory of San Sil∣vester, or Constantine, I know not; it is sufficient that the Emperours suffer'd several years to pass after the death of those two persons, without medling or concerning them∣selves at all in the Election of the Popes, which was a great error in their Politicks. For the succeeding Popes had opportunity in that time to advance their own Interests, to the prejudice of the Empire, and Emperors, who taking no care to bridle and restrain the In∣terests of Rome, contented themselves to live quietly at Constantinople, and to send out their Orders to their Vicars and Prefects in Rome, that they should endeavour with all possible industry to hinder the proceedings of the Popes; but with express caution, that they should by no means interpose in the Election of the Popes, that being to be left to the Clergy and the people, who by unanimous consent had had possession of the said Election for several years.
The introduction of the people into the Election of the Pope, may be said to be casual, there being no Pontifical Bull visible that gave them admission; but it is to be suppos'd, it fell out by reason of the Deacons, who were admitted from the very time of the Apo∣stles, into the disposition of Ecclesiastical Charges; and because as the Churches en∣creas'd, and the number of the Faithfull was augmented, so also was the number of the Deacons in the Assemblies; in so much that by little and little they grew so numerous, (the said Deacons being not of the Order of the Clergy, but of the Laity) that they brought in the people; and the Clergy having introduc'd the Deacons, thought it not meet to turn out the people, who possess'd the places of the Deacons. At first the number of the Ecclesiastick Electors, was much greater than the Deacons; but the Deacons being become the people, there became a greater inequality in the Electors, and perhaps not without some displeasure to the Clergy, who would willingly see the people excluded. Whilst the Clergy were holy, that is, addicted to the service of God, to the edifica∣tion of their Neighbours, to the augmentation of the Faithfull, and the propagation of the Faith; whilst they were retir'd from the Corruptions of the age, and macerating their Flesh with Sackcloth, and Fasting, the people willingly joyn'd with them in the Election of the Popes, because it belonging to the Clergy to give the first votes, the peo∣ple could not imagine those persons subject to Error, who had no other aim than the service of God, and therefore they willingly concurr'd, delighting to confirm the opinion of the Clergy, because they judg'd it holy and good. But as soon as pride began to have place in the breasts of the Ecclesiasticks, and that they pleas'd themselves with the enjoyments of Mundane advantages; as soon as they began to deviate from the wayes of Heaven, and the people observ'd their tendency to be too great towards the Earth, they began likewise to press and insist upon their own opinion, not trusting to the opinion of the Clergy, because they saw them so deplorably void of all holiness. From hence there succeeded infinite disputes, and innumerable dissentions, in so much that that action which was formerly sacred and solemn, became prophane and scandalous, by degrees; they contending not only with words, and in∣vectives, but with blows many times, the people labouring to the utmost the division of the Clergy, and the Clergy the dis-union of the people; so that they form'd themselves into flying Squadrons, both on the one side and the other. Great was the scandal which happen'd in the year of our Lord 500. by reason of the differences in the Election of Simacus, betwixt the Clergy and People, each of them en∣deavouring to engage those that were without, in so much that the Communalty of the City were forc'd to take Armes, and with threats to oblige the Electors to a conclusion. The Prefect, or Imperial Vicar at Rome, signify'd in the behalf of the Emperor, that if they did not agree, his Master would be constrain'd to bring an Army to Rome, to the prejudice of the whole City; with which the Electors being affrightned, they agreed in the Election of Simacus. For certain years after this, they chose their Popes with little or no controversie, till that in the year 531. they began to relapse into their former disputes, obliging the City to take Armes the second time, whose threatnings prevail'd to put an end to that Electi∣on also, by their declaring Boniface the second Pope; which said Boniface, being an Assertor of the interest of the Clergy, as soon as he was assum'd to the Papacy, he en∣deavour'd to apply a remedy to those scandals, and to give the greatest share to the Clergy. And Virgilius his successor in the Papacy, observing things to run clearly with them, establish'd a Decree, that the Election of the Popes should remain absolutely in the hands of the Clergy for the future, to the exclusion of the people; which Decree gave so great dissatisfaction to the Romans, that they watch'd for an opportunity to re∣venge it. About this time Attila, who was call'd Flagellum Dei, with great triumph to the Goths (whose King he was) over-run all Italy, and with great cruelty and slaughter threatned the total destruction of Rome: Pelagius the Pope, who succeeded Virgilius, not thinking it safe, in such a conjuncture, to have a discontented people, and Tyrant
upon his shoulders at one time, to gain the favour both of the one and the other, pub∣lish'd a Bull, forbidding the Clergies Election of the Pope, without the consent both of the People and Emperor, and so it came to pass that they introduc'd into the Elections, the Ambassadors of the Emperor, and the People, in the same numbers as before. The Emperor and People were very well pleas'd with it, and took possession of their Priviledges in the next vacancy of the Chair, all of them together electing John the 3d. But in the year 583. Rome being besieg'd, the Clergy and the People chose Pelagius the second Pope, without giving any share or participation to the Emperor, who vow'd revenge, as soon as he had the news: But the new Pope to pacifie his choller, dispatch'd an Ambassador to make his excuse, and to assure him for the future, there should be no Election made without his consent, to which end he confirm'd the Bull of Pelagius the first; which Bull and confirmation continued in force successively till the year 607. in which time the Emperor Foca would needs create Boniface Pope, in spight both of the major part of the Clergy, and the People, who rejected him as a person unworthy of so eminent a Dignity. However Boniface express'd himself much more affectionate towards the Clergy, and the People that were his adversaries, than to the Emperor who would have elected him; and the reason was, because he saw what Authority the Emperors were usurping in the Pontifical Elections, and therefore by new Orders and Decrees he confirm'd the Privi∣ledges of the people, commanding expresly that they should not for the future make any Election, without the intervention of the People, and Clergy, to whom he gave Autho∣rity to do all. The Emperors for all this did but laugh at their proceedings, and betaking themselves again to the force of their comminations, they asserted the Priviledges granted them by the Pelagiusses, and would either by force, or fair words, make the Popes as they pleas'd: Hence it was that Severus the second being chosen in the year 535. by the Clergy, and the People, and the consent of the Emperor also, would not act any thing till he was confirm'd by Isacius the Emperors Lieutenant in Italy; and all to publish how great the Authority of the Emperor was in the Election of the Popes. And the pretenders to the Papacy, observing the greatness of the Emperors Authority in the Elections, almost all of them apply'd themselves to him, for the obtaining of their designs: In so much that in the year 688. one Pascal an Arch-priest, and Treasurer to Conon who was then Pope, did earnestly solicite John Platina at that time the Emperors Vicar in Italy, and with great sums of money endeavour'd to oblige him, upon the death of the present Pope, to assist him in the succession. Platina took his money, and sent him away well pleas'd with his promises; but the Pope being dead, instead of assisting of Pascal, he endeavour'd the promotion of another, which was Sergius the first: Yet it is certain, had he found the Electors dispos'd, he would have chosen him; but the Clergy being wholly averse, he would not undertake a thing, he could not compass without dishonour, seeing it was very well known what way Pascal had taken, and what money he had consign'd to that purpose. But the good Pascal no sooner saw Sergius in the Chair, and himself without money, and deluded, but he did what he could to make the people rise against Sergius, but without any effect. This faculty of electing▪ of Popes, began to lessen in the time of Gregory, who being Pope, and a zealous assertor of the Ecclesiastical Liberty, that he might render the Pope∣dome more considerable, he endeavour'd by an insurrection of all Italy, against the Em∣peror then reigning, to banish the Emperors of the East out of Italy; and to that end he declar'd all such as yielded them obedience, Excommunicate for the future; and the people, partly for fear of Excommunication, and partly to set themselves at liberty, de∣clar'd themselves free, and threatned with Armes in their hands to defend themselves to the last drop of their blood, against whoever should endeavour the contrary; and thus by the contrivance of Gregory, were the Emperors of the East excluded from their Do∣minion in Italy. Zachary a Grecian was chosen Pope in the year 743. by the Clergy, and People only, without any participation with the Emperor, who was wholly excluded from the Electi∣on of the Pope.
And this exclusion continued till the year 760. in the time of Charles the Great, and Adrian the first, who entring into a League, for several respects, they granted many Priviledges one to the other, viz. Adrian granted to Charles the Great, the Title of MOST CHRISTIAN KING, and CITIZEN OF ROME, (which was but a small business for an Emperor, and King of France) with power to call himself Roman Em∣peror, and last of all, Authority to interpose in the Election of Popes. Charles the Great on the other side, declar'd Adrian true and lawfull Prince of the City of Rome, Patriarch of all Italy, establishing the Empire of the Pope above all Em∣pires, and declaring his own inferiour to it. There was but one Pope chosen by the consent of the Emperor, and that was Leo the third; after his death the Clergy and people (in despight of the Priviledges granted to the Empire, in regard of the Election of the Pope) assembled themselves and created Stephen the fourth, without attending the vote or assent of Lewis the Good, who suc∣ceeded in the Empire after the death of Charles. Lewis was disgusted at the Election, and declar'd he would go in person to Rome, and by force of Armes pull Stephen out of the Vatican, and put another in his place, as he thought good himself. But Stephen having advertisement thereof, prevented that mis∣chief, by going personally into France, and in the presence of Lewis, pretending to de∣posite all his Authority in the hands of the said Emperor; which act of humility work∣ing upon the natural goodness of Lewis, he confirm'd the Priviledges granted by Charles the Great, and sent him back again to Rome, with considerable Presents. After the death of Stephen, which was in the year 817. the people and the Clergy created Pascal the first, without any notice given to the Emperor, who made his com∣plaints, and threatned the Pope who was newly elected; but he was perswaded to send two Legates in a solemn Embassie to make his excuse, which they did so effectually, that Lewis was not only satisfy'd with the Election of Pascal, but remitted and renounc'd all the pretensions he had to the Election of the Popes. It was not without difficulty that Lewis agreed to a thing of such prejudice to the Empire, but at length his goodness prevail'd, and he granted it. In so much that as soon as Pascal was dead, there arose great differences and disturbances betwixt the people and the Clergy; but being grown more politick, that the Emperor might not have occasion to put to his hand, they endeavour'd to accommodate all, by the choice of a third person, which was Eugenius the second, excluding Zinzimus for that time. In the interim Lewis repented that he had given away his right of Election, at the instance of Pope Pascal; and therefore Pope Valentine the first being dead, in the year 828. he sent to make his claim, and to declare, that if the next Pope was chosen without his consent, he would not fail to bring his whole force into Italy, to the detriment of Rome, and the Electors especially. But the Clergy and the people oppos'd those instances, by shewing his Writing of Concession, and without more circumlocution, by common consent they elected Gregory the fourth, who being fearfull of the Emperors indignation, dispatch'd an Ambassador to him to desire his Confirmation, but he could not obtain it, till by Bull he had restor'd the Emperors to their former Prerogatives in the Elections; which Gregory willingly consented to, in compliance with the humour of the said Lewis. For a while, with difficulty sometimes, and sometimes without, the Emperors con∣serv'd the faculty of Electing and Confirming the Pope, till that in the year 884. the Clergy and the people having created Adrian the third, a fierce and arrogant man, he not only refus'd to expect Confirmation from the Emperor, as some of his Predecessors had done, but as soon as he was Crown'd, by a particular Bull he decreed, that the Election of the Pope was not by any means to be participated with the Emperor, nor his Confir∣mation to be attended, declaring that the people and the Clergy, ought to Confirm those Popes which they elected. Adrian would not have undertaken such an enterprize, and injury to the Emperor, had he not known him to be very low, by reason of several Wars in which he was en∣gag'd, so that this news did but adde to the afflictions of the Emperor. Otho being receiv'd to the Empire, disdaining to endure the injuries which the Popes
offer'd to the Emperours, he deliberated revenge, and contriv'd which way he should re∣store his affairs to their former condition: and therefore in the year 957. with the con∣sent likewise of the Clergy, he depos'd and depriv'd John the 13. of the Papal dignity, he being accus'd of not reciting the Canonical hours, of ordaining Deacons in Stables, of Swearing and Blaspheming at Dice, of Ravishing of Virgins, and several other delin∣quencies; for which, he being driven out of the Vatican, there was substituted in his place by the sole order and authority (as it were) of the Emperour Leo the eight, who was a Citizen of Rome, and principal Treasurer of the Church of San Giovanni Laterano. This Leo continued Pope, while the Emperour continued at Rome; but he departing the next year, the Adherents to John by a popular tumult, prevail'd to have John re∣stor'd to the Papacy, and Leo discarded; but John lived but few months after his resto∣ration. When he was dead, several instances were made in the behalf of the Emperour, that Leo might be chosen and restor'd, that thereby they might avert the dangers impend∣ing, from the indignation his most Christian Majesty had conceiv'd for the affront done to Leo; notwithstanding all which, the People and the Clergy laid Leo aside, and chose Benedict the fifth. How much the Emperours mind was disturb'd with the news of these proceedings, may be collected from the violent resolution he took; for resenting the injury to Leo, as done to himself, he turn'd the whole power of his Arms against Rome, which City after two months Seige, was constrain'd to open her Gates at discretion, and to deliver Pope Benedict into his hands, who sent him presently in exile to Hambourg, where he ended his dayes in a thousand sorrows and afflictions. The next day after the Emperours entrance into Rome, Leo was with the usual So∣lemnity, restor'd to the Pontifical Chair, to the no small dissatisfaction of his Adversa∣ries. But Leo understanding his obligation for the Papacy was wholly to the Emperour, by whose affection and authority he was chosen in defiance both of Clergy and people, he sought by all means, in spight of them both, to comply with the Emperour, and therefore took away the power of Electing the Pope from the Clergy and people, de∣claring the priviledges granted by Charles the Great, void; transferring the absolute au∣thority in Elections, upon the person of the Emperour; and all as he pretended, to pre∣vent the tumults and scandals that happen'd dayly betwixt the People and the Clergy: by virtue of which Concession, Leo being dead, the Emperour created John the 14. with the greatest tranquility imaginable. The rancour of the Romans, to see themselves depriv'd of the faculty of Electing the Pope, (which they had for so many ages injoy'd) was so great, that from morning to night they had their publick and private meetings, to find out some way to recover the priviledges they had lost. Peter who was Governour of the City of Rome, with two Consuls, and twelve Senators, enter'd into a Conspiracy against the person of the New Pope, as one that in favour to the Emperour, did much prejudice to the priviledges of the people, and being accompany'd with great number of the Nobility, they enter'd one day with Arms in their hands, into the Church of San Giovanni Laterano, took his Holiness Prisoner, and carry'd him to the Castle of Saint Angelo. By this it may guess'd, how great the insolence of the people was, whilst they were unbridled and free, and acting without either reason or judgement, or consideration of the power of the Emperour, who being at that time without wars, was very potent and strong: and indeed the Emperour no sooner receiv'd the alarm, but he turn'd his Forces again the third time against Rome, with resolution not to pardon any of the Principal in that Sedition; and indeed he was as good as his word, for having enter'd the City with more anger than difficulty, he commanded the greatest part of the Criminals should be hang'd, contenting himself with the Confiscation of the rest. But Peter who was the principal Author of the Conspiracy, was deliver'd into the hands of the Pope (who was discharg'd of his Imprisonment, and restor'd to the Papacy) from whose hands he re∣ceiv'd incredible Cruelties, before he was suffer'd to dye. This Slaughter and Vengeance of the Emperour upon the Romans, abated the pride of that people in some measure, leaving the Emperour in free liberty of Electing whom he
Pleas'd Pope, which appear'd in the year 975. when he declar'd Boniface the seventh Pope, who was a person so odious to the people, they were almost ready to run mad at his creation, forbearing the very Churches out of hatred to Boniface, who understand∣ing well enough the animosity of the people, took a resolution to run away to Constan∣tinople, and that he might not be unprovided with moneys when he came there, he made bold with the whole Treasure of Saint Peter, carrying every thing along with him, that was of any value or price. The Romans were displeas'd both with his Robbery and Flight, but made their ad∣vantage of what was happen'd, making use of this as an occasion of repossessing them∣selves of what they desir'd so earnestly; and accordingly, without communicating any thing with the Emperour, they created John the 15. Pope, who dyed miserably in Pri∣son, by order of Boniface; which said Boniface having sold his Jewels and Plate, came back again to Rome, and by virtue of the Sums he brought with him, reconcil'd himself to many, and repossess'd himself of the Papacy, chasing away John from the Throne by force of Arms, and clapping him up in Prison when he had done. By this occasion the People of Rome reassumed their power, and votes in the Election of the Pope, which the Emperour likewise conceeded to them, upon condition that his assent should be expected; by which means, all parties being pleas'd, they created their Popes quietly for several years, till that in the 995. John the 17. being dead, and the Emperour in Italy with his whole Army; he let the Clergy and the People understand, he would have a Pope of his own choosing, and accordingly he nam'd a certain German call'd Bruno who was his Kinsman. The Clergy and the People excus'd themselves at first, pretending that the Election was free, and that it was convenient that several persons should be introduc'd into the Scrutiny: but the Emperour insisting that he would have no other, to avoid the falling into his displeasure, the Electors were constrain'd to create the said Bruno under the name of Gregory the fifth. But as soon as the Emperour was return'd into Germany, the People took up Arms under the conduct of the Consul Crescentius, and drove the poor Pope Gregory, not only out of the Vatican, but our of Rome, who betook himself im∣mediately to the Emperour to make his complaints of their insolence towards his per∣son; but whilst he was upon his way, the People and the Clergy created the Bishop of Placenza (a Grecian born) Pope, who took upon him the name of John the 13. The Emperour receiv'd Gregory very kindly in his Court, treated him as Pope, and with his whole Army brought him back to Rome, which he took by force, and exercis'd the greatest cruelty imaginable against the Romans; but the greatest part of his indigna∣tion fell upon John and Crescentius the first of which was kill'd in Prison, strangled as some report, poyson'd as others; but be it which way it will, he dy'd there: and Cres∣centius was hang'd without the walls of the City, in the sight of all the people. The Clergy endeavour'd what they could to exclude the people from the Election of the Pope, but they knew not which way to bring it to a resolution, because they under∣stood very well they were naturally inclin'd to Novelties and Sedition. In the year 1004. it happen'd that John the 19th. was created Pope, and had the Title of Secco added to his name; and because the people at the beginning of his creation, were averse, and with great difficulty consented at last, when they saw the Clergy resolv'd to have no body else. John (who was an Italian, as soon as he was created, retain'd it in his mind) apply'd himself to be reveng'd, and endeavour'd the total Exclusion of the people from the Election of the Pope, being provok'd by the constant solicitations of the Clergy. And that he might with the greater facility bring it about, he ingrandiz'd the Title of Cardinal, giving them great Priviledges, and amplifying their Authority and Jurisdiction to a great heighth; which design succeeding, and the Cardinals rising to an eminent pitch, John publish'd a Bull, for the Exclusion of the people, pretending they were to be instructed, and not to instruct; and that they were to follow the Clergy, and not the Clergy them, which Bull was afterwards confirm'd, and much inlarged by Gre∣gory the 7th. in the year 1075. and by Innocent the second a Roman, in the year 1135. This Bull of Pope John the 19th. was effectual for a while, according as they were able to deal with the Emperours Forces, and to their affection to the Apostolick See:
yet the people did not forbear in the mean time, by their insolence and power, to en∣deavour their re-establishment, in so much that the Cardinals were oftentimes con∣strain'd to go out of Rome to elect their new Popes, upon the vacancy of the Chair. The more the people strove to work themselves in again, into the Elections, the more the Cardinals sought to exclude them, which occasion'd great scandals and schisms in the Church; and of this there happen'd so tragical an instance in Rome, in the year 1045. that the Christians had reason to bewail it for several years. And this happen'd, by reason that the Emperor pretended to a power of electing the Pope, by virtue of several Bulls which were extant to that purpose, and did clearly make out his claim; the people on the other side, press'd very hard to be restored to the posture they were in, before they were interrupted by John the 19th. The Cardinals who for several years had had the sole faculty of electing the Pope, resolv'd to adhere to their Priviledges, and keep out both Emperor, and people; and all parties continuing firm to their pretensions, each of them created his Pope, viz. Benedict the 9th. a Florentine, Silvester the 3d. a Roman, and Gregory the 6th. all three of them residing in Rome, Gregory in the Palace of Santa Maria Maggiore, Silvester in the Palace of Saint Peter, and Benedict in the Palace of Saint John Lateran, which was one of the antientest in Rome. These dissentions gave no small impediment to the growth of Christianity, nor no little diminution to the number of the Faithfull, but of great advantage to the enemies of the Faith. A thousand cogitations and jealousies boil'd in the hearts of the Christians, in every City they discours'd of it, and the service of God grew languid and cold. Henry the third, who was at that time Emperor of Germany, fore-seeing the ill con∣sequences these Schisms would bring upon the Church, and the quiet of the Empire in particular, without losing one moment of time, he came with great diligence to Rome, where he was no sooner arriv'd, but by his own absolute Authority he call'd a Synod, in which the three good Popes were condemned, and Clement the second chosen. The Cardinals made many instances and supplications to the Emperor, that the Pope might be elected by the Ecclesiastical Synod alone, without the intervention of the people; but the Emperor thought it not seasonable to disgust them, least after he was departed, they should fall again to their Schisms; and by this means Clement was elected by the votes both of the Clergy, the people, and the Emperor. The first solemn Cere∣mony this Pope performed, was the Coronation of the Emperor, in which there was no consideration of expence. That Ceremony being past, the Emperor prepar'd for his Voyage, but Clement be∣seech'd him, to give him his helping hand before his departure, in what he was resolv'd to do, which was to renew the Bull of John the 18th. for exclusion of the people de novo from the election of the Pope; and because History did mention the Tragedies that succeeded by reason of such exclusion, attempted so many times without effect, the Em∣peror and Pope, in spight of the people, consulted together, and resolv'd to make the people themselves condescend to their own exclusion, by a solemn abjuration. The people refus'd it with a thousand protestations, but finding the Emperor resolute, and threatning corporal punishments to such as durst oppose it, the Pope preparing to thunder out his Excommunications against all that refus'd it, and they being on the other side tyr'd out with Wars, Sackings of Towns, animosities and calamities, suffer'd upon the score of Elections, they condescended to their demands, and submitted to swear upon the hands of the Pope, who held the Book of the Gospel open, in the presence of the Em∣peror; which Oath was taken not only by the Consuls and Senators, but all the chief of the people, to the number of three thousand, each of them engaging to transferr his right of Election to the Cardinals. Yet for all this Oath, the people ceas'd not to trouble and molest the repose of the Electors, if not with intention to be included in the Election, at least with design to have the Pope after their own way; renouncing many times the Pope which was recom∣mended to them by the Colledge of Cardinals, or the Clergy, and demanding another; and these kind of violences were us'd in the Elections of Damasus the 2d. of Leo the 9th.
Stephen the 9th. and Nicholas the 2d. but these violences lasted not long, in regard of the Cardinalitial Majesty, which grew greater and greater every day. However the Em∣peror look'd well enough to his own interests, preserving his share still in the Elections; but he also was excluded in the year 1064. to the universal dissatisfaction, and I shall in short tell how it fell out Nicholas the 2d. being dead in the year 1062. the Clergy assembled for the election of a new Pope, and resolv'd to create one without the intervention of the Emperor, there being little danger of any obstruction from him, by reason of the Wars in Germany wherewith he was infested; and that things might proceed with greater order and de∣corum, they resolv'd to find out a Pope experienc'd in the affairs of the World, and cou∣ragious both in his Actions and Councels, and having weigh'd and consider'd the lives of many, they at last concluded to choose Anselme a Milanese, and Bishop of Lucca, a man of great spirit and resolution; for which reason the Cardinals willingly con∣sented to his Election, as judging him capable of defending their interests, and oppo∣sing the violence of the Emperor, if he should attempt any thing against the Apo∣stolick See. The Emperor understanding the creation of Alexander, without his assent, was ex∣ceedingly enraged, and call'd immediately in his presence an Imperial Diet of Lombards, and made them create one Cadolo Bishop of Parma Pope; he was a person more ad∣dicted to the Wars, than to the Word, as he demonstrated by his actions; for being follow'd by the Lombards themselves, and other Souldiers given him by the Emperor, as soon as he was declar'd Pope in the aforesaid Diet held at Basil, he march'd with a powerfull Army towards Rome, with hopes to drive away Alexander, and place himself in the Vatican; but he was mistaken in his accounts, for the Romans being besieg'd, drew out to give him Battel, in which they had the Victory, put Cadolo and his Army to flight, and pursued them towards Lombardy. The Emperor having the news of this defeat, and seeing all things favourable to the Romans, he resolv'd to accommodate things fairly if it was possible, and to send Otho Archbishop of Colen to Rome, with full power to treat with the said Alexander, and to find out some way of composing those Schisms. Otho was receiv'd in Rome with great kindness, the Pope himself desiring to enjoy his Dignity more peaceably: In the first Audience they discours'd of nothing but the Em∣perors interest in the Pontifical Elections, from which he could not in any wayes be ex∣cluded, having so many Bulls in Confirmation of his faculty, and therefore he complain'd greatly of Alexander, that he would be elected without the Emperors concurrence, and suffer himself to be Crown'd without his advice. Hildebrand a Senese, a Counsellor, and Consident of the Popes, being present, would not permit the Archbishop to finish his discourse, but interrupted him, and justify'd his Holinesses cause, asserting, That his Election belong'd not to the Emperor, but the Cardinals, by whom he was legally chosen, and might be call'd Canonically Pope, and exercise the Papacy, as the true Vicar of Christ. Otho (who as he was an Archbishop, was more inclinable without doubt to the defence of the Popes interest, than the Emperors, at least in his heart, if not in his tongue) suffer'd himself to be easily overcome by the perswasions of Hildebrand, de∣siring only, for the honour of his Embassie, that he would condescend to the publication and convention of a Council, in the City of Milan, for the abolition of the Schism which was then on foot. The Council being held, in which it was establish'd, That the Election of the Pope should belong to the Cardinals, and to no body else; Alexander remain'd as it were under the Dominion of Hildebrand, who tyranniz'd and govern'd him as he pleas'd. But though the Election was plac'd in the hands of the Cardinals, the Schisms were not appeas'd ever the more, but increas'd and grew numerous more and more, and al∣wayes with new scandal to the Church. But the greatest Schism was in the year 1159. the Cardinals being assembled to choose a Successor to Adrian the 4th. they could not agree, the Emperors party refusing publickly to concurr with them, who pretended to exalt a very worthy person.
The greatest part of the Cardinals therefore chose Roland the Chancellor, born in Siena in Tuscany, who would be call'd by the name of Alexander the third. The other Car∣dinals, who follow'd the interest of the Emperour, and were nine in number, withdrew themselves from Rome, and chose another Pope, which was Octavian a Citizen of Rome, and Cardinal Priest, with the Title of Saint Clement, as he would be call'd himself, or of Victor the fourth, as they call'd him: That Pope being dead, the said Imperial Cardi∣nals remaining firm to their opinions, they proceeded in their schism, chose a new Pope, and would by no means acknowledge Alexander for the lawful successor of Saint Peter; and the Pope which they chose was Paschal: But God Almighty not suf∣fering this Anti-pope to live long neither, perhaps to make the schismatick Cardinals sensible of their Errors, (there having four of them dy'd since Alexander was created) the Emperour, to put an end to those troubles, being excited by the compunction of his heart, rather than by his Cardinals, who advis'd him by all means to continue the schism, he call'd a Synod in the City of Pania, with design to accommodate the differences be∣twixt the Cardinals, ordaining that Pope Alexander should be present, to whom he sent a solemn Embassie to the same purpose. But Alexander in great indignation reply'd to the Ambassador, that the Popes of Rome ought not to be judg'd by any body; that the Councel; and Synods were subject to him, not he to them: that the Emperour being but as the Son, was to pay obedience to him as the Father; and with this answer he sent back the Ambassadors very ill satis∣fy'd with their entertainment; especially he having thundred out his Excommunications the very same day, against the Emperor and his Anti-pope; with which the Emperor being provok't, he march'd forthwith towards Italy with his whole Army, to be re∣veng'd of the Insolence (as he call'd it) of the Pope: and this was the occasion of that memorable war which is so obvious in History, and was stopt by the mediation of the Venetian, who taking up arms likewise, constrain'd the Emperour to acknowledge Pope Alexander the true Successor of Saint Peter, and (after he had restor'd all those Cities and Lands which he had illegally usurp'd) with all humility to kiss his Holinesses foot. To the Articles of agreement betwixt the Pope and the Emperor, there was one an∣next, in which the Emperour renounc'd all the right of Election, to which he pretended, in the vacancy of the Chair; obliging himself by Oath to leave the Election free to the Cardinals for the future. For all this Alexander fail'd not to chastise some of those who had been of that schism; so that some of those nine Cardinals which follow'd the interest of the Emperour, dyed in despair, seeing themselves bitterly persecuted by the Pope, and those who had stuck to his party, rewarded abundantly; But Alexander besides that endeavoured what he could to ingrandize the Title of Cardinal, and that they might more strongly preserve their faculty of Election, he constituted a new form of Elections, contrary to what was formerly by the majority of voices; for till the time of this Pope, it was sufficient to create one Pope, if he had the advantage but of one voice. But Alexander declar'd that no body should be admitted for Pope, who had not two thirds of the votes of all the Cardinals then present at the Election, which custome continues to this day. After the death of Alexander, the Cardinals continued in the creation of Popes for a∣bove sixty years (that is from the creation of Lucius the 3d. who was Alexanders Suc∣cessor, to the time of Gregory the ninth) in great quiet and tranquility, and without a∣ny obstruction, either from Emperour, or people. But the said Gregory being at wars with the Emperour Frederick, about the year of our Lord 1239. the greatest part of the Cardinals were taken prisoners by the Empe∣rours Army; for which reason, after the death of Gregory, which happen'd in the year 1241. the Church was necessitated to remain without a Pastor, the space of twenty months, till that the Cardinals (being by the intercession of several Princes, discharg'd of their imprisonment) assembled themselves as formerly, for the creation of a Succes∣sor, which was Innocent the 4th. a Genoese call'd Simbaldo Fieschi before: he was a per∣son very well qualify'd, chosen by common consent, without any discrepancy of voices at all.
This Innocent was no sooner crown'd, but he began to think of revenging the injury the Emperour had done to the Cardinals, in keeping them prisoners so long. In order to this, he ordain'd a Councel should meet at Lyons, and commanded that Frederick should be there present, within so many days; and because Fredericks Embassadors insisted up∣on longer time, making it appear by good reasons, that it was not possible to perform such a journey, in the time that was assign'd. The Pope being inraged at their answer, declar'd the Emperour a contumacious and disobedient son of the universal Father, and accordingly he Excommunicated him, de∣priv'd him of his Imperial dignity, declar'd him a Schismatick; and (having absolv'd them from their Oaths of Fidelity which they had given to the Emperour) he excited all the Princes to depose him from his Empire, and chose another in his place, as it fol∣low'd in effect, Henry Landgrave of Turingia being elected presently after. Frederick prepar'd himself, both for defence, and revenge; but he dying the next year, made an end of that quarrel. In that Councel the Pope gave the Cardinal the Cap and red Mantle, in token of their readiness to spend their blood in the service of the Church; But to say the truth, before they received the Red Cap, there were several Cardinals that suffer'd Martyrdom. But since the time they received it, to this day, there has not been so much as one; so that we may believe, the Cap took away their desire to be Martyrs. The Lord Cardinals proceeded with great freedom, and liberty, in the Election of Popes, being become absolutely soveraign in that affair: They created several Popes with great satisfaction to all Christendom, because they were chosen with great unani∣mity. But by the death of Clement the fourth, who dy'd at Viterbo, the face of things was alter'd, the Church (to the great scandal of all Christians) remaining two years without a Pastor, because the Cardinals could not agree in the election of a Successor. The Causes of so long a dissention, are variously represented, by several Historiogra∣fers; but the chief were as follow: The first and most forcible of all, was the contrari∣ety in the Natures of the Cardinals which were present at the Election at Viterbo, who were 18 in number, all obstinate and untractible, and had sworn each of them, never to yeild to his Companion in the least. All of them believ'd themselves worthy of the Papacy, and (which was of most im∣portance, and gave the greatest delay to the Election) every one negotiated for himself, without speaking a word of other Pretenders; so that it was not possible amongst eigh∣teen several Competitors, that they should come to any resolution: But that impedi∣ment being remov'd, in which the Cardinals continued obstinate for above ten months, there arose another, which lasted above a year, and was the second occasion of the te∣diousness of the Election; and that is, the Cardinals were divided into two factions, one of them Italians, the other French, these would have a Pope of their own Nation, and the Italians would have him of theirs; neither of them complying with the other, and the number of the French being equal to the Italians, there being no way to be found of gaining the two thirds of their Votes, they remain'd whole weeks obstinate, and do∣ing nothing, unless it were heaping dissention upon dissention. The other reason was, that this delay growing redious to the Princes, and in parti∣cular to Philip King of France, and Charles King of Sicily, these two Princes resolv'd to come in person to Viterbo, and sollicite the Cardinals to expedite the creation of the Pope; upon this occasion the Cardinals which were adherents to these two Crowns, ha∣ving notice of their resolutions, would do nothing till they were arriv'd, who when they did come, serv'd for nothing but to protract the Election, though their desire was to hasten it; each of them recommending different persons; But the Cardinals being re∣solute not to depend upon any body whatsoever, lest they should again reduce themselves into subjection, the Princes finding all their intercessions ineffectual return'd as they came, leaving the whole business to the Cardinals. In the first Assembly after the Kings were departed, John Cardinal of Porto observing the pertinacity of the Cardinals, whilst they were together inv the Holy Ghost, cry'd out publiquely, and with a loud voice. Let us uncover (my Lords) the  Chamber, perhaps the holy spirit will not come where we are, thorow o  it
would be necessary to have a Holy Ghost for every one, seeing there is no two will agree. The Holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles, because they were met together with one mind, but how can we expect him, who are so strangely divided? At length, all these disputes being ended, and the Cardinals weary of going up and down to the places of their Assemblies, and doubting moreover, by their delay, to bring in some new schism into the Church, which seem'd already to be whispering in Germany; two thirds of the Cardinals agreed to the Election of Tibaldo Visconte a Mila∣nese, Archdeacon of Lodi, who was not as yet return'd from his Voyage into Asia, whe∣ther he was sent by the command of Innocent the 4th. : upon whose Election Cardinal Govanni del Porto made these Verses in Latine. Papatus munus tulit, Archidiaconus unus, Quem patrem patrum fecit discordia fratrum. The Cardinals themselves being out of hope, Archdeacon Tibald was created Pope. Gregory as soon as he received the Keys of the Vatican, endeavour'd what he could to make peace betwixt the Venetian and the Genoese, who for several years together, had been at wars with one another, with great effusion of Christian blood, and no small de∣triment to the Apostolick See. He Excommunicated the Florentines, for usurping cer∣tain Cities belonging to the Ecclesiastical State. Having perpetrated these things, and all things succeeding according as he design'd, he went into France in the year 1273. he gave beginning to the Councel of Lyons mention'd before. Philip King of France was present at that Councel, with an infinite number of noble and learned persons, both French and English. Michael Paleologus the Emperour of Constantinople, agreed the second time to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome; though his Predecessors had done as much twelve times, and always revolted: upon that business, there were several Sessions and dis∣putes, and all of them in the presence of his Holiness and the King of France. The principal cause of this Assembly was, that Gregory might be enabled to remedy several abuses in the Church, and more particularly by their advice to find out some way of preventing the tedious vacancies, after the deaths of the Popes. And because Gregory understood well enough the root from whence that evil did spring, and that it proceeded from a liberty the Cardinals took, of assembling where they pleas∣ed, of breaking up and meeting again as they thought good, delaying and protracting the Elections, by the Contentions and Correspondencies they had abroad; Gregory or∣dain'd that the Cardinals for the future should be oblig'd to shut themselves up in some particular place, from whence they should not stir, till the Election was finish't, but in case of sickness, or other urgent necessity; nor should any body be permitted to goe into them, besides such as were appointed for the service of the Cardinals, none of them being allow'd, during the whole time of their seclusion, to have communication with a∣ny of the City. And this is the place call'd at present the Conclave, which indeed signifies no more then the place where the Cardinals are shut up for the Election of the Pope. Before Gregories dayes, that is from the time of San Silvester, to Gregory's Popedome, they were not us'd to be shut up in a Conclave; but if they were in Rome, the Elect∣ors met, either in the Church of St. John Lateran, or of Saint Peter, or in sme o∣ther place, as occasion offer'd; if they were out of Rome, they met in the Cathedral of the place where they were, or in some other Church, more convenient: But all this brought nothing but prejudice and inconvenience to the Church, because the Electors did many times neglect to use that diligence which was due, not regarding expedition in their Elections of the Pope, whilst they had liberty to command, to goe and come as they thought fit, and to live in their own houses at their pleasure: and therefore it may rationally be said, that the invention of the Conclave by Gregory, was holy, and good, and worthy of a Pope of his piety and zeal. There were likewise establish't by the said
Gregory several Laws and Orders for the Conclave, which were afterwards by several Popes put into better form, till that in Process of time they were reduc't into that state, which for greater convenience I shall insert in this place. The Principal Laws which are usually observ'd in the creation of the Pope. THe first Article is, That the Election be made in a proper and convenient place, and ordinarily there where the last Pope dy'd. If it should happen the Pope should die in a∣ny Town or Village, in which the Election cannot so commodiously be made, let it be made in that City to whose jurisdiction the said Town or Village does belong, provided it be not un∣der interdiction; for in that case, they are to choose another City in the same Diocese, or at least not far off. But if the Residence was in another place, in the time of the preceeding Pope, then the Conclave is to meet, not in the place where the Pope shall die, but where he kept his Residence whilst he liv'd: and this is establish'd in two Bulls, of Gregory the tenth, and Clement the fifth. The second is, That after the death of the Pope, there shall be no discourse of the Election of a Successor, till ten days be past, in which time the absent Cardinals are to be expected, and the nine days obsequies for the deceas'd Pope be celebrated with due respect, by all the Cardinals that are present in the place. The third, That it be not permitted to any Cardinal that is absent to send his vote in any manner whatsoever, by which it is intended, that they are deprived of their Voice, as of∣ten as they are absent from the Election, though for considerable reasons. The fourth, That the nine days Ceremony for the death of the Pope, being over, the Mass dello Spirito Santo solemnly said, and the Prayer de Eligendo Pontifice, recited, Let all the Cardinals that are present in the Palace, which shall be call'd the Conclave, (which is to be in a secure place, close in all parts, and well guarded) be shut in, with two or three servants only, for their necessities. Let it not be lawfull for any to enter after the Conclave is shut up, nor for any to come forth, except in the case of infirmity: and if any body be oblig'd either to go in, or out, let it be by the consent of the whole College; Nor is this Conclave to have any Wall or partition, to distinguish one Chamber from another; but let there be certain traverses or Curtains of Linnen or cloth to divide their Lodgings: and be they given to the Cardinals by lott, to prevent all controversies for place. The fifth, That it be not only unlawful to elect those that are absent, but that it be not permitted to the Cardinals to choose any but one of their own Order, and of those that are present in the Conclave. And this is decreed by Paul the second. The sixth, That the place, and the gates and doors of the Conclave be well guarded; if the Election be made in Rome, the first Guards are to be kept by the Souldiers of the Popes ordi∣nary Guards; after them by the Barons of Rome, and the Ambassadors of Princes, who are all to be sworn in the Conclave it self before it be shut up; that they will keep the said Guards, with diligence and loyalty, as is convenient; and last of all in the nearest places to the door of the Conclave, by the Bishops, and Conservators of the City. If the Election be made out of the City of Rome; the Guard of the Conclave is to be made by the Temporal Lords of that place, with the same formality, and oath, as in Rome. The duty of those that are de∣puted for Guards is, to prevent any violence shall be offer'd to the freedom of the Cardinals votes, to observe well the provisions that come in, that there be no Letters convey'd in them; and in case any such be found, let them be consign'd to the Marshal, to be kept till the Con∣clave be finisht: That they further take care the Cardinals be not incommoded, that they be all ready at their beck, and in case of delay, that they force them (first gently and with in∣treattes, but afterwards even with threats) to hasten the Election. The Souldiers of the Conclave (that is those who are appointed to guard it) and the Barons of Rome, are to pre∣serve the Conclave from all disturbance and violence. The seventh, That the Cardinals may not go out of the Conclave, or adjourn their As∣sembly to an other place, for any person whatsoever, but upon any emergent necessity, let them put an end to the Election, and then they may go forth, if otherwise they should go out, let them be forc'd back again by the Guards of the Conclave.
The eighth, That those Cardinals who come after the Conclave it shut, and before the creation of the Pope, may enter and give their voices as the rest: and that no Cardinal can, upon any occasion or pretence whatsoever, (although he be Excommunicated) avoid being present at the Election, and giving his Vote. But all this is to be done by the consent of the whole Colledge, and not of the Governour of the Conclave only. The ninth, That three dayes being past after their entrance into the Conclave, if in that time the Pope be not chosen, the Prelates and Barons of Rome, and such others as are de∣puted Guards to the Conclave, may require an account of the Cardinals transactions within, and restrain them of their variety of dishes, reducing and lessening them by degrees, according as they find the Election delay'd. The tenth, That in the time of the Election, no person whatsoever, whether Secular or Ecclesiastick is to give, or promise, or intreat, thereby to move or incline the hearts of the Cardinals to their private desires, and this under pain of the Popes Excommunication. And that it be not permitted that the Cardinals discourse of any other matter, than the Election of the Pope, to expedite the Election, and to prevent occasion of exasperating the minds of the Cardinals other wayes. The eleventh, That no person whatsoever, may by reason of the Bull of Alexander the third, be declared or elected Pope, if he has not first two whole parts in three of the voices of the Cardinals which are present in the Conclave, which Votes are to be given in secret, and afterwards read publickly, that all persons may take notice who is chosen. The twelfth, That after the death of the Pope, all Magistrates and Ecclesiastical Offices are to cease, except such a are in the persons of the Cardinals, which are perpetual; which Offices are to remain unexecuted, all but the Office of the chief Penitentiary, and the Chamberlain. The thirteenth, That there be a Governour of the Conclave, that he be a worthy person, and of good qualifications, that he be chosen by the Body of the Cardinals, before they enter into the Conclave; whose Office it shall be, to give seasonable Orders, that things may go within as they ought to do, and that the Lord Cardinals may not want any thing convenient. The last is, That an Oath be given to the Cardinals, to keep secret all the transactions and argumentations of the Conclave, relating to the Election; that it be not permitted to any body to bear armes in so sacred a place, nor to revenge any injury whatever, either with words or with deeds, but that they bear all things patiently, and endeavour to avoid that mischief. And thus Gregory being exceedingly pleas'd with the introduction of this Form into the Conclave, he dismiss'd the Council of Lyons, (in which many things were decreed, as the Enterprize into the Holy Land, the Union of the Greek and Latine Church, and the Peace betwixt the Princes of Christendom) and then he began his journey, in order to his return into Italy; and refusing to pass by Florence, (least he should be oblig'd to take off the Interdiction) he took his way towards Arezzo, in which place he arriv'd, fell sick, and dyed in the year 1276. in the fifth year of his Popedom. The Cardinals who follow'd his Holiness, were the greatest part of them at Arezzo, the rest by another road were arrived at Rome, which occasion'd some difficulties amongst them, some pretending the Election was to be made in Rome, others insisting it was to be at Arezzo, where Gregory dyed. But because the greatest number of those who were at Arezzo prevail'd, those Cardi∣nals who were in Rome came thither, that they might not be excluded from their Votes, seeing those at Arezzo had declar'd their number was sufficient, and they would create a Pope without them: Besides Gregory's decree, which ordain'd expresly, That the Election should be in the place where the preceding Pope dyed; to which those in Rome reply'd, That that was intended, if the place was convenient, producing a thousand pre∣tences to prove the incommodities of Arezzo. It is enough, be it one way or the other, those who were in Rome were made to know, that they were in the wrong, and there∣fore being arriv'd at Arezzo, they went into the Conclave with the rest of the Cardinals the 21. of January; this Conclave was guarded with good Guards, by the Aretines,
who were not a little elated to see the first Conclave celebrated in their City: But these Guards lasted but one night; for the same night the Cardinals entered, they agreed to choose Pietro Farantasio, (a Burgundian and Dominican Fryer) Pope, who took up∣on him the name of Innocent the 5th. In this manner coming out of the Conclave, with the new Pope, on the 22 in the morning, all the Cardinals began their Congratulations; Innocent, though he was requested to pass away the Winter where he was, yet being resolved not to be Crowned at Arezzo, where he was Elected, but in Rome, the true Apostolical seat, and where he design'd to have his Residence, prepar'd immediately for his journey thither; as indeed it succeeded, making himself to be Crown'd as soon as he came to Rome, in the Church of Saint Peter with great solemnity, 40 days after his Election. But here it is to be advertis'd, that the Constitution of the form of the Conclave e∣stablish'd by Gregory in the Councel of Lyons, was annull'd, and restor'd, three or four times, some Popes being chosen without any Order of the Conclave: In the mean time, after the death of Innocent the 5th. which happen'd in the year 1276. six months exactly after his Election; Alexander the 5th. who succeeded him, being created in Rome, and with all the formalities of the Conclave, which was held in the Court of Lateran, as soon as he was receiv'd to the Popedom, revok'd the Order establish'd by Pope Gregory, concerning the affairs of the Conclave, though in due form it had the approbation of a General Councel. This revocation, or suspension, as you please, was declar'd invallid after his death, as having been pronounc'd before his Coronation: But Pope John the 21 succeeding, both in his Papacy and humour, and having no kindness at all for the Name of the Con∣clave, he not only confirm'd Adrians Bull, but by another of his own, of greater force, he annulled the said form of the Conclave in all respects whatsoever, and so the Popes which succeded him, which were Nicholas the 3d. Martin the 4th. Honorius the 4th. Nicholas the 4th. and Celestine the 5th. were all created according to the Order observ'd before the time of Gregory the 10th. Celestine the 5th. being received to the Popedom in the year 1294. moved by the same considerations, wherewith Gregory was moved, he revok'd and annull'd Pope Johns Bull, and confirm'd the Law and Constitution of Pope Gregory, in relation to the Conclave. And Boniface the eight, who succeeded Celestine, was so well satisfy'd therewith, that he confirm'd it again, and order'd it to be Register'd in the Book of the Decreetals; so that from Celestin's time, to this present time, the formalities of the Conclave have been punctually observ'd, and may they be so eternally; for, to speak truth, the introducti∣on of that form into the Conclave, has put an end (as one may say) to the Schisms in the Church, and settled the true Catholick in tranquility and repose. Indeed this Capriccio in Pope John, who annull'd the form of the Conclave, had no other effect, but the introduction of delay and animosity among the Cardinals; by whom Innocent the 10th. was created Pope, according to the constitution of Gregory the 10th. after the said Gregory was dead, with expedition, and quiet, and satisfaction to the People, in the year 1276. After Innocents death, Adrian the 5th. was created in Rome, he was a Genoese of the Family of Fieschi, call'd before, Ottobuono, without any discrepancy: accordingly af∣ter him, in the year 1276. John the 21 was elected at Viterbo, without any difference at all: These three Popes liv'd all three but a little above a year. These three Popes being created according to the form of the Conclave, instituted by Gregory the 10th. things began to proceed in good order, and the Election; to be made with care, and quiet. But after it was annulled by Pope John, all things fell to dis-order, in so much that the See was vacant after the death of the said John (who dyed under the ruines of a Pallace) five months, and upwards, of which I shall give the reasons in brief. John being dead in the City of Viterbo, the first scruple arose amongst the Cardinals, was, whether they ought to follow the form of the Conclave, establish'd by Pope Gre∣gory, or the decree of annullation, publish'd by Pope John; the most voices prevail'd, and they were for Pope Johns decree; and accordingly, without shutting themselves up in any place, they met for several days in the Church, early in the morning, and re∣turn'd to their own houses at night, about their own affairs.
It is well known in the mean time, what delay there was by that means in the Electi∣on; and to remedy the matter, the Cardinals were supplicated, I had almost said, con∣strain'd by the people of Viterbo, to re-assume the form of the Conclave, which was a∣greed to, and orders given immediately to have the Conclave accommodated, into which, according to the Constitution of Gregory, all the Cardinals then present at Vi∣terbo, did enter. But for all this the Cardinal Electors could not agree about a Successor, because there were so many French Cardinals, and Italians, all of them standing firm to their resoluti∣ons, of choosing one of their own sides to be Pope, and to remain shut up in the Con∣clave, till such a number of the one, or the other, should die, as should be sufficient to render the other party the stronger. At this time the Guard of the Conclave was given to one Richard of the Anibals, one of the principal Families in Rome; which said Richard having a while before taken the Government of Viterbo, from Orso, a Nephew of Pope Nicholas, to whose family he was a severe and fierce Enemy. The two Cardinals Orsini, who manag'd the Italian faction, cry'd out that Orso was to be restor'd to the Government he had lost, before they came to the Election of a new Pope. The people of Viterbo being backt by the said Richard, and excited by the French, en∣ter'd into the Conclave, took out the two Orsini, and clapt them in prison; upon which the Italian party being render'd the weaker, the French taking hold of the occasi∣on, chose a Pope as they pleas'd themselves, and this was Martin the fourth, call'd Simon before; he was born in Tours in France, and was Cardinal di Santa Cecilia. And thus that Conclave was brought to a conclusion, after a tedious debate, to the great de∣triment of the most noble house of the Orsini, who were driven out of Rome by the Ana∣bali, and oblig'd with all their followers, to retire to Preneste. Martin being dead in the first month of the fifth year of his Papacy, the Vacancy was but very few days; the Cardinals who had their Conclave then at Perugia, for the Election of a Successor, agreeing very readily in the person of Honorius the 4th. of the Noble Family of the Savelli: But it was not so after the death of Honorius, the Church being vacant for ten months together, yet not so much from any dissention amongst the Cardinals, who were all moderate and quiet; as by an accidental sickness, and Earth∣quake that happen'd; for whilst the Conclave was held in Santa Sabina for the Creation of a new Pope, several Cardinals fell sick on a sudden, amongst which five of the most considerable dy'd in a week, and they were Giordano Orsino, Il Conto a Milanese, Hugo an Englishman, Gervasio Dean of Paris, and Anterio a person of great worth and re∣nown. And because many of the rest were forc'd to keep their beds, the Conclave was open'd, ond dissolv'd, and that election reserv'd to a better time, and the rather because the Earthquakes continued so frequent, they were frighted into a resolution of deferring it till another time, which happen'd afterwards, in the month of March, 1288. in which Nicholas the 4th. of the Order of the Minors of Saint Francis, was created Pope with general satisfaction. The Cardinals after the death of Nicholas, that the Election of the next Pope might be with more freedom, and liberty, the whole City being in a Mutiny and Confusion, remov'd to Perugia. But the misery was, they carried such animosities along with them in their hearts, that they spun out the Election for above six and twenty months, with very great scandal. In this long vacancy of the Chair (which was occasion'd by not observing the form of shutting up the Conclave, for in that case they would have dispatch'd, that they might not be shut up so long) the Emperour Paleologus dy'd, and the Grecian Priests would not that he should be buried in any consecrated place, because he had consented in the Councel of Lyons to an union of the Greek and Latine Churches. Andronicus the son of Michael Paleologus would willingly have joyn'd with the Latines, if ours would have assisted him in the least: but seeing himself desperate of any assistance from the Romans, during the vacancy of the See, he resolv'd to desert the Catholicks, that he might not run the same fortune whilst he was living, as his Father did when he was dead.
Charles the second King of Naples, fore-seeing the inconveniences which were likely to follow, and which indeed the Church did already feel, by the long vacancy of the Chair, he came from Provence to Perugia, many times admonishing and exhorting the Cardinals to Concord, and a speedy Election of the Pope. But he was reprehended by Benedetto Gaetano, who was Cardinal of Anagni, because with his instances and impor∣tunity, he seem'd in some measure to obtrude upon the Colledge, which in the creation of the Pope ought alwayes to be free. This same Cardinal, who was in great esteem amongst the whole Sacred Colledge, to shorten the Election of the new Pope, exhorted the Cardinals to re-establish the Form of the Conclave, without which they would never have ended the Contest. They shut themselves up therefore in the Church, with resolution never to come out, nor negotiate with any one whatsoever, before they had chosen a Pastor for the Church. Yet so great was the differences amongst them, they could not agree to choose one of themselves, but to put an end to the Election, they pitch'd upon Peter Morone a Hermit, who was absent, and in his solitude, not far from Sulmona. The greater part of them believ'd confidently, that he being far from the least ambi∣tion, and of a long time accustom'd to his retirement, would not by any means have accepted of the Papacy; nor were they mistaken, for upon the first notice he declin'd it absolutely, and receiv'd it at last upon the importunity of Charles King of France, who sent his Ambassadors to him, to perswade him that he would not suffer the Church to continue any longer in her Widdowhood; upon which Exhortation he condescended, and accepted of the Popedom; and assuming the name of Celestine the 5th. he came immediately to the City of Aquila, whither he call'd all the Cardinals which were at Perugia, but they with reiterated Letters begg'd of his Holiness, that he would vouchsafe to come to Perugia, as a place much more convenient for the Dignity of a Pope. But King Charles suggesting to the contrary, Celestine's opinion prevail'd, and the Cardinals came to Aquila, where they paid their Reverences to him as the true Pope, and Crown'd him afterwards with due solemnity: at which Coronation, as Ptolomeus writes, who was present, there were above two hundred thousand people met together, but the most of them more out of curiosity, than devotion. The Government of Celestine, by reason of his extravagant bounty, was a great dimi∣nution to the Pontifical dignity, for not having the power to deny any body, he gave the same thing to two or three several persons, with which the Consistory of Cardinals being disgusted, they-began to think of a remedy, especially because the Clergy hated him, for a resolution he had taken to reform them. The Cardinals had some thoughts of deposing him, but they forbore that, for two reasons; the first was, that they might not give occasion to any new Schism, or at least any great scandal to the Church; and the other, not to provoke the indignation of King Charles, who defended him with great ardour. There never was seen certainly any Pope, so little practis'd in politick or Ecclesia∣stick affairs, as this, and all by reason of the Hermitical life which he had led in the Wilderness, far from such administrations; Celestine therefore being conscious of his own insufficiency, left the Reines of the Government to Cardinal Latino, who was a person of transcendent wisdom, but he being dead, Celestine by his inexperience, with∣out any malice at all, fell into so many Errors, that the Cardinals made several instances to him, that he would be pleas'd spontaneously to renounce the Papacy, and not expose the Church to so many perils, by his incapacity. The Cardinals would not have been inclin'd to such a resolution, but by the instiga∣tion of Benedetto Gaetano, (who was afterwards Boniface the eighth, as we shall shew in its proper place) he was a Cardinal of great learning and experience, but so extreamly ambitious of the Papacy, he left no stone unturn'd to compass his designs: And because he saw by his great judgement, he might easily bring it about, if Celestine happen'd to renounce, he apply'd himself so hard to the business, that Celestine resolv'd to resign, at the great instance of Gaetano, who by reason of the great credit he had with him, spake to him freely, and which is worse, laid it to him as a scruple of Conscience, and to fright
him, perswaded him, that at the day of Judgement it would be imputed to him, if any ill did happen to the Church. King Charles, who understood the subtility of Gaetano, and the superstitious lenity of the Pope, conducted him to Naples, forcing himself to turn him from so dishonourable a thought. And because the people cry'd out every where, they would have no other Pope but Celestine, he answer'd, he would make no other but him whom God should inspire for the good of the Christians. But the Christians discern'd very well, that he did nothing but what was inspir'd to him by Cardinal Gaetano; who found out a most Diabolical invention, and it was this; he suborn'd some of his friends to make a hole corresponding with that part of the Chamber in which his Holinesses Bed stood, from whence they cry'd all night long, with a most dismal voice, as if it had been the Judge∣ment of Heaven, Celestine, Celestine, lay down the Popedom, for it is a charge too great for your abilities. The innocent and devout Pope being wrought upon by all these reasons, and assisted no longer by King Charles, whom Gaetan had gain'd to his side, he resolv'd to con∣descend to the renunciation: But first that he might seem to do it upon good grounds, he would needs make a Law, that it should be lawfull for any Pope to renounce the Papacy, and commanded it should be establish'd by the consent of all the Cardinals, who willingly made him a Golden Bridge, to send him going. This Law and Constitution was after∣wards confirm'd by Boniface the eighth, his Successor, as is to be seen in the sixth Book of the Decretals; but the Popes are not so simple to make use of it for all that. It was propos'd that this renunciation should be made in some publick place in the Church, but that was not thought convenient, least the people, who lov'd Celestine very much, should commit some extravagance, and by violence hinder Celestine's resolution; wherefore they thought it expedient to have it done in the Consistory of Cardinals, as it follow'd in the sixth month of his Papacy, after which Celestine return'd to his Cell from whence he came. The same day in which Celestine did renounce, (things being well prepar'd before hand in Gaetan's favour, who was the forger and contriver of all this mischief) the Car∣dinals without the form of the Conclave, chose the said Gaetan with open Votes, that they might not leave the Church without a Pastor, much apprehending the popular fury, for as much as there was not any of them consenting to the renunciation. Bene∣detto Gaetano being declar'd Pope, and the name of Boniface the eighth assum'd, he began his Reign with so much insolence, arrogance, rashness, and tyranny, that in a short time he gain'd the Title of Nero the eighth. Sciarra Colonna took him Prisoner at Anagni, and carry'd him to Rome, where at the end of 35. dayes he dyed of anger, in the eighth year of his Pontificate: So that some took occasion to say, that he was made Pope like a Woolf, he govern'd like a Lyon, and dy'd like a Dog; which character was so true, that Histories have taken great delight to mention it, reporting it with great infamy to the Roman Church, and to those who elected him. Great was the joy all Christendom receiv'd at the death of a Pope so unworthy of that dignity; the Princes and Cardinals celebrated the news with Bone-fires. The people hated this Pope, for several reasons, but especially for having order'd Celestine with so much ingratitude to be slain, and persecuted the Gibellines in such sort, that the Noblest Families in Italy were glad, for fear, to hide themselves like savage Beasts, in the most profound Caverns of the Mountains. Some report he was poyson'd with an Italian Fig, which is not much wide of the truth: But be it as it will, he dy'd in prison the 11th. of October 1303. and the Cardinals went into the Conclave the 21. of the same month. Many believ'd the Election would be tedious, by the great care the Princes seem'd to take, that they might not be ill satisfy'd, as they were with Boniface. Amongst the Cardinals some there were which adher'd to the Guelfs, and others to the Gibellines; these were very curious that the succeeding Pope should not be of the humour of his Predecessor, the Guelfs desir'd such another, so that in appearance there was great likelihood of a long Conclave. But things fell out clear contrary, for the next morning after the Cardinals entred, they came to an agreement to elect the Cardinal
d'Ostia, call'd Fra Nicholas di Treviso, of the Order of the Preachers, who took upon him the name of Benedict the 9th. or the 11th. The Guelfs condescended readily to this Election, Benedict being a Creature of Boni∣face's, and by consequence a Guelf. And the Gibellines did so too, as not knowing amongst all the Cardinals, where to find one less their Enemy than he, and the rather, because though Benedict had been secret Counsellor, and privy to the most occult designs of Boniface, he never seem'd by his Counsels to have done any thing contrary to the repose of the Gibellines, but endeavour'd to mollifie Boniface, and to remove the great prejudice he had to the poor Gibellines, who being satisfy'd with his proceedings, they concurr'd willingly to the Election of Benedict; who was not ingratefull, for he receiv'd into favour all the Cardinals who had been persecuted, and (as Gibellines) depriv'd by his Predecessor. Benedict dyed in Perugia, in the eighth month of his Pontificate, in which City the whole Court being at that time, it was resolv'd a new Pope should be chosen; but pri∣vate interest, prevail'd against the publique good, for the Cardinals for above two months together, went up and down, trifling away their time in disputes and clamours, scandalous to Christendom, but pleasant to the Infidels. The reason was, the Cardinals were divided into three factions, one stuck close to Charles King of Naples, who would have a Pope according to his way; another was for the principal Barons of Rome▪ who being back'd by several Princes of Christendom, en∣deavour'd to spin out the Election as long as they could, expecting by such delay, other Votes from abroad; and the third stood firm to the interest of Philip King of France, who with a very liberal hand, had sent no small sums of money and other Presents to Cardinal Pietro Colonna, to the end that with James his Unkle, a Cardinal of the same name, they might keep up the interest of France. On the other sides, there were the Cardinals Ʋro, Napoleone, and Matio, every one negotiating for himself, and with stedfast resolution never to yield to one another. The Cardinals not being able to en∣dure their restraint any longer in the Popes house, which was the place appointed for the Election, and observing things go on the pace of a Tortoise, that is, tediously slow, for as much as their animosities continued, they left their apartment, went abroad into the City, some here, some there, into the most delectable places, following their pleasures and recreations, and thinking of nothing less than the Election of his Holiness. The people of Perugia taking offence at all this, and having more affection for the publique good of the Church, than the Cardinals themselves, who were Senators thereof, took up Armes immediately, and with threats obliged them to firt up themselves in the Conclave, who were managers of the Ship of Saint Peter. The Cardinals fail'd not to be present at the place appointed, but persisting still in their passion and pertinacity, the people not only put Guards upon them, to prevent all Communication without, but streightned them in their diet, reducing their allowance to a small volume, (as one may say) and threatning, that if within five dayes they did not finish the Election, they should have nothing given them but Wine and Bread, which the people of Perugia did not spare to let them understand. Cardinal Peter, mov'd by his hopes from the King of France, apply'd himself with the money he receiv'd from him, to corrupt the minds of such as he knew were covetous of Gold, feeding them on with promises besides; so that part of the Cardinals being fast in those Chains, and part of them intimidated by the threats of the Perugians, they agreed upon the Election of a Bishop of Gascoign, and so Cardinal Colonna proposing the Bishop of Burdeaux, who was a great lover of the King of France, he was chosen by common consent, and a Courier sent post to him, (who was then at his Bishoprick) to know what name he would carry; he reply'd, he would not change the name he was Baptiz'd with, which was Clement, and so he was accordingly publish'd to the people. After publication in the usual place, the Cardinals dispatch'd several Messengers to the New Pope, to intreat him to hasten his journey to Italy: But his Holiness being in∣structed by the King of France, made answer, That the Flock was to follow the Shepherd, and not the Shepherd the Flock, commanding the Cardinals immediately to repair to him in France, and particularly in the City of Poictiers, as they did.
The transferring of the Apostolick See into France by Clement the 5th. displeas'd the Italians highly; so that Clement being dead, the Chair was vacant for two years and upwards, the Italian Cardinals not enduring a French Pope to be chosen, least if the Ita∣lians should fail, and the French increase, the residence should be always in France. The Conclave was held in Lyons, but without the formality of being shut up, according to Gregories decree, for they went and came at their pleasure. The number of the Cardinals was 23, twelve French, and eleven Italian, the Itali∣ans would have the Pope purely Italian, or of any other Nation, but he should promise to continue his residence in Italy. The French seeing themselves more in number, and eve∣ry day incouraged by their friends and allyes, stood firm to their principles, and would have none but a French Pope, which at length they obtain'd, by reason that the Con∣clave was held in France. In this manner after so great a vacancy, Giacomo di Cahors Bishop of Porto was crea∣ted Pope by the name of John the 22. who as soon as he was created, departed from Ly∣ons, and with his whole Court, took up his residence at Avignon, where he dy'd in the ninetieth year of his age, 1335. after he had reigned eighteen years. The Cardinals lost not so much time, to find a Successor for John, as they did to make one for Clement; for the next week after they went into the Conclave at Avignon, they agreed to choose Fra. Giocomo Cardinal dl Titolo di Santa Prisca, of the Family of du Four in France, he was a Cistercian Monk, though others believ'd him a Car∣melite. The cause why they came so soon to an accord, was no other, but because the Itali∣ans understood very well the inability of their party, to contend with the French, who were resolv'd to have the Pope of their Nation; besides they growing by degrees to be acquainted, and pleas'd with the Country, and the humour and liberty of the French, they condescended with alacrity to what they must of force have consented to (though for three year they had been of a contrary opinion) and the rather because the said Fra. Giacomo was worthily qualify'd for so honourable a dignity, which he receiv'd, if not with an universal, at least with the applause of all France, and call'd himself Benedict the 12th. Clement the 6th. Innocent the 6th. and Ʋrban the 5th. were all French, and cre∣ated at Avignon, and for the same reasons almost their Conclaves were dispatch'd, for which Benedicts was hasten'd. In the year 1370. Peter Belforte of Lemousin, who took the name of Gregory the Ele∣venth,, was created at Avignon likewise, who thought good to transfer the Apostolical Chair from Avignon back again to Rome, a thing almost incredible; for so many French Popes succeeding one another, they had so weakned and debilitated the Italian party, that there was no Italian Cardinals amongst them all, and of the French there was more then twenty. Several reasons are alleag'd that mov'd Gregory to that resolution, but particularly these following: The first was,, that he saw all Italy in arms, not only by the wars be∣twixt Venice and Genoa, but by a resolution several Cities had then, to shake off the yoak of their servitude, and re-establish themselves in a state of Liberty, which he be∣lieving to be occasion'd by the absence of the Pilot from the Vessel of Rome, he began to think of re-setling his Pontifical residence in Italy. The second was, reprehending one day a certain Bishop (his familiar) that he left the Bishoprick to follow the Court, the Bishop confidently reply'd, And you who are Pope of Rome, why are you in France? Why do you give example to others to repair to their Churches. Others will have it, that a Letter from Saint Bridget (upon whom his Holiness look'd, as upon a true Saint) contributed much, in which she advis'd him, as from God, to return to Rome. Be it which way it will, he gave order for twenty Gallies to be ready in the Rhone, pretending to go some whither else with them, because he suspected, that the French (who had so much advantage by the residence of his Court in France) would obstruct it, if they had the least notice of his removing the See to Rome. But indeed they took not the least umbrage, or allarm at all the preparations which were made, as not imagining possible, a French Pope would put such an affront upon his Nation. So as they had no∣tice of it only when his Holiness was at Sea, being past as far as Genoa, and from Genoa
to Cornetto, where being weary of his Gallies, he made the rest of his voyage by Land, and being arrived at Rome, he began to accommodate apt Medicines, and specifical, to the Maladies of Italy. But whilst this good Pope was exercising his Pastoral cure with extraordinary zeal; he dyed in the year 1280, of a great distemper in his Bladder, after he had reigned six years in France, and five in Italy. After the death of this Pope, the Church began to be miserably torn with new schisms which began to arise betwixt the French and Italian Cardinals, each Nation choosing its own Pope, in its own manner; the French not able to digest the affront they receiv'd from Gregory, in transporting the See from France into Italy, departing privately from Rome, they remov'd to Fondi, and being arriv'd there, they us'd many invectives and Satyrs against Ʋrban the sixth, whom they had already, with the Italian Cardinals, E∣lected in Rome; they pretended they were forc'd to it by the people of Rome, otherwise it was was never their intention, to make an Italian Pope. For these reasons, the Chair (in their judgements) being vacant, by the favour of Joan Queen of Sicily, who was their friend, they chose another Pope, which was Ro∣berto a Cardinal, with the Title of the Holy Apostles, he was of Geneva, and particu∣larly of the antient family of the Conti, in that City he took upon him the name of Cle∣ment the seventh. From Fondi, Clement remov'd with his Cardinals to Avignon, where he was adored by the French, and the Spaniard; these disputes lasted a long while, the Legitimate Pope at Rome, and the Anti-Pope at Avignon, firing their Bulls upon one another, and sending them forth into all parts of the world: the adherents of both sides put forth several defamatory Libels, calling one another, Schismatick, Heretick, Ty∣rant, Thief, Traytor, wicked sower of sedition, Son of Belial, and such stuff as that, of which there are two treatises extant at this day, one of them written by Doctor John de Ligni, in favour of Ʋrban, against Clement, and the other by the Abbot of San Vast, in favour of Clement against Ʋrban. Whilst Clement was contriving which way to remove the true Pope, who had his Re∣sidence in Rome, he dy'd in the year of our Lord 1392. and was buried in Avignon: he being dead, Boniface the 9th. who was Pope at that time in Rome, writ a fatherly Let∣ter to the French Cardinals, exhorting them to desist from their Schism, and return to their obedience to the Holy Mother the Church, of which he was the lawfull head: But the French laughing as it were at such perswasions; chose a Successor to Clement, which was Pietro della Luna, who took the name of Benedict the 13th. who had argu'd very much in Clements justification, and that was the principal point upon which he was cho∣sen by the Cardinals, who concluded, that he who defended anothers cause with such ar∣dour, would doubtless defend his own with more. Whilst this good Anti-Pope held his residence in Catalonia, particularly in the castle of Paniscola, administring the Sacraments, and conferring of dignities, as if he had been the true Vicar of Christ, he was condemn'd (together with the Cardinals which E∣lected him) by the Authority of a General Councel. Afterwards he assembled a Councel at Perpignan, where he created several Cardinals, and commanded them, after his death, to follow his Orders, which were to choose ano∣ther Pope without loosing of time: and indeed they took his advice; for no sooner was this Anti-Pope dead at Paniscola, but the Cardinals chose one Giles Mungos, a Canon of Barcellona in his place, calling him Clement the 9th. who at the instance of King Al∣fonso, created Cardinals forthwith, and began to act in every thing, as the true Popes were wont to do. But upon Pope Martin the 5th's accommodation with King Alfonso, Giles (being commanded) renounc'd those rights of the Papacy which were not his due, and was de∣clar'd Bishop of Majorca; and the Cardinals likewise which he had created, were forc'd to renounce the Cardinalitial dignity. On the other side Ʋrban the 6th. being dead in Rome, after he had for eleven years manag'd the Popedom, with small satisfaction (by reason of the Rusticity and his seve∣rity of his humour) either to the People or Clergy; the Cardinals observing the schism dayly to increase (that they might not leave the Church without a Shepherd any longer)
they enter'd immediately into the Conclave, and created Boniface the 9th. in the three and thirtieth year of his age, who gave great demonstration of his prudence, in the whole course of his Papacy. He governed the Church 14. years and 9. months, in very troublesome times, and dyed in the year 1405. The Cardinals fail'd not to supply him immediately with a Successor, they call'd a Conclave out of hand, in which they remain'd not above four dayes, for after they had compos'd some small differences there, they created Cosmo di Sulmona Pope, (who was Cardinal di Santa Croce) in a time when all Italy was in confusion. He would fain have been call'd Clement, but the Consistory did not think it fit, the memory of the Anti-pope (who was call'd by that name) being so fresh, upon which score he took the name of Innocent the 7th. but I know not whether properly, or not, he having amongst variety of other vices, a very large stock of revenge: he was very elo∣quent notwithstanding, and believ'd that by the suavity of his tongue, he could like ano∣ther Mercury, bring the whole World over to his opinion. He liv'd but two years, and dy'd, leaving Italy in a very ill condition, for there being neither true Pastor, nor Em∣peror in Christendom, every Gentleman gave Laws as he pleased. Whilst Christendom was lamenting the ruine which that Schism brought upon the Church, by having one Pope at Rome, and another at Avignon, both of them reverenc'd by several Nations, and both of them acknowledg'd true and lawfull Successors of Saint Peter, though but one of them could be the Vicar of Christ: Three Princes in France, (who by reason of the Kings indisposition did then govern that Kingdom) viz. the Dukes of Berry, of Burgundy, and Orleans, mov'd by their Christian zeal, and a com∣passion they had for the sufferings of the people, by reason of that inundation of Schism, they went all of them together to Pietro di Luna, (who was call'd Benedict the 13th.) to Avignon, beseeching him that he would provide against this disorder, by renouncing the Papacy; urging, that it was much better to have the publique interest take place, than the private, and the rather, because he had promis'd at his Election, to lay down, when∣soever things should be adjousted with Rome. To these Exhortations they added others, promising him, that that Pope which should be made in Rome after Innocent, he should do the like, because those who desir'd the common benefit of Christendom, or had the service of God in their hearts, did be∣lieve, that if these two Favourites (one of France, and the other of Italy) were dis∣possess'd of the power of the Keys, which they both exercis'd at the same time, as lawfull Successors to Saint Peter, a third ought to be created, who should be the certain and indubitate Pope. To which Exhortations Benedict reply'd, that he did believe, he could not without offending of God Almighty, consent to the Counsels propos'd, for his renouncing the Church, and abandoning the Flock of Christ, which by the common consent of so many persons, of so many good and worthy Electors, was committed to his custody; being unwilling to bring a thing in question, that he had so legally obtain'd: That for what re∣spected the taking away of the Schism, and restoring concord to the Church, it pleas'd him very well, and he would condescend to it with all his heart, provided a secure place was chosen, in which every one might speak his mind freely. For his own part he promis'd, (and affirm'd it with Oaths) that in case the Schism could not be taken away by any other means, than by renunciation of the Papacy, that he would renounce, upon condition the other at Rome would do the same, otherwise it was to no purpose to solicite it. The Princes understood Benedicts mind, and how little he was dispos'd to an accom∣modation; they began therefore as soon as they were departed out of his presence, to deliberate among themselves, of some way of bringing him over to their desires. Benedict who was cunning in other things, apprehending some violence, fortify'd himself in his Palace, and was besieg'd there the space of five or six months: But being weary of being close so long, he embarqu'd in the Rhone upon certain Gallies, (which he had caus'd to be put in order for such an enterprize, whilst he was besieg'd in his Palace) and in them he escap'd into Catalonia, which was his own Country.
Some there are who will have it, that these Princes undertook to discourse in this manner to Benedict, at the great instance and importunity of the French Cardinals, who hated the said Benedict, because he was a Catalonian, and not a Frenchman; besides which there were other reasons that render'd him odious, and particularly whilst they were treating, after the death of Clement the Anti-pope, to choose a Cardinal of France, they could not agree among themselves, so that to remedy that, they thought good to choose a third person, which was Benedict; as soon as he was created Anti-pope, to shew his zeal for the good of the Church, he began to make Laws for the reformation of abuses, and many times he admonish'd the Cardinals to live with more Sanctity, and ab∣stain from Simony, otherwise he would have them punish'd severely: In short, he was outwardly as meek as a Lamb, but inwardly as rapacious as a Woolf: The Cardinals therefore not being able to endure his humour, they unanimously sollicited these Princes, to put a remedy to the business, and prevail, that Benedict should be depos'd, and another more worthy be elected Pope in his place. The Italian Cardinals, and the Cardinals of other Nations which were present in Rome, after the death of Innocent, having observ'd the great negligence the three last Popes had used, and how little care they took to prevent the ruine which so long a Schism carry'd with it; besides other evils they saw daily springing in Christendom. Being enter'd into the Conclave, in a place near Saint Peters, they swore all of them so∣lemnly upon the Holy Evangelists, which their Dean held in his hand, that they would every one of them renounce the Papacy, if they were chosen, so that the French, or Catalonian Anti-pope, renounc'd his Anti-papacy first. The cause of this resolution was to satisfie the French, who having introduc'd the custome of creating of Popes according to their own mode, it seem'd impossible to turn them out of that way with reputation, unless the Italians resolv'd to do the same; and the rather, because Benedict declar'd, it would be in vain to think of a remedy for the scandal of the Church, without a re∣nunciation of both the Popes; whereas if they renounc'd, another would be chosen out of the whole Colledge of Cardinals, that would be true and undoubted Pope, whom the Princes and the people would make no difficulty to obey. In the year 1406. Angelo Corraro a Venetian, was created in Rome; he was Car∣dinal of Saint Mark, and took upon him the name of Gregory the 12th. before he came out of the Conclave, they made him promise in writing under the hand of the Notary, to observe what he had promis'd, and subscrib'd with his own hand, and at last gave him an Oath; but the place where these two Popes were to meet (as we shall see by and by) being in dispute, and they not like to come to an agreement, both Gregory and Benedict alleadging a thousand difficulties, the French Cardinals resolv'd to abandon Benedict, and the Italians Gregory, and to declare them breakers of their Faith. The Cardinals of Avignon, and of Rome both, being come to this resolution, they met at Pisa, and by common consent depriv'd Gregory, and Benedict too; all the rest of the Nations con∣curring with them, but Catalonia and the hither part of Spain; (a strange thing, the Spaniards who have been the greatest Schismaticks in the World, are at present the zea∣lousest Catholicks in the Universe:) The King of Scots, and the Comte d'Armignac, were favourers of Benedict. But in despight of their contradictions, the Cardinals resolv'd by common consent to create a Pope, who in such calamitous times should govern the Church of Christ with Holiness and Piety; and accordingly they elected Pietro Filardo, a Minor Fryer, and Archbishop of Milan, who took upon him the name of Alexander the 5th. a name suitable with his actions, he being the most generous person, that perhaps ever was amongst the Princes; for which reason it was pleasantly said by himself, that he was a rich Bishop, a poor Cardinal, and a beggerly Pope. Gregory understanding the news of Alexanders creation, and the sentence of the Cardinals against him and Benedict, fled towards Romagna, urging and insisting (where-ever he came) upon a General Council; he stay'd at Rimini for some time, where he was magnificently entertain'd by Carlo Malatesta. Benedict after he had held a Council in the City of Perpignan, by the intervention of his own friends, he retir'd again for his greater security into his Castle of Paniscola,
where he had been a long time before. But though these two Anti-popes, had been de∣priv'd by the Council of Pisa, nevertheless they desisted not from their Ecclesiastical and Papal functions, creating of Cardinals, and particularly Gregory created Gabriel Condolmero Cardinal, who was afterwards Eugenius the 4th. as we shall shew in its proper place. He liv'd not above eight months Pope; after his death, the Cardinals assembled at Bologna, where Alexander dyed, and created Baltasar Cossa (a Neopolitan) Pope, who would be call'd John the 22. This Election, according to the opinion of several Writers, was violent and forc'd, because the said Baltasar being Legate, not only of the Town, but the Province of Bologna, he had a certain number of Souldiers under his command, which as soon as Alexander was dead, he began to double and augment, from whence it was collected, that not being able to obtain it any other way, he did it in order to his Election to the Papacy: Be it as it will, he was created Pope, a Dignity he alwayes aspir'd to, and that so ardently, that having studied the Law for some time in his youth at Bologna, and having commenc'd Doctor, he departed for Rome; on the way he met with a Friend of his, who ask'd him whither he was going, he answer'd him im∣mediately, I am going Brother to acquire the Papacy. Being come to Rome, he was made secret Chamberlain to Boniface the 9th. and a while after created Cardinal of Saint Eu∣stachius; he was sent Legate to Bologna, which City, and the Country belonging to it, he reduc'd in a short time to the obedience of the Church, and a great part of Romagna therewith, banishing and driving away some malefactors, and executing others. For the space of nine years he gain'd great honour and authority in Toland, and a vast quantity of wealth. After Alexander was dead, he brib'd the Cardinals with his money, espe∣cially those poor ones which Gregory created, by which means he arriv'd at his so much desir'd Papacy. Christendom being weary to see so many Schisms on foot, was contriving which way to give ease to the Church, and therefore by the Orders of all Nations in Christendom, John was cited to appear at a General Councel, to extinguish the said Schisms; he sent two Cardinals immediately into Germany, to negotiate with the Princes of that Coun∣try, and of France, about election of a place proper for the celebration of so great a Councel. By the major part of the Nations Constance was pitch'd upon, as the most convenient city of all. At the time appointed they met, and John amongst the rest, though he had been disswaded by the soberest of his friends, presaging the danger he was in, of going a Pope, and returning a private person, as it happen'd. For all this John would goe, and he carried along with him certain persons excellent in all manner of learning, with whom he held the Germans for a long time in variety of disputes, and a thousand ambiguities and doubts to resolve upon that which ought to be resolved on. But Sigismund arriving at the same time, and free liberty being given of discovering other peoples defects; there were several great delinquencies objected against John, who being conscious of their truth, and fearing corporal punishment, as well as to be depriv'd of the Papacy, he fled out of Constance in the disguise of a footman, and retiring to Shaffusen, a City belonging to Frederick Duke of Austria, whither several Cardinals of his creation fled also. By the authority of the Councel, John being recited, he fled again from Shaffusen to Fribourg, designing to throw himself under the protection of the Duke of Burgundy. But he was taken, and by Order of the Councel imprison'd in the Isle of St. Mark, near Constance, in the fifth year of his Pontificat. The Councel not suspecting John's Escape, chose certain grave and learned Judges, giving them authority to form diligent process upon the actions and life of John: and to report his misdemeanors to the whole body of the Councel: There were above forty Articles prov'd against him, some of them so small, they might have been excus'd; but others there were would have begt great scandal to the church, if they should have pass'd unpunished; and these were such as declar'd him a Heretick, a Sodomite, a Murderer, a Simoniac, a Perjur'd person, a Blasphemer, a Hypocrite, a Gamester, an Adulterer, a Fornicater, a Poisoner, an Usurer, a Profaner, and so forth. Upon these considerations, all the Fathers concur∣ring in the sentence, John was legally depos'd, and the sentence sent to him to subscribe, which, being in prison, he willingly did.
That being done, he was deliver'd into the hands of Ludovico Bavaro (a great favour∣er of Gregory the 12th.) to be kept in safe custody, till the Councel should determine otherwise of him. Three years he continued a prisoner in the castle of Haldelberg, un∣der no few afflictions; the greatest of them all was, that he was not permitted to have any Italians to his servants, and the Souldiers that guarded him, being all Germans, they understood not one word that was spoken on either side, so as their discourse was only by signs. What manner of life this Pope had led, may be argued from his sentence, which was given by those only, who had been formerly of his parry, and had created him Pope; for those who were of Gregory's and Benedicts faction, were not yet arriv'd at the Coun∣cel, and receiv'd the news of it upon the way. In this Councel a Decree was publish'd, by the Fathers which presided, declaring that a General Councel lawfully assembled, was unquestionably above the Pope, and had its power immediately from Christs, and that therefore the authority of the Pope must needs be inferiour to theirs. Gregory was resolv'd not to be there himself, being so perswaded by the Emperour Sigismond▪ and therefore he sent Charles Malatesta, a very worthy person, in his name, who seeing all the Fathers of the Councel resolv'd upon their sentence, that Gregory should renounce, got up publiquely upon the Seat, which was prepar'd for Gregory, and as if he had been present himself, having read the power he had from Gregory to re∣nounce, he renounc'd the Papacy in his name, and declar'd him but a private person. For this prompt and liberal resignation, Gregory was immediately declar'd Legat della Marca, and went to his charge; but he liv'd not long in his Office, dying at Ricanati, of pure discontent, because Malatesta had made his renuntiation so soon, believing that if he had delay'd his renuntiation for a while, he might have found out some expe∣dient, to have kept the sacred Mantle upon his Shoulders. He dy'd therefore before the creation of Martin, and was buried in the church of Ricanati; and thus two Popes John and Gregory being taken out of the way, there remained a third still, which was Pieter del Lnna, call'd by the name of Benedict the thirteenth, who made more difficul∣ty of renouncing the Popedom than the other two; and because he had declar'd that he would never consent to the renuntiation, to make him do it by force; the Emperour Sigismond, with the Orators of the Councel, went in person to the Kings of France, and of England, perswading them that they ought to be instrumental in the safety of Chri∣stendom, and the ease and security of the church, which was to be done by forcing Be∣nedict to renounce the Papacy, as the other two had done: Sigismond having received a satisfactory answer from these two Princes, he went to Narbon, discours'd personally with Ferdinand King of Arragon, whose Subjects, or at least the greatest part of them, paid obedience to Benedict. Amongst the rest, one of their resolutions was, that Bene∣dict should be perswaded with efficacious arguments, not to remain so untractable in re∣solving to do that, which the other two had done: And if notwithstanding, force of argument was not sufficient to remove him from his pertinacity, that in such case the King should force his Subjects to desert the said Benedict, and follow whom the Council of Constance should ordain; and accordingly he sent a most eloquent Ambassador to him. But Benedict who found himself in a strong place, and the people affectionate to him, suffer'd himself neither to be overcome, nor mov'd by their perswasions, alleaging still for his answer, that he was the true Vicar of Christ, and that Constance was not a place convenient for the liberty of an Ecclesiastical Council, seeing that John had been condemn'd and depos'd from the Papacy, by those very persons who had been formerly his friends, and receiv'd him to the Pontifical Dignity. The Princes of Spain observing the pertinacity of Benedict, concurr'd with the opi∣nion of the Council, which was manag'd by five several Nations, viz. Italy, Germany, France, Spain, and England; all that these Nations had then done, was approv'd, and was publish'd by a Trumpet, or a publick Notary: As soon as by a general consent all was confirm'd, and Benedicts cause had been discuss'd, in this order and method, for se∣veral dayes; At last he was depos'd, and declar'd void of the Papacy; no reckoning being made of those Nations which were absent, and continued their obedience to him, as the Scots, and the Comte d'Armignac did. About this time John Hus, and Jerome of
Pragne his Disciple, were burnt and declar'd Hereticks, because they asserted, that the Clergy ought in imitation of Christ, to be poor as he was, seeing that from affluence and superfluity of riches, sprung nothing but scandal to the people. If this opinion be Heresie, I would be a Heretick, and dye a Martyr with all my heart, for I have alwayes believ'd, and alwayes shall, that the opulence of the Clergy, is the cause of their damnation. All these things being ratifyed in the Council, the Fathers began to consider of the Corruptions in the manners of the Clergy, and many there were of opinion, that certain Laws and Ordinances were to be establish'd, for their reformation. But the greatest part held it not fit, to meddle with that, in the vacancy of the See. Whereupon they fell upon the principal point, which was the Election of the Pope, and that, to give the Decrees of the Council the greater Authority. And to the end the Election should be without the least scruple or jealousie, they concluded to choose six persons of each Na∣tion, to go into the Conclave, and give their Votes with the Cardinals. On the 8th. of November 1417. thirty two Cardinals enter'd the Conclave, with thirty others for the several Nations, which is six apiece; and the Church having been four years with so many Popes, and never a true one, contrary to the judgement and desires of all people; on the 11th. of the same month, which was the Feast of Saint Martin, about three in the morning, Cardinal di San Gregorio (call'd Oddo Colonna before) was created Pope, with great joy and satisfaction to every body. The Emperor Sigismond, transported e tydings, without consideration of his Dignity, went immediately into the Con∣d having given thanks to the Electors, who in the great necessity of the Church  made so good an Election, he threw himself at his Holiness's feet, and kiss'd them. The Pope embrac'd him, and seem'd to treat him as his Brother; he gave him thanks ile, that he by his industry had been the occasion that the Church, after so many tpests and wrecks, was brought safe home into her harbour of repose. Martin would ds be  by that name, because his Election happen'd upon that Saints day; and  express'd himself another Martin, in his zeal for the Government of the Flock of Christ, giving place neither to rest, nor to sleep, but devoted to his business wholly; e heard, he approv'd, he perswaded, he disswaded, he encourag'd, and deterr'd, such as had business with the Apostolical See, according as he was convinc'd the desires of the Agents were honest or dishonest; many times turning himself to such as had Govern∣ments in their hands, he cry'd, Diligite justitiam, qui judicatis terram. And certainly the Church of God at that time had great need of so skilfull a Pilot, who with the Rudder in his hand, should conduct the Ship of Saint Peter, toss'd and tumultuating in so many Seas of Schism and Sedition; and he did it with that zeal and affection, which so eminent a dignity requires. That which was the greatest affliction to the new Pope was, to see that there was yet one head of the Schismatical Hydra remaining, which was Benedict di Luna, who with certain Cardinals and Prelates, had shut up himself in Paniscola, as in a Rock of Schism, and so much the more, because there were several of the people of Aragon, who con∣tinued doubtfull whether they should incline to the Orders of the Council, and acknow∣ledge Martin to be Head of the Church, or pursue their opinion of Benedict. By the judgement of the Council therefore, the new Pope sent a Legate to Aragon, which was the Cardinal di Fiorenza, a German, and a learned man, to the end that under pain of Ecclesiastical Censures, he should in due form admonish Pietro di Luna, that he should lay down the Papacy, and not run himself into the displeasure of the Council, and of so many Christian Princes. The Cardinals which were with Peter, understanding the ultimate resolution of the Pope, and the Council, and seeing their destruction at hand if they persisted in their pertinacity, they went all together to supplicate Peter, that he would put an end to the Schisms in the Church, seeing that for the benefit of Christen∣dom, Gregory and John were already contented to lay down their pretensions. Peter reply'd with his usual cunning, with which he was abundantly provided, that it was not a time to do it then; but that he would come to an agreement with Martin, if that which was reported of the goodness and integrity of his manners, should be true; and of that, they should leave the thoughts to him, and not trouble themselves at all. These Cardinals that were speaking with Luna were four, two of which, observing his resolu∣tion
to continue the Schism still longer, left him, and came in to Martin. The other two followed the perversness of Peter. But in short all Spain submitted to the authority of Martin, by whose example the Scots and Armignacks were induc't to do the same, and with them, the whole Christian Commonwealth, except only Paniscola, which re∣main'd divided. The affairs of the Church being thus made quiet, and serene, by the diligence of all the Christian Princes, as well secular as Ecclesiastick, and particularly by the Emperor Sigismond, who took no small pains in the business, They began to canvas, and consi∣der of the licentious manners of the Clergy, and seculars both, and to propose certain ways of Reforming them. But because the Councel had been already of above four years duration; Martin observing them all to be tyred, and the Prelates to have suffer∣ed a thousand inconveniences, he was contented by the unanimous consent of the Fathers to put it off, till a more convenient time, in which they might discourse of the said re∣formation more fully: It being true (as Jerome said) that every Province having a pe∣culiar inclination, it was impossible easily to reconcile them. Besides Martin know∣ing very well that that Schism proceeded from a small inconsiderable occasion, and last∣ed with so much misery to Christendom so long, and understanding moreover the news of the flight of John the 23. he was jealous least it should give a foundation to another Councel, and therefore publish'd this Decree upon the calling of Councels, viz. that the Councel of Constance being determin'd, they should not hold another till the space of five years were run out, upon any account whatsoever, and that after that, they should stay seven years more, and after that ten more, and so after every ten years, they might be assembled in some convenient place, to consider of things appertaining to faith, and the Christian Commonwealth; and to the end that this Decree might be invigorated, and in force, Martin would have it confirm'd by a Bull, and authenticated in the usu∣al form: and besides, that every one might know how well he was inclin'd to the meet∣ing of Councels, and to take away those suspicions, which some people would have conceiv'd, of the rectitude of his mind, he declar'd, by the consent of the whole Coun∣cel of Constance, Pavia to be a proper place, and accordingly he sent out his Briefs eve∣ry way, and it follow'd in the month of April the next year. At length being desirous to put an end to the Councel, in the year 1418. he made a publique Assembly, after which by common consent, but especially of Sigismond, Ibaldo Cardinal of San Vito, by Order from his Holiness pronounc'd these words of dismission, Domini ite in pace, and therewithall, all of them had liberty to depart to their houses. In the mean time the Pope was intreated by the Emperour first of all, to remain in Germany for a while, and afterwards he was invited by the Princes of France to retire into those parts; But Mar∣tin excus'd himself to them all, demonstrating that he could not do it, by reason that the Patrimony of Saint Peter, which was in Italy, did suffer much by the absence of the Pope, and Rome, the head of the Christian Religion, was (as being without a Pastor) involv'd in such civil seditions, as caus'd the Churches of the Saints to go utterly to ru∣ine, for which reason it was necessary for him to hasten his journey to Rome, as indeed he did, travelling by Milan as the nearest way. He was Pope 14 years, and died of an Apoplexy the 20. of Febr. 1421. The first of March the Cardinals enter'd into the Conclave, with a general agreement to choose Gabriel Condulmera, a Venetian, Pope, who in his Legation della Marca, given him by Pope Martin, gave great essays of his prudence, in the correction of those, who un∣der pretence of ill Ministers, had rebell'd against the Church. Before their entrance into the Conclave, things seem'd not a little imbroil'd, one part of the Cardinals pretending to Elect Cardinal Cesarino, another propos'd Anthonio Cassino, both of them persons of greater parties than parts. But those kind of projects remain'd without; for as soon as they were enter'd the Conclave, in the first scrutiny, which follow'd the very next day after their entrance, Condulmera was chosen Pope, by the consent of all but 3 in 40. which was the number in the Conclave: This was the most expeditious and peace∣able Election that had ever happen'd before; for it is certain, there was never any Pope chosen in the first scrutiny but he. Being demanded what name he would be call'd by, he took a little time to resolve them, and desiring to retire into a private place, he staid
there a considering above half an hour, from whence some of the Cardinals took occa∣sion to say, That it was easier for them to choose a Pope, than for him to choose a Name. Some there were that believ'd, that he would draw lots for his Name, as if the goodness of the person consisted in his Name; it is sufficient that about half an hour after, he came forth, and declar'd he would be call'd Eugenius the 4th. The People receiv'd the Election with great applause, but a while after, taking disgust, they took up Armes against him, and he was forc'd out of Rome, in the habit of a Monk, to escape the fury of the people. There were many accidents which happen'd in the Papacy of Eugenius, in which he commonly remain'd Victor; He chastis'd those Cardinals who under the name of the Council, endeavour'd to depose him. In the Wars he was alwayes neutral, and un∣concern'd, and it was he who drew over the Jacobites to the Christian Faith: But that which afflicted him most, was to see that he had lost the obedience of the Germans, which happen'd in this manner. Philip de Florentini had taken a prejudice against Eugenius, because it was he, that had caus'd Sforza to be sent into the service of the Venetian; to be reveng'd, he fell in treaty with those who were assembled in the Council of Basi, to cite Eugenius, which they did three several times; and because Eugenius refus'd to appear, and his design did not take, he made him be declar'd divested of the Papacy, and got Amadeo Duke of Savoy, his Father-in-Law, to be created in his place, who liv'd then in the company of some Gentlemen in Ripalta, like a Hermit. Amadeo having receiv'd the news of this new Election, which was made by 26 Car∣dinals, after he had caus'd himself to be shav'd, stript of his Hermitical habit, and taken upon him the name of Felix, he went immediately for Basil, accompanied with a mul∣titude of the Gentry of his own Country: where being arriv'd and consecrated, he be∣gan to exercise the functions of a Pope, ordaining, confirming, consecrating admini∣string the Sacraments, excommunicating, creating Cardinals and Bishops, granting par∣dons and indulgences, and in short deporting himself as he had been Pope indeed. By reason of this Schism, great seditions were hatch'd in the Church, the Christians dividing themselves into three factions, one was for Felix, another for Eugenius, and a third being neuter, was for neither of the two; one side maintain'd, that the Pope was to be inferiour to a Council, another asserted the contrary; and there wanted not others who deny'd the greatest part of the Popes Authority, making a dispute, whether he should be call'd the Head of the Church, or not. About this time Eugenius dyed, on the 23. of February 1496. after whose death the King of Aragon dispatch'd Ambassadors to the Sacred Colledge, to assure them, that they need not have any apprehension of him, he being resolv'd to give them assistance upon occasion, in the Election of a Pope, to which he did exhort the Cardinals. At the same time Cardinal Capuano arriv'd at Rome, a person of great worth, and whom the people cry'd up, as a fit person to be chosen Pope: But the opinion of the people, and of the Colledge, did not agree, in which there were very few for Capuano's Election. It was order'd that the Conclave should be kept in the Church della Minerva, though the Ca∣nons oppos'd it, so that the obsequies of Eugenius being over, the Cardinals enter'd into the Conclave; the command of their Guards was given to the Ambassador of the Order of Saint John, which is as much as to say, of the Knights of Malta, then of Rhodes; but the Keys were kept by the three Archbishops, of Ravenna, Aquileia, and Sermoneta besides the Bishop of Ancona. When the Cardinals were entring into the Conclave, many of the Roman Barons came to them, and Gio. Battista Savelli amongst the rest, pretending a right they had to be present at the Election: But they were refus'd, and made sensible, that they had not now the same reason for that, as in former times they had had. There were but 18. Cardinals in the Conclave, though there were 23. living, so that the two thirds came to be 12. those of the first Scrutiny which was made, divided their Votes in 10. Cardinals, and therefore that Scrutiny being void, another was made the next day, in which Cardinal Prosper Colonna had 10. voices, and Cardinal Firmano 8. This gave some small addition to the opinion people had of Colonna, many believing him certainly to be Pope, especially when they saw he wanted but two voices. The next day
they came to a third Scrutiny, and the 8. voices were divided, they having propos'd some persons without the Conclave, yet the 10. voices for Colonna were entire. From whence Cardinal Firmano (who defended Colonna's party) taking courage, he began to cry out: Let us lose no more time in vain, in these contests, seeing the Church is so great a sufferer by them; let us open our eyes (I beseech you) which are seal'd up as it were by particular passion, and look upon the evils impending: Behold Rome is divided into two factions; the French County declar'd our Enemy; the Schism of Amadeo Duke of Savoy, is grown stronger by our differences; the King of Aragon threatens us with his Armies: and why then do we lose time? why do we not resist these evils, by giving a Pastor to the Spouse of Christ? why do we not ect Cardinal Prosper Colonna, who wants but two voices, and is a person qualify'd with virtue for so honourable a charge? The Cardinal Bolognese, being moved by these perswasions, rose up to go to Colonna, and give him his voice; which Cardinal Tarentino observing, pluck'd him by the sleve, and said, Stay a while, not in such hast; a business of this importance requires time, and maturity of counsel; we are now deliberating about the Election of Gods Vice-gerent upon Earth, a Shepherd for the whole Flock of Christ, and a Governour of the Uni∣verse, and shall we precipitate in this manner? Cardinal Aquilegiense reply'd, Your words, Cardinal Tarentino, do import as if you would make a Pope o your own, and wrest the Papacy out of the hands of Colonna: Explain your self then, who is it you would have Pope? Bolognese, reply'd Tarentino; and I the same, said Aquiligiense. Cardinal San Sixo went towards the Cardinal Bolognese, and said, Thomas I make you Pope, it is appointed this day that we celebrate the Vigils of Saint Thomas; upon which words there was a common cry of all the Cardinals, We will have no other Pope, but Thomas Sarzana da Luna Bishop of Bologna, who was nam'd by San Sixtus, and so with a general acclamation he was made Pope. This Cardinal was so modest, that in the presence of them all, he declar'd himself un∣worthy of so great a charge, beseeching the Cardinals that they would fix their eyes upon some body, that might be more able to do the Church service than he; to which Cardinal Tarentino reply'd, that he ought not to withstand the pleasure of the Holy Ghost, who had directed his Election; he submitted thereupon to the will of the Lord, and took upon him the name of Nicholas; every one admiring to see him Pope, who never aim'd at it at all, and those remain Cardinals, who fancy'd they were already created. It is scarce credible with how much zeal this Pope began his Pastoral Cure, he spent the greatest part of the night, in ruminating and considering of a way, to extinguish the Schism of the Anti-pope, to which he by several reiterated instances press'd the Empe∣ror Frederick; who (being willing likewise to do any thing for the satisfaction of his Holiness) forc'd Felix to renounce the Papacy, which he did in the year of our Lord 1449. about two years after Nicholas was created: however Nicholas us'd Amadeo with this courtesie, that he made him Cardinal, and Legate of Germany, that he might not be destitute of Dignity, in regard of the Nobility of his Family, which was reckon'd amongst the principal of Europe, as it is esteem'd at this present. For the abolishment of this Schism, and of so pleasing an agreement, the people and Clergy all Italy through made no small expression of their joy, shewing their thankfulness with Bone fires, and Processions, especially in Rome. This deposal of Felix was very displeasing to the poor of Germany, for he was cer∣tainly one of the most charitable persons living: Being one day desir'd by certain Am∣bassadors, to shew them his Hounds, he reply'd, that they should not fail to see them the next day; the time, and the Ambassadors being come, the good Felix (who was then Don Amadeo) shew'd them a multitude of poor Beggars, all of them set down at his Table, telling them, Behold these are my Hounds, which I daily feed, and do hope by following them, to be carry'd to glory everlasting; (many Princes of these dayes would have need of such an example.) He liv'd Anti-pope nine years, although he was very old, having seen his Grand-sons marry with the Daughters of Kings. After his renun∣tiation, he liv'd but a few months, and dyed in Ripalta, though others suppose in Lusana,
where it is believed he was buried, because he has a fine Tomb of excellent Marble there, at this day. Felix his Schism being compos'd in this manner, and the Cardinals elected by him, confirm'd by Nicholas, they all embrac'd one another, obliging themselves, both the Cardinals created by Nicholas, and they who were created by Felix, for the future to a Religious concord, and to look nearer into the duties of their Dignity, and the incon∣venience the Church had receiv'd, by their differences and disputes, swearing to one another, after a true resentment of what was past, a firm resolution of moderating their private passions in the Conclaves, and not to expose the honour and quiet of the Church any more. They promis'd moreover, that they would not only endeavour to put the Popedom, in the time of the vacancy of the See, into the hands of a deserving person, and one capable of exercising an Office of that Grandeur, but that they would hasten the finishing of the Conclave, to the utmost of their power, that the people might not have time to embarque themselves in any mischievous design, and that the Princes might not be oblig'd to put their hands to the Work, because they, being trou∣bled to see the dis-union amongst the Ecclesiasticks encrease, were uniting themselves to give a remedy to the Schism. After the death of Nicholas the 5th. which happen'd in the year 1455. (as it were with extreme grief which he conceived to see the City of Constantinople fall into the hands of the Enemies of the Gospel) it was apparent that all which the Cardinals had promis'd, was with their mouths only, and not with their hearts; for the Cardinals being enter'd in the usual form (though with a small number but of 28.) into the Con∣clave, they began immediately to divide, not as Brothers, but Enemies, making four factions, that the election of the Pope might be sure to be difficult, eleven of them pre∣tending to the Papacy themselves, and yet there were but 15 for any one; so that by this means there were two scrutinies ineffectual; after this there began strong practices in the behalf of Cardinal Bessarione, of Constantinople, a Grecian, who was one of the chief, which had oppos'd themselves against the Latine Church, he had disputed much against Purgatory, unleaven'd bread, and against the very person of the Holy Ghost, who he maintain'd, proceeded from the Father alone, and not from the Father and Son. Cardinal Bettone, Archbishop of Avignon, being advic'd of this, and discovering the two thirds of the Cardinals declar'd in the design, he fail'd not to use his utmost en∣deavour to frustrate that Enterprise, and with great zeal he exprest himself in words like these. Most illustrious Lords, what? shall we make a Pope upon a present appearance on∣ly, without reflection on what is past, or whats to come? shall we prefer a Grecian to the Latine Church, and establish a Neophite in the highest place of the Vatican? who is it that can assure us his conversion is true? heterodox opinions in matters of Religion, though re∣nounc'd and alter'd with the tongue, do yet leave a muddiness and disturbance upon the heart? shall we give the Keys of Heaven to him, who for so many years; and with so many argu∣ments, deny'd there was a Purgatory? shall we make him head of the Catholick Church, who oppos'd it with so much audacity? Is it possible our Church of Rome should be so poor, and indigent, that there cannot be one person found out, who was born in her bosom, and is wor∣thy of the Government of the Flock of Christ? what will the rest of the Nations say, to see us goe up and down, begging our Popes of this Country and of that? Rouze up your zeal most noble Companions, and permit not a thing so scandalous in the Church of Christ? this I am sure of, he which is a friend to Christianity, will not give his voice for such a Pope. These words being spoken with great energy, had such an effect upon the hearts of the Cardinals, that they began to change their designs, and place them upon Cardinal Al∣phonso Borgia of the City of Valenza in Spain, a person of great experience in Politick af∣fairs, and of maturity in respect of his age. The usual scrutiny being made, the said Cardinal was chosen Pope, and took the name of Calisto the 3d. verifying the Prediction of Beato Vincenzo, who upon his death-bed prognosticated, that not long after his death, a Countryman of his of Valenza should succeed in the Papacy. Calisto lived three years, and died the sixth of August 1458. and on the 20th. of the same month, Cardinal Aeneas Piccolomini of Siena was created Pope, by 18 Cardinals
which were present in that Conclave, in which there were but two Competitors for the Papacy viz. Cardinal Rotomagensis, and Aeneas aforesaid: so that for the four dayes time in which it was debated in the Conclave, they had no other difficulty but to make choice either of the one, or the other of these two; because Pietro Barbo, and the Car∣dinal of Pavia, who likewise made some pretensions, were excluded at the first. But that which was most curious, and worthy to be remembred, was to see each of these two persons, driving on his own promotion, magnifying his own virtues, and deba∣sing the qualifications of his adversary. Rotomagensis in this manner went from one Car∣dinal to another, and said, What have you to doe with Aeneas? what reason is it that moves you to think him worthy of the Papacy? what passion is it that blinds you, so as to confer an Office of that Majesty and importance, upon a Gouy Beggar▪ how can he that is poor and infirm himself, relieve, or support the Church, which is as weak, as infirm, and as poor as he? Where is his learning? where is his knowledge? will you make him a Pope, because he is a Poet? It is not long since he came out of Germany, and who can assure you but he may have thoughts of transferring the See into Germany? for my part I should not have am∣bition'd it, if I had not seen a person stand for it, of much weaker parts than I am? I am the antienter Cardinal of the two, for it is scarce two years since he was made a Cardinal, and in my Conscience there is none of you but knows, I have Learning and Parts enough to go∣vern the Church of Christ very well, to the Government of which, learning and parts are ab∣solutely necessary? Besides all this, I am of Royal Extraction, and have friends, faculties, and wealth, wherewithall to accommodate, and alleviate the necessities of the Church: and last of all, you your selves will have advantage by my Election, by reason of the many Bene∣fices I hold, which upon my renuntiation will be divided amongst you. Thr Cardinal of Avignon, an audacious, rash, and avaricious person was there, in favour of Cardinal William Rotomagensis, whose interest he pursu'd with all imaginable zeal, not so much as he was a Frenchman, as because upon his promotion, he pretend∣ed the Church of the said William, his Pallace, and Chancery: He assembled therefore several Cardinals in a House of Office, as in a private and secret place, and began with many fair promises to inveigle them into the Net, and taking an Oath of each of them, he agreed with them about the way Rotomagensis was to be chosen. The business was held as good as done; nor was there any thing expected but day, to meet in the chapel about the Scrutiny. Cardinal of Bologna seeing things at this pass, went to Cardinal Aeneas after midnight, and spake thus to him: I am come to bring you news, that the Pope is made; that several Cardinals having met privately in the necessary house, they have deter∣min'd among themselves to make Rotomagensis Pope, as will follow as soon as a is day. For my part I am resolved to have a care of coming again into the noose, having experimented already, how inconvenient it is to have a Pope to ones Enemy; and this I can say from Ca∣listo the 3ds. kindness, who never look't upon me with a good eye, for having spoke against his Election. My advice is therefore, that you put your own things in order, that you get up immediately out of your bed, and tender your service to Rotomagensis, as you desire not to have him your Enemy. Aeneas lost not his courage at the tydings, but animating himself rathe the more, he reply'd, Avoid Satan! seeing you come hither ut to give that devil∣ish counsel to me, which you have taken your self: Keep therefore such Councels to your self, my conscience does not serve me to choose a person, who to my knowledge is not only not , but the most unworthy of all. God keep me from falling into so great a crime; and if thers shall choose him, let it lye upon them to give an accompt of it at the latter day. I know well enough how inconvenient it is, not to have the Pope to be ones friend, but yet i much bet∣ter to have the Pope than God Almighty to ones enemy. He will not take away my life sure, because I gave him not my Vote; I believe he will lessen my diet, dey me my Pensions, ba∣nish me his presence, and never consider me in my distresses. Why? in Poverty I have been hardned, I have liv'd in poverty till now, and in poverty I will die. He will not take away my Muses, who are my greatest refreshment; In short, I trust in God for the rest, who will never suffer the Church, his Spouse, to fall into the hands of so impure and lascivi∣ous a person. The goodness of God will not endure that Vatican to be turn'd into a Den of Thieves, and an infamous receptacle of Harlots, which has hitherto been the habitation of so many holy and religious Popes. If the Holy Ghost makes the Pope, he will not be the man;
if the Devil makes him, let him give his consent that has a mind to▪t. The power of the Con∣spirators will vanish, the design being laid in so sordid a place. In the morning, by the Grace of God, it will be seen, whether the Pope be made by the combination of men, or the inspira∣tion of Heaven; and if you be a good Christian, as well as a zealous Cardinal, you will not give your vote for one, who is a perfect member f the Devil. In the morning early Aeneas went to Cardinal Roderigo a Spaniard, and one of the Conspirators for Rotomagensis, who had receiv'd a promise in writing from the said Rotomagensis, and the Cardinal Avignon, that the Chancellorship should not be taken from him. He excus'd himself to Aeneas that he had concurr'd, because he did certainly believe he would be chosen, and he was unwilling to hang off and lose his Chancellorship. But Aeneas return'd him this answer. And will you then sell your Vote? and by the sin of Simony, run your self into the displeasure of God? do you take so little care then, to obtrude a youth upon the Vatican, and one that is an Enemy to your Nation? Oh blindness! Oh folly! will you give credit to the words of a person of no credit? know that the Chan∣cellorship, which is promis'd so faithfully to you, is promis'd likewise and confirm'd to the Cardinal of Avignon; so that for you, there will be nothing left but the bare policy; for, it can never be, that a French Pope will do more for a Spaniard, than for one of his own Nation. But if he should give you the Chancellorship, which never will be, the worm of Conscience will be still gnawing at your heart, as oft as you remember, that you concurr'd to the giving such a Vicar to the Church of Christ. In short, if you will not have an eye to the Christian Religion, to the interests of the Church▪ nor to the honour of Christ, have at least some care and compassion for your own reputation. Such was the contumacy and indignation of Roderigo Borgia, that he gave him not a word; so Aeneas departed to find out the Cardinal of Pavia, who was one of the Con∣spirators likewise, and having found him, he accosted him in this manner. I am inform'd of your resolution to choose Rotomagensis Pope, which I could never have believ'd▪ as esteeming you another person, than it seems you are: You ought to be asham'd, to degenerate so much from Cardinal Brando, your Ʋnkle, who with so much labour and sweat, tyr'd him∣self out to transfer the Pontifical Court from Germany to Rome; and you that are his Nephew, would transport it from Italy into France; it must necessarily be believ'd, that Rotomagensis will never give the Italians the precedence before the French, and you that are an Italian, will confederate sooner with France, than your own Country; what a sad thing Italy will be without a Pope? what light can we see, without that light? and have you the heart to be instrumental, with your authority and counsel, to deprive us of the greatness and splendor of such a Guide? if he should stay still in Italy, what a shame would it be to see her enslaved to a Foreign Lord? must Italy therefore, who is the Queen of all other Nations, beg her Monarchs from amongst them? can you have the heart to see your self a slave to the French, when it is in your power to make the French obedient to our Nation? is it not enough that you have had experience of the Catalonians, but that you must try the French too? who perhaps when you think least of it, will make himself Master both of Sicily, and all the Cities and Fortresses belonging to the Church; and the rather, the example of Calisto being so fresh, who gave his Countrymen the Catalonians, his utmost assistance to get possession of all. Cardinal Pavia reply'd, (but with a very low voice) that he did not believe the French had any thoughts against the profit and advantage of the Church, they having given with so much generosity, the greatest part of the Provinces it possess'd, and they would not probably take that away, which they had given so lately; to which Aeneas reply'd thus: But suppose that should be, ought it not to stir up your heart against Roto∣magensis, to consider the infamy of his manners? are you not asham'd to choose a man Pope, given to lasciviousness, and of so unconstant a mind? do you not abhor to prepare such a Bridegroom for the Spouse of Christ? and to recommend the innocent Flock of Christ, to the tuition of a ravenous Woolf? where is your justice? where is your conscience? where is your zeal to God? where is your prudence? how are you so much alter'd from your self? you have told me many times, you would sooner dye, and endure Martyrdom, than give your Voice for Rotomagensis, knowing the wickedness of his nature; and yet now you make him Pope in despight of your knowledge? what is the reason of so great a chang? is he in the
twinkling of an eye become an Angel of a Devil? or are you become a Devil of an Angel? Pavia was astonish'd at these words, and wept (I know not whether for sorrow or dis∣dain) but fetching a deep sigh he reply'd, 'Tis true indeed Aeneas all that you say, but I have past my word to make Rotomagensis Pope, and if I do it not, I shall be held infamous, and a Traitor. To which Aeneas answered: As far as I see, things are reduc'd into such a state, that which way soever you turn you, you cannot scape the blemish of a Traitor, it is in your power yet to choose whether you will betray Italy and your Country, and be true to Rotomagensis, or betray him, and be faithful to your Country and Italy. Cardinal Pavia was overcome by these words, and took a resolution to betray Roto∣magensis, as the lesser evil of the two; and therefore meeting with Cardinal Pietro di Santa Maria Nova, and other Italian Cardinals in the Cardinal of Genoa's Chamber, they altogether began to contrive the destruction of Rotomagensis pretensions, resolving to prefer Aeneas Piccolomini before any body else. Seven Cardinals there were of this opinion▪ who past their words to one another, and ingaged before his Divine Majesty, to do nothing to the contrary: Cardinal Aeneas was against his own Election, as thinking himself unworthy, and declaring that he be∣liev'd all the other Italian Cardinals very fit, except Cardinal Rotomagensis a French∣man whom he excluded. How great the ambition of Rotomagensis was, was visible even in the Scrutiny, for being timerous and fearful things would not happen as he expected, seeing Cardinal Aeneas going towards the Schedule, he said to him with an humble and submissive voice, Aeneas I recommend my self to thee, remember me I beseech thee, and have compassion on me. Aeneas answer'd him only thus, Poor worm, thou mistak'st in recommending thy self to me. His ambition was moreover conspicuous in the prayers he went mumbling about, yet so, as his neighbours might understand them, lifting up his eyes, and his voice to heaven, and joyning his hands he cry'd out, Deus propitius esto mihi peccatori. The Scrutiny being publish'd, it appear'd that Aeneas had three voices more than Rotomagen∣sis, but they could not obtain their two thirds: however what was done, astonish'd the French Cardinals, and gave great incouragement to the Italian. Cardinal Bertone and San Sisto to hinder the accession, rose up, and pretended to go to the House of Office, in hopes that others would have follow'd, but seeing no body come after them they return'd to their places. The Cardinals Roderigo, and Santa Ana∣stasia in the mean time declar'd Aeneas with a loud voice, which Cardinal Prosper Colon∣na observing, being ambitious to have the honour of making the Pope, for as much as there wanted but one voice, he arose, took his way towards Aeneas, and though he was hinder'd and restrain'd by Cardinal Niceno, and Rotamagensis nevertheless without re∣garding their violence, or that he had given his vote for Rotomagensis, he cry'd aloud, I joyn my self to Cardinal Aeneas, and do make him Pope: which being heard by the rest of the Cardinals, without more adoe, they threw themselves down at Aeneas his feet, saluted him Pope, and confirm'd the Election afterwards, with the usual suffrages. This being past, Cardinal Bessartone spake to the new Pope, in the name of all those who had favour'd Rotomagensis, and his words were as follow. We rejoyce most sacred Father at your assumption, although we have not consented to your Election from the beginning, which proceeded not nevertheless from any malevolence in us, but from an infirmity and indisposition in you; as judging you by reason of your Gout, in more need of rest, then of business, We do now acknowledge you most worthy of the charge, and do confess your Election to come from God himself; and we do hope therefore that the same God which Elected you, will pardon our ignorance, and supply the weakness of your feet. According to his natural benignity, Aeneas return'd him this answer. Certainly according to my opinion, you have made a better judgement of things, then I my self; having imputed no defects to me, but those in my feet; and yet I am sensible how little I am worthy of so holy a Chair, and so soveraign a command. I know very well it was not any deserts of mine which advanc'd me: I acknowledge my self unworthy before his Di∣vine Majesty: and I speak it from the bottom of my heart, I would not imbrace that honour, nor charge my self with a weight so much above my power to bear, did I not sear the judge∣ment
of him, who call'd me to it, which call may be argu'd from what hap∣pen'd in my election: for that which two parts of the Colledge do decree, must be be∣liev'd to proceed from the Holy Ghost, whose inspirations we cannot, we ought not to resist. Let us give obedience then to the Divine call, let us give thanks to that God who has order'd things so: and to you likewise O Niceno, together with the rest, with whom if you conti∣nue in unity, we do praise you: if according to the judgement of your Conscience, you thought me unfit to be chosen by reason of my insufficiency, you did well, and I assure you, you shall be all equally dear to me, for I acknowledge my Election, not from this person, or from that, but from God, and the whole body of the College, inspir'd by the Holy Ghost, from whence all perfection comes. This said, the Masters of the Ceremonies stript him of his Cardinalitial habits, and put on him the white garment of Christ: after which he swore to the observation of certain Articles, which were agreed on by the Colledge three days before the Election. which being past, he plac'd himself upon the footstep of the Altar, where according to custom, the Cardinals, and other persons of the Conclave kist his foot: The Adoration being over, he was shewn to the people, with the name of Pius the 2d. which he chose as soon as the scrutiny was ended. You must understand there was a certain custom introduc't, I know not how, into the Conclave, of plundring and rifling (as it were) that Cardinals Chamber which was created Pope; no sooner therefore was the scrutiny publish'd, and the number of Votes in favour of Piccolomini, but the Officers of the Cardinals which were then in the Con∣clave, ran with all speed to his new Holinesses Cell, and (in a manner very indecorous, and unsuitable to the sanctity of the place) rob'd him of every thing, taking away all that little plate he had there, and plundering not only his Cloaths and his Books, but his very writings of importance which he had lock'd up in his Cabinet. In the like manner the people of Rome not only only sack't, but demolish'd his Pallace, carrying away the Windows, the Gates, the Floors, the Beams, even the Marbles themselves. However the loss the new Pope sustain'd in his old Pallace, could not give him much trouble, for at last he found another, incomparably more noble, and more rich, and a revenue of so many millions to make him amends. But the prejudice the o∣ther Cardinals receiv'd was more to be lamented, for the Populary being in suspence, by reason of the variety of reports, which said sometimes this Cardinal was chosen, and sometimes that; the most insolent, and audacious sort of the people, ran to them all, sometime to this house, and sometime to that, plundering and robbing even the Images of the Saints. And it being talkt I know not how, that a Genoese was created Pope, (perhaps by a mistake in the pronuntiation, calling him a Genoese for a Sienese) many of them ran immediately to the Pallace of the Cardinal of Genoa, and plunder'd it so, he had much adoe to find a bed to sleep in, when he came out of the Conclave. When the usual Balcony was open'd, for the publication of the creation of the new Pope, the People not having patience to attend the publication from the mouth of a Cardinal, cry'd out as loud as they could, some of them, long may Rotomagensis live, others, long may the Genoese, and others the Medanese: So that it was not known which of them was Pope, a thing very displeasing to the said Cardinals, who began to curse those who were the occasion of their exclusion, as receiving no ordinary disturbance, from so unu∣sual an affront. The people were obstreperous, and in a tumult, but when they were assured Cardinal Aeneas Piccolomini was the person which was plac'd in the Chair of Saint Peter, as uni∣versal Father and Governour of the Church, they immediately laid down the arms they had taken up to satisfie their vehemence and passion, having no confidence but in their sword, and the face of the City was alter'd in a moment, so that that City which a lit∣tle before seem'd dedicated to Mars, in the twinkling of an eye became, (I will not say the City of Venus the Mother of the Trojan Aeneas) but a Paradice of Peace, and an Epito∣my of tranquility, which every one expected from the Exaltation of such a Pope. This Election was generally to the satisfaction of all the Princes of Christendom, par∣ticularly, Ferdinand King of Sicily was very well pleas'd, to see so good a friend of his Fathers, admitted to the Government of the Church. Borso Duke of Modena was so
much over-joyed at this Election of Pius, (as one with whom he had a mutual corre∣spondence and friendship, from the time he obtain'd that Dukedom from Frederick the Emperour, in which concession also Aeneas had been instrumental) that in testimony of his congratulation, he made Tournements or Tiltings, hoping under his Pontificate to meliorate his fortune, and augment his Estate: To that end in Ferrara, and in all other places of his Dominion, he commanded solemn Festivals to be kept for the Election of that Pope, which the people fail'd not to observe. Francis Sforza Duke of Milan, though perhaps his wishes were to have seen another Pope, nevertheless understanding Aeneas was Elected, he made his expressions of joy: having receiv'd him honourably in his own lodgings in Milan, and treated him with great generosity, a little before his Election. The Marquesses of Mantoa, Monr∣rat, and Salussi, who were all Aeneas his great friends, were very much pleas'd, and order'd their Subjects to make demonstration of their joy. The Venetians, and the Flo∣rentines, were the only people dissatisfied with this Election; the Florentine (from a natural fear and animosity they had to the Sieneses their Neighbours, with whom they had frequent disputes about their Confines) took so great a disgust at the assumption of Aeneas, that as he was walking in the Street, and saluted by those which met him, with a Dio vi salvi, they reply'd with great contumacy, ci salvera perche no: the Venetian likewise had no great correspondence with him: yet for all that, both the one and other dispatch'd most sumptuous Embassies to him, to congratulate, and pay him the usual o∣bedience. The Nobility of Siena, being jealous of the house of Piccolomini, as well for other considerable respects, as for fear the Pope should usurp upon the liberty of the City, and make it a Principality hereditary to his own Family, receiv'd but little delight at the news of Aeneas his Election: However the generallity of the people, seeing a fellow Citizen of theirs, exalted above the Cardinals of all other Cities, celebrated his Eecti∣on for several days, with bone-fires, and such other transcendant Expressions of their joy, as seem'd madness and extravagance, as commonly most of your popular solemni∣ties are. But that which was most remarkable, and most for the glory and reputation of the Pope, was, that almost all the Barons of Rome assembled themselves on horseback, to Congratulate, and on the 28 of August about shutting in of the Evening, they made a solemn Cavalcade, every one with his lighted Torch in his hand, attended with a great number of Lacqueys and Grooms, with Torches likewise; which train being disposed into order, extended all along, from the Castle of Saint Angelo, to the Church of Saint Peter. The Ceremony was so Pompous, his Holiness stood at the Window all the while, to behold so illustrious a spectacle, design'd and dedicated to the honour of his Exaltation. But above all the Princes of Christendom, Frederick the Emperour was the most satis∣fied: and not without reason, because it was by his instance, and mediation, Aeneas was made a Cardinal; and therefore transported with joy, he not only dispatch'd Ambassa∣dors to congratulate his Creation, but he commanded Justs and Tiltings to be celebrated for several days: The King of Spain did the same, and indeed all the Princes of Christen∣dom, except the Kings of France, of Scotland, of Denmark, of Poland, Hungary and Cy∣prus, who for several reasons had no great opinion of that Election: But all the rest of the world (I mean of Christendome) were glad. I will not omit (though I shall mention it but by the way) to remember the great zeal this Pope exprest towards the recovery of the Holy Land, especially when he saw the Turk had got possession of Greece and Sclavonia: it brought tears of compassion from his Eyes, as oft as he heard of the miseries which the poor Christians suffered who were under the Dominion, I may say Bondage, of the Barbarians: This zeal carry'd him in person to the Councel of Mantua, in which he negotiated the cause of Christ so well, with his most excellent eloquence, that all the Cardinals and Fathers concluded that en∣terprise into the East was necessary; in which he confaederated with the King of Hunga∣ry, the Venetian, and the Duke of Burgundie; as knowing those Princes most dispos'd to so sacred a work, against which all good Popes ought principally to bend their whole
power, and designs, and lay aside, deprive, themselves of their passion to their Nephews, rather than see the Church ruin'd by its barbarous Enemies. Pius sent his Legates about through all Christendome, injoyning the Bishops, to excite, and inanimate their Subjects to an expedition of that advantage and importance to the Church. In the City of Siena, as he was making his journey to Ancona; he understood that Philip Duke of Burgundy (who had promis'd to go himself with an numerous Army) had chang'd his resolution, and united with several other Princes, and People, as well Italians, as strangers, and out of envious and ambitious ends, were using all possible means to divert others from so holy a design; pretending and declaring that the conse∣quence of that expedition could be nothing but certain danger, and uncertain reward. This news troubled his Holiness to the very soul: so that he sent away Legates imme∣diately to try if he could reduce them to more rational resolutions, at least to sit still, and not discourage others, if they would do no good themselves: From Siena he re∣turn'd to Rome upon some new occasion, and afterwards departed again for Ancona, in which Port the whole Christian Army was to Rendezvouz▪ at least that of Italy. By the way he met great numbers of Soldiers, design'd for Asia, but more for their pay and profit, than to gain glory by the design. These kind of people were not at all wel∣come to his Holiness: he caus'd a Muster to be made, and selecting those he lik'd best, he sent the rest back again, loaden with indulgences and Pardons, as judging them fitter to pray to God in a Cell, than to draw a sword against the Turk. This Holy and Zealous Pope being arrived at Acona, but tyr'd with the length of his journey, was receiv'd with great demonstrations of affection, whilst he lay in ex∣pectation of his forces, which was dispatch'd from several Ports of Italy; being worn out with a tedious feaver, he saw his end approaching, and calling therefore all the Cardinals together, who were then present in his Court, he exhorted them, not only to the hastning of a Successor, but that they should give the Keys to such a one as would zealously pursue the design against the Turk: In short he departed this life, earnestly re∣commending this honourable enterprize, in which he did resolve, to have imploy'd his whole force, and to have spent the whole Treasure of the Church. And here would I have those Popes to reflect upon themselves, whose thoughts reach no further, than their recreations at the Castle of Gondolfo, and the Promenades of Mon∣te Cavallo: But what do I say? I would have this Pope be an example to all those, who contrive more to destroy the Treasure of the Church, for the accommodation of their Nephews, than to ruine the Turk by incommoding their Nephews, or themselves. Asia laughs, Europe mourns, and both the tears of the one, and the exsultation of the other, will be judg'd and rewarded in Heaven, because they are regarded so little by the Popes, and the Cardinals on Earth.
Il CARDINALISMO di Santa Chiesa, OR THE HISTORY OF CARDINALS. In III. Parts. PART III. BOOK II. The Contents. Wherein is discours'd of a Decree of Paul the 2d. which forbids the Creation of the Pope, without the whole body of the Cardinals. Of the death of Pius the second, and Cardinal Barbi his assumption to the Papacy. Of the name of For∣moso refus'd by the Cardinals to the said Barbi, and why. Of the reasons why he would be call'd Paulus the second. Of the time he was Pope, and the num∣ber of Cardinals which were present in the Conclave. Of the creation of Six∣tus 4th. and of his death. Of the assumption of Cardinal Cibo, call'd Inno∣cent the eight, of his death, and of the time of his Papacy. Of the detestable courses us'd by Cardinal Roderigo Borgia to obtain the Pontificate. Of the Cardinals suborn'd, and of his ingratitude to those who Elected him Pope. Of the violent death of Alexander the 6th. and the disturbances his Son Duke Valentino gave to the Church. Of the Election of the Cardinal of Siena, call'd Pius the third, of his death, and the time he was Pope. Of the assump∣tion of Julius the second, and of what he did for Duke Valentine, who was a∣gainst
him, of the time he was Pope, and of the Vacancy of the Chair, after his death. Of the number of the Cardinals in the Conclave of Julius the second, in which Pope Leo the tenth, of the house of Medici was Elected. Of the creation of Adrian the sixth, and of the differences amongst the Cardi∣nals, about the names of other pretenders, of his life, and of his death. Of the factions of the Cardinals of the house of Medici, and Colonna, and of the disputes which hapned in the Conclave, before the Election of Clement the seventh. Of the sacking of Rome in the days of this Pope. Of the as∣sumption of Paul the third, of the house of Farnese. Of the introduction of the factions of the Nephews, and the Crowns into the Conclave. How the interests of Princes were brought into the Conclave. How the liberty of the Cardinals was reduc'd to a slavery, and servitude to the Nephews of the Popes. Of the Cardinals which do adhere to the faction of the Nipotismo, and of the reasons which mov'd them to it. Of the opinion of a certain Roman Abbot concerning the Debates of the Conclave. Of certain reasons which make the Popedom appear, not Elective, but hereditary to the Nephews. Of the death of Paul the third, and the controversies which follow'd in his Conclave. Of the French exclusion of Cardinal Polo, and of the endeavours of the Imperials for his creation. Of the creation of Cardinal di Monte by the name of Julius the third, of his death, and the time he lived. Of the great, but short differences which arose at the creation of Cardinal Caraffa, who took upon him the name of Paul the fourth, of his death, and the barba∣rity the people us'd to his Statue. Of the Exaltation of the Cardinal di Me∣dici, who was call'd Pius the fourth. Of the number of Cardinals, and of the factions in the Conclave wherein Pius the fifth was created. Of the time he was Pope, and of the Cardinals which entred into the Conclave after his death. Of the creation of Cardinal Boncompagno, call'd Gregory the thirteenth, of his life, death, and the ingress of the Cardinals into the Conclave. Of the course Sixtus the fifth us'd to compass the Papacy, some particulors a∣bout his Government, and the time he was Pope. Of the creation of Cardi∣nal Castagna with the name of Urban the seventh. Of the good will Sixtus the fifth had always, that Castagna should succeed him in the Papacy. Of the promotion of the Cardinal of Cremona under the name of Gregory the thirteenth. Of the peaceable Conclave in which Cardinal Facchinetto was created, with the name of Innocent the ninth, and of the shortness of his life. Of the creation of Cardinal Aldobrandino, and the differences which hap∣ned in his Conclave, by the inclusion, and exclusion of other persons. Of the name of Clement the eight which he assum'd, and of the time he was Pope. Of a Report in Rome, that the Cardinals were fighting in the Conclave of Leo, and of the resolution taken to choose the Cardinal Borghese, who would be call'd Paulus the fifth. Of the life and death of Paul, and of the creation of Cardinal Ludovisio, with the name of Gregory the fifteenth. Of the number of Cardinals present in the Conclave of Gregory, where Urban the eighth was created. Of many particulars hapning at the creation of Inno∣cent the tenth. Of his death, and the exaltation of Alexander the seventh. Of the form of the Scrutiny used in the Conclave, and the difference between Adoration, and Accession. Of the manner of the Engagement wherewith the Pope was sometime Elected, and of several other particulars of all Conclaves in general.
THUS far we have spoken of the Election of the Popes in a general way, for till the Pontificate of Paul the 2d. who succeeded Pius the 2d. the Cardinals had liberty to choose persons out of the Conclave; which being look'd upon by Paul as an occasion of delay, in respect of the time which was lost in inquiring after the qualities of the per∣sons recommended: he commanded they should choose none for the future, but out of the body of the Cardinals; by which means, the Cardinals became of extraordinary reputation, the Princes being oblig'd to give them no little honour, as seeing the Papacy like to be alwayes in their hands. These remedies notwithstanding which Paul thought rational, and good, have prov'd vain, and ineffectual, having produc'd no other fruit, but the increasing of the Cardina∣litial Grandeur: seeing there were the same passions in the Conclaves as formerly, and perhaps greater, for the Cardinals being jealous of one another, protracted the Electi∣ons out of envy, none of them yeilding to his Companion, but multiplying their quar∣rels, they appear'd rather Enemies, than Brothers, making more difficulty to give place to a Cardinal Competitor in the Conclave, than to any other uninterested pretender. For the better satisfaction of the Reader in this Cardinalismo, I shall give a short descrip∣tion of the causes from whence these discords have sprung. After Pius the 2d. was dead in the year 1464. who had Govern'd in his Pontificate six years, and his body remov'd from Ancona, where he dy'd, to Rome: the Lords Car∣dinals assembling together as soon as they could, they enter'd the Conclave to the num∣ber of 20. the six others (for the whole number of Cardinals was at that time 26.) remaining without, in respect of the greatness of their distance from Rome. The 28th. of August they made their entrance into the Conclave, with full resolution to create Cardinal Petero Barbi (a Venetian) Pope, in whose favour, 15. of the Cardinals had declar'd, and there were but 14. necessary for his creation. Being come to the Scrutiny the third day after the shutting up of the Conclave, there were but twelve voices among the names for Barbi, the rest being divided, this way, and the other; so that two voices only being wanting, they came to Accession; and the Cardinal Deacon having ask'd them all, if they did approve the Election, and finding them firm to their opinions, he embrac'd him on a sudden with these words, I make you Pope, and immediately the Adoration followed. There were some controversie happen'd about his name, he desiring to be call'd For∣moso; which the Cardinals would not concede, lest it should be look'd upon as a piece of vanity, because his Holiness was naturally beautifull and handsome: upon the refusal of that name, he took the name of Mark upon him, with which the Cardinals were as little satisfy'd as before; upon which, he smiling said, Well then I will be call'd Paul, and by this name he was publish'd to the people. But the Cardinals did not think it fit again, he should bear the name of Paul the first, seeing there was never another Paul in the Vatican, so they assign'd him the name of Paul the 2d. which he receiv'd willingly enough, affirming that he vallu'd not to be the second in name, so long as indeed he was the first. Cardinal Giovanni di Mela a Spaniard, was a great adversary to this Election, he carry'd the Title of SS. Aquila, and Priscilla; he discover'd great indiscretion and malice, because he would never recede from his obstinacy, though he saw the Pope was made, he went not to kiss his feet, according to the order of his preceedence, but pretended to go forth, that he might seem to be the last. This Pope lived six years and 10 months, and dy'd the 28 of July 1471. 27 Cardi∣nals enter'd into the Conclave, 4 only being absent, two of which set out as soon as they receiv'd the news of his Holiness his death, to come to Rome, but they could not get thither before the Conclave was ended. From the very first day they began to talk of creating Francisco d'Alberola of Rovere, Pope, who was of the Order of Saint Francis, and was made a Cardinal by Paul the 2d. in the year 1467. But those Cardinals which were created by Pius, and some few
of Calisto's Creatures, did what they could possibly to disturbe the good designs the rest of the Cardinals had in favour of Rovere; not that they had any thing to object against him, but that they could not endure to see themselves out-stript by a Cardinal of fewer years, and the last which was dignify'd with the Purple. There were present in the Conclave amongst the rest of the Cardinals, Latino Orsino, a Creature of Nicholas the 5th. Roderigo Borgia, a Creature of Calisto the 3d. and Cardinal Gonzaga d Mantoa, created by Pius the 2d. who being all persons of great authority in the Colledge, endea∣vour'd to draw over the rest of the Cardinals to Rovere's side, which they defended, with a firm resolution to dye, rather than to elect any other Pope than Rovere: which discover'd by the other ambitious pretenders, they desisted, and promis'd the Cardinals Orsino, Borgia, and Gonzague, that they would go along with them: In so much that in the second Scrutiny (though they could do nothing in the first) of the 27. Votes, there were 18. for Rovere, a thing not heard of before, to have so many voices for one man, in one Scrutiny. They came afterwards to the Adoration, and his name being desir'd, he said he would be call'd Sixtus, and accordingly he was proclaimed to the people by the name Sixtus the 4th. they having not continued in the Conclave three full dayes. This new Pope (either in despight to such as had oppos'd him, or to shew himself a generous rewarder of good Offices) gave the Office of Chamberlain to Cardinal Orsino, the Abbey of Sbiaco to Cardinal Borgia, and the Monastery of Saint Gregory to Gon∣zague: Yet there were some believ'd, he had purchas'd his Papacy with thee promises before hand, but it could not be so, for he was too zealous in his Religion, to be tainted with Simony. This Pope reigned 13. years, and dyed the 13th. of August 1484. on the 23. of the same month, after the usual solemnities at his Funeral, 28. Cardinals enter'd into the Conclave, so divided in their judgements, that many believ'd the Election would be very tedious. There were three Scrutinies ineffectual, there being none but Cardinal Barbo only, who was Nephew to Paul the 2d. and was call'd Cardinal of San Marco, which could reach to the number of eleven; the rest of the Competitors arriving a not above two or three. Some of the Cardinals oppos'd themselves against this Saint Mark, out of envy which they bore to the Republick of Venice, not enduring to see two Popes succeeding one another so nearly, out of the same City. Giuliano della Rovere, Nephew to the late Sixtus, otherwise call'd Cardinal of Saint Peter in Vinculis, went one night to the Cardinal of Saint Mark, and told him, that if he would give his Palace to the Cardinal of Arragon, King Ferdinando's Son, he would oblige himself to make him three voices more in the next Scrutiny, which amounted in all to 14. so that in the accession after he would be sure to be Pope. But the Cardinal San Marco reply'd, that he would not come into the Vatican by Simony, nor make a bargain for the liberty of the Church; it being easie for King Ferdinand, by putting himself in that House, and fortifying it, to make himself Master of the whole City. Cardinal Juliano being very much disgusted at this repulse, went to Cardinal Borgia, a great Enemy of San Marks, treating earnestly with him for the exaltation of Cardinal Cibo, a Genoese, who though in other things he was deserving enough, yet in this case he suffer'd himself to be carry'd away with ambition, so that he gave license to the two Cardinals aforesaid, to negotiate as they thought fit, and to promise Offices and Digni∣ties at their pleasure, obliging himself by an Oath to confirm them; and thus by means of those liberal promises, they got 18. or 19. voices, who being got together, went up and down the Dormitory publishing the creation of the Pope, and indeed they chose him in the night. In the mean time six of the antientest Cardinals were asleep, and little dreamt of a Cibo to be Pope; and when they came to tell them, they must come away, the Pope was created, they were astonish'd at the news; being got up, and come to the Chappel, they found things beyond all remedy, there being more than two thirds of the Cardinals of his party, so as they judg'd it best for themselves also to condescend, and in this manner
Cibo was made Pope, with the name of Innocent the 8th. afterwards he rewarded them very well who had given him their Votes, some with money, some with Benefices, and some with Honours. His Election was on the 5th. day after the Cardinals entrance into the Conclave, and the 16th. after the vacancy of the See. He govern'd the Church about eight years, and dy'd the 25. of July 1492. after whose death, there was a tumult of the people, whole Troops of Banditi and Thieves running up and down the Streets, committing insolencies and murders, with such noise, that the very Cloysters were not thought to be safe. Roderigo Borgia ceas'd not all this while to negotiate the Papacy for himself, in the most a and detestable manner has been formerly heard of: The Cardinals, the greater part of them, were brib'd by Cardinal Ascanio Sforza, (one of the greatest promoters of that barbarous Pope) to that pass, that 22. Cardinals entring the Conclave on the 8th. of August late in the night, on the 11th. which was the first Scrutiny, by common consent Borgia was chosen. An accident sufficient to convince us, of the effects of the natural perverseness of Man; for it has not been known that ever a holy and pious Pope was chosen with so much ap∣plause, a this Jugler was, even honest men giving him their Votes, perhaps by Divine ordination, to mortifie their pride: There was present then in the Conclave Cardinal Girardo Patriarch of Venice, from whence he was come Post thither, having understood the incurable infirmity of the Pope; though indeed he pretended to go to Rome, to re∣ceive the Cap from the hands of the same Pope, who had given him the Purple. This Cardinal therefore, who could not stand upon his leggs, being so decrepid, and in an age of 92. years, foretold all the calamities in which the Church was afterwards involv'd, and with strong reason oppos'd the Election of that person; but seeing the in∣effectuality of his words, and the press of Cardinals, he held his peace, and proceeded to the Adoration with the rest, which was perform'd the 11th. of August before day, and at the same hour he was publish'd t the people by the name of Alexander the 6th. The greatest part of those Cardinals who were brib'd, out of a principle of ambition and covetousness, receiv'd the reward of their wickedness and corruption, in giving the Papacy to so unworthy a person; some of them being put to death by Alexanders order, others banish'd from Rome, and others confin'd to perpetual imprisonment; Asca∣nius Sforza himself, who had been his principal promoter, though in the Conclave he obtain'd the Vice-Chancellorship from the hands of his Holiness, in recompence of his pains, yet he had afterwards his share of chastisement, God Almighty not exempting him from his just punishment, to the end that by his example, the rest might be taught to ba∣nish Simony from the Conclave. Alexander dyed of a violent death the 12th. of August 1502. after he had reign'd in a most barbarous manner 11. years: The Duke Valentino, his Son, gave many trou∣bles to the Church, and no small molestation to the Cardinals, who thinking not con∣venient to enter into the Conclave, after the 9. dayes usual obsequies, kept out 16. dayes longer, in expectation of the march of the French Army out of Rome, which was going against the Spaniard, the Cardinals apprehending least any tumult should happen in the City, whil they were in the Conclave, into which they enter'd at length on the 9th. of September, to the number of 37. divided into five parties, and so dis-united in their thoughts, that it was believ'd impossible to unite them, without some great tumult. Those who were of the Duke Valentino's faction, negotiated for a Creature of the said Dukes, with the most infamous and detestable Simony in the world; yet in the Scrutinies there was not any had above 9. voices, for which reason they came not to the access. The Spanish and French Cardinals, each of them pursued the advantages of their own Nations, and the nearest Competitors, kept firm to their resolutions, of not yield∣ing to one another. At length the Cardinal of Siena, whose teeth water'd at the Papacy as well as the rest, seeing all the Pretenders drive on their interests with promises, he also would follow their example, and accordingly taking the same measures, he went one night to the Car∣dinals Rotomagensis, Sforza, and Valleteravo, as persons which had the greatest party
of followers of them all, promising them many things, if they would be pleas'd to assist his Election. These Cardinals saw it would be hard for them to happen upon the person they desir'd, and to fasten it upon the Cardinal of Siena, would be easie, and being satisfy'd with his prayer's and his promises, they consulted among themselves to make him Pope, and to that purpose they met in Rotomagensi's Chamber, after which, as a thing done and con∣cluded, they went to be merry, and congratulate in his own Chamber, where it being his Ague day, besides his Gout, they found him in bed. It was said (whilst the Cardinals were upon agreement for the Election of the Sienese) that it would be best to choose him by the way of the Holy Ghost, to which Rotomagensis reply'd, that the Election by the way of the Holy Ghost was dangerous, in respect one single contradiction sufficed to render it null. In the mean time the Scrutiny was made, and the Cardinal of Siena had two thirds of the voices; which the Cardinal of Naples observing, though he was very averse to that Election, yet he went to the Adoration with the rest; and afterwards the usual Balcony being open'd, the said Cardinal of Siena, was pronounc'd to the people by the name of Pius the 3d. a name he had chosen for himself, and leaving his proper name of Francisco, which indeed he ought not to have done, he being chosen Pope on the day of the Stigma∣ta of Saint Francis, which was upon the 17th. of September, eight dayes after their en∣trance into the Conclave, and 34. after the vacancy of the See. Pope Pius the 3d. lived but 27 dayes after his Election, dying on the 13th. of October, not without suspition of poyson, many believing it was convey'd into the sore of his Legg, by the appointment of Pandolfo Petruccio Tyrant of Siena, out of an apprehensi∣on lest his Holiness by force of arms should drive him out of his Country. On the 29. the Duke Valentino, call'd all the Spanish Cardinals together into his presence, obliging them by Oath to give their voices for nobody, but for Cardinal Georgio Ambrosio of Roano, who had promis'd the said Duke to make him Gonfaloniere, and General of the Church, if by his means he should be chosen Pope. The last day of the month, the Cardinals enter'd into the Conclave, to the number of 32. the two thirds were already agreed upon the Election of Cardinal Julian della Ro∣vere, Nephew to Sextus the 4th. but that which is most wonderfull is, that all this was transacted during the time of the vacancy of the Chair, with great secresie, lest the Duke should have given any obstruction, who insisted much upon having one of his own Party. Six hours, and no more, they continued shut up in the Conclave, in which time they dis∣patch'd all things in favour to Julian, who was proclaim'd Pope, with the consent of al∣most all the Cardinals, but with great dissatisfaction to the Duke, who would sooner have condescended to any ones Election, than to his, and that because he had treated him very ill in the time of Alexander. Cardinal Alessandrino, who was of the Dukes party, would not go into the Cardinal Julian's Chamber to congratulate, though he saw all the Spanish Cardinals go: a piece of obstinacy that Julian did not like at all, though he dissembled it for the present. The Scrutiny being made, there were above 24 voices which nominated Saint Peter in Vincu∣lis, which was Julian himself, but all of them concurr'd at the Adoration, and being ask'd about his name, he said he would be call'd Julius the 2d. and by that name he was pub∣lish'd to the people upon all Saints day, which was the first of November; and the same day, in the sight of all the people, they came forth of the Conclave. Many people believ'd this Pope would be the destruction of the Duke Valentino; but he thought it best to make his Enemy a Bridge of Gold, and suffer him to escape, accor∣ding to his desire. After Julius had Raign'd ni years, and some months, with great reputation, though almost alwayes in Wars, he dy'd the 21. of Febr. 1513. On the 4th. of March, 25 of the Cardinals entered into the Conclave (7 being absent, the whole number then living being 32) it could not be discern'd that there was any design amongst them then, though they had all their suspitions. In the first Scrutiny, there were not votes enough for any body, all the Cardinals being honour'd, some more, some less, only the Cardinal Alborenze, who out-number'd
them all, having receiv'd 13. which was no small terrour to his Competitors, gave them occasions to make sad reflections thereupon. After dinner they went briskly about their affairs, but they could not discover in whose favour it was like to be carryed, all the old Cardinals, and most capable of being Popes, remaining in no small jealousie and fear. Late in the night, in the great Hall, the two Cardinals, Medici, and San Georgio, discours'd together above an hour in that publique place, without any bodies perceiving upon what subject they discours'd, yet every one suspected they were negotiating the Pa∣pacy for one of them; and therefore the rest of the Competitors went up and down, en∣deavouring what they could to interrupt their designs. In the interim the younger Cardinals, viz. the Cardinal of Arragon, Gonzague, Cor∣naro, Petrucci, Sauli, and Sedunensis, resolv'd amongst themselves to make Medici Pope; which business was so well manag'd, and prepar'd, that it was publickly dis∣cours'd every where, that Medici was Pope. The other Cardinals seeing things so well dispos'd in favour of Medici, and all wayes of excluding him stopp'd, they went into the Hall where Medici was, kissing his hand, and congratulating his happy Election. On Friday morning, on the eleventh of March, all the Cardinals went into Medici's Cham∣ber, conducting him to the Chapel of Saint Nicholas with great applause, where the Scrutiny was made, and all the votes, but two, were for him, and one of them, as is sup∣pos'd, was his own. He was afterwards saluted Pope with the usual formalities, and then publish'd to the people with the name of Leo the 10th. In the time of his being Pope, Martin Luther began his Schism in Germany, with so much prejudice to the Church of Rome, that it may be said, that little Fryer, debauch'd more Provinces and Kingdoms from the Catho∣lick Church, than all the Popes put together could ever acquire. He dy'd the 9th. year of his Popedome on the 1st. of Decemb. 1521. of a violent death; for being at Supper, and having the news brought him that the French were beaten out of Italy, in great joy he cry'd out, God has been so mercifull to me as to let me see three things, which I desir'd from the bottom of my heart. The first, was to return with honour into Florence, from whence I was banish'd with shame; the second, to have merit enough to advance me to the Papacy; and the third, to see the French beaten ot of Italy; in pronouncing of which last words, he fell down dead with the glass in his hand. All convenient Orders being given for the good Government of Rome, and the Obse∣quies celebrated, the Cardinals 39 in number, enter'd the Conclave the 17th. of Decem∣ber, on which day it was discours'd the Ambassadors of the Princes were to have Au∣dience. The discords amongst the Cardinals was the cause that they procrastinated the Scruti∣ny from day to day, and spent their whole time in plottings and disputes, not being able to come to the first Scrutiny till the 30th. of that month, and 14 dayes after their en∣trance into the Conclave; but that Scrutiny came to nothing, the votes being divided, 10 for Grimano, 9 for Cardinal d'Ostia, seven for Farnese, and some others here and there. The first of January they had a second Scrutiny, in which there was a Schedule put in, which nam'd 13 Cardinals; which gave all of them so great a disgust, that some of them cry'd out it should be open'd, to discover the hand; but having consider'd of that better, they let it alone On the second, they had their third Scrutiny, in which Santi quattro advanc'd his votes to 14. which made the rest of the Pretenders look about them, and endeavour to countermine him with contrary designs, and indeed they did it so effectually, that in the 4th. Scrutiny he was brought down again to four, Orsino ad five, Fiesco nine, and Cam∣peggio, and Medici, some others. On the 5th. the fi Scrutiny was made, and Fiesco had his nine votes still, d'Ostia seven, Santi quattro four, and Valenza, and Bologna, some few. All this while Cardinal Medici, Cousin to Leo, was labouring very hard for to get himself exalted, or at least some person that depended on him; and he did not labour in vain, for he got the promise of 17 of the younger of the Cardinals created a little before by Leo, that they should not any of them give their votes but for him alone, or such as
he should recommend. And being fortify'd in this manner, he did what he was able to make himself Pope; but understanding the antienter Cardinals his Competitors, were labouring as much to the contrary, lest any of them should be too hard for him, he sug∣gested to his Cardinals, that they should give their votes for Cardinal Adriano, call'd Dertusensis, a creature of Leo's, who was then chief Minister in Spain, as having been Tutor to Charles the 5th. The 9th. Scrutiny being come, and the old Cardinals having notice of the young Cardinals resolutions, to prevent their designs, they also gave their words to one another, to give the Cardinal d'Ostia their votes. Insomuch that at the opening of the Scrutiny, there were 15 votes in favour of Adrian, and 14 for Ostia, all of them sticking very close to their parties. Then Cardinal Medici began to propose an Access, and Cardinal San Sisto rising up, said, he could not but side with Adrian in the Access, because he knew him to be a per∣son of virtue, and worth. The Cardinals, Colonna, Monti, Anconitanus, Piccolomini, Jaconacci, Como, Frani, Armellino, and others, follow'd his example; only Cardinal Farnese continued re∣fractory with five or six of his party. Cardinal Santa Croce interpos'd, and exhorted him to master his passions, and submit in a business already determin'd, to which Farnese reply'd, he would not do it, because he knew not the person, he having never been at Rome. Medici told Santa Croce, that there was no need of desiring an Access, seeing the greatest part were already agreed. And thus Adrian was Elected, and being absent, publish'd to the people by his own proper name, which he would not change, after he had notice of what was done; but made himself be call'd Adrian the 6th. After this, Embassadors were dispatch'd to him, to give him advice of his creation, and to exhort him to hasten his return. In the mean time, it was decreed, that three Car∣dinals, exchanging from month to month, according to the Order of Preceedence, should take the Government upon them, and reside in the Vatican. And thus the Electi∣on of Adrian was concluded, after a suspence of two months and certain dayes from the vacancy of the See, by the great differences amongst the Cardinals. The Life of this Pope was but short, having injoy'd the Papacy but a year and a half, he dying in the Vatican the 14th. of September 1523. with little disquiet to the people, or the old Courtiers, who hated him exceedingly for the sowerness of his humour, and to speak truth, there fell out several things in his Papacy, so much against the benefit of the Publique, that they went about the Streets crying out as loud as they could Semper de Sextis Roma diruta fuit: for all that they gave him a most noble Funeral, after which the Cardinals enter'd the Conclave the 26 of September, to the number of 30. There were two which aspir'd principally at the Popedome Julius di Medici, and Pompeius Colonna, who had almost all the votes shared betwixt them. The other pre∣tenders, were Alexander Farnese, Francisco Orsino, Ostia, Paceto, and some others, but their hopes was only in case, that if they could not agree (without which it was im∣possible to create a Pope) they would be constrain'd to make choice of a third, and then each of them hop'd to be the man. These two Cardinals Medici, and Colonna, were the most potent pretenders, and perhaps made the strongest Competition for the Papacy, that was ever made in the Conclave. Medici, in respect of the great number of Cardinals, his Clyents, and partakers, and in regard of the freshness of the memory of Pope Leo his Cousin, was thought to be something the more potent of the two; however Colonna ballanc'd him by the interest he had in Charles the 5th. But in their nobility, faculties, dignities, and reputations, there was no great difference. By reason of these differences therefore betwixt these two, the creation was prolong'd two months, and four days to the great prejudice of the Publique. All the old Cardinals were favourers of Colonna, and all the young, of Medici: it was certainly believ'd, that Colonna would have been first forc'd to lay down his pretensions, by reason that Medici was look'd upon as the stronger, had not the old pretenders, stuck close to the exclusion of Medici, and all, that the Papacy might fall into the hands of a third person, and they have their share; very good charity indeed. There were in this time above 25 Scrutinies to no purpose, their Votes being divided, sometimes three, sometimes four, and many times those Cardinals who thought of it the
least, had ten, however they went on still, multiplying their Scrutinies, so that Cardinal Orsino being call'd one day to a Scrutiny, To what purpose (said he) do we continue our Scrutinies? we are the same yesterday and to day; there is no new thing set on foot; Colonna is firm in his resolutions, not to give place to Medici; Medici is as obstinate, not to give that cordial to Colonna, and we do but lose time to go up and down making of Scrutinies. During these controversies, there were many little practises contriv'd by the Cardinal Farnese, and as many by Cardinal Santi quattro, but in point of the Keyes, all were fru∣strated; for no sooner was any person propounded by Medici, but Colonna was ready to excuse him; and on the contrary, no sooner did Colonna recommend, but they were as well prepar'd to obstruct it. The people suffering many inconveniences in the mean time, cry'd out from without, that they should make an end of the Election; and the more zealous of the Cardinals declar'd in a full Congregation, that it was high time to get out of that prison; to which Medici reply'd, he was ready, and Colonna said the same; after which there was no body reply'd: At length Cardinal Medici seeing himself oppos'd by Colonna with all his power, and to be out of all hope almost of gaining his design, he thought to do something that might push for it, and indeed it was his Master-piece. He propos'd Cardinal Orsino, a capital Enemy of Colonna's, and who had also some friends amongst the Creatures of Colonna; however Medici's design was not to make Orsino Pope, but to fright Colonna into an agreement with himself. To this end he caus'd it to be spread abroad, that Orsino had several practises on foot, and accordingly all the Cardinals of his party being together one morning, he pretended to go along with them towards the great Hall; and being ask'd by the way by Cardinal Monti, in these words, Whither are we going? he reply'd, To make Ursin Pope: This being reported to Colonna, and he fearing such a design, believing certainly they would make Ʋrsin (his profess'd Enemy) Pope, he call'd all the Cardinals his friends toge∣ther, and desired them to give their Votes for Medici; and having done that, he went out immediately to find him, who was passing away the time in the Gallery, in expecta∣tion perhaps of what happen'd; as soon as he saw him, he said, Your most illustrious Lordship is making Ursin Pope, and I am come to make you Pope; and embracing him he cry'd out with a loud voice, Long live Cardinal Medici the New Pope, which was follow'd by the common acclamation f he rest of the Cardinals: and from thence passing into the Chappel, they made their Election immediately; after the Ceremony of Ado∣ration, he declar'd he would be call'd Clement the 7th. and accordingly with that name he was publish'd to the people, the 19th. of November 1523. In the time of this Pope, Rome was sack'd by the Army of the Duke of Borbon, in the year 1527. the 14th. of May, and he made a Prisoner for several months in the Colledge of the Spaniards, although some will have it, that he was besieg'd only, and not imprison'd. His Pontificate was sometimes with good fortune, and some∣times with bad; he govern'd ten years, and dy'd in the year 1534. the 25th. of September. Some few dayes before his death, finding his end approach, he call'd all the Cardinals then in Rome together, and with a Paternal affection, recommended to them the brevity of the Conclave, protesting that if the Papacy had been hereditary, he would not have left it to any body but Alexander Farnese, because he did not see a Cardinal more fit than he, to govern the Christian Commonwealth, or to defend and conserve the Pontifi∣cal dignity, and therefore he intreated Cardinal Medici particularly, to imploy all his interest in his behalf. Clement being dead, and the Cardinals excited, partly by the perswasions of the dying Pope, and partly inform'd of the excellent qualities, experience, prudence, and learning of the said Alexander, they resolv'd to choose him Pope after a new way, before they began the o sequies of Clement, and without entring into the Conclave at all; but this resolution was constantly impugned by Alexander, he begging of the Cardinals, that they would not transgress and invert the Orders observ'd in the Elections of the former Popes.
By this means it was concluded, the Exequies should be celebrated first, for the space of the usual dayes; Farnese in the interim keeping close in his house, to avoid the ap∣plause of the people as he went up and down the City, every body looking on him as al∣ready created. The 11th. of October the Exequies being over, 35. Cardinals went into the Conclave, being come from several Neighbouring Provinces, to be present at the Election of the New Pope: There was not much time lost in the Visits of the Ambassa∣dors, every one knowing already who was design'd to be Pope. The same night Cardinal Medici remembring the instructions of Clement, ell into discourse (but more for form, than any thing else) with the Cardinal of Lorrain, who was in great esteem in the Sacred Colledge, and with the Cardinal Trivl, who had then he Government of the French faction: In this manner these three, follow'd by all the Cardinals their friends, went about two a clock in the night to the Chamber of Farnese, who was then at rest▪ and putting themselves upon their knees, they saluted him Pope, and adored him, before his Election; which likewise was perform'd the next morning betimes, by a general concurrence of Votes, and being ask'd his name, he desir'd to be call'd Paul, and accordingly he was proclaim'd to the people by the name of Paul the 3d. In short, there has not been any Pope created, either before or after him, with a more sincere, frank, unanimous Election than this, not protracted by envy, not corrupted by ambition, not precipitated by fear; and that which is more considerable, in this Scrutiny, all the Cardinal; put in their Polizys open, so as every one might easily read what his Companion did write. There was one Cardinal only, and he of no mean authority, who being envious of Farnese, aid some petty designs against him, but they were all to no purpose; Farnese having notice of it, went to him, not to desire his Vote, but sharply to reprehend him, for speaking so bitterly against him; the Cardinal being affrighted, hum∣bled himself to Farnese, and with much ado reconcil'd himself, that he might not remain his Enemy perpetually. But all that I have said yet of the of the Election of the Pope, has been nothing but a meer superficies of the policies of the Court: the greatest differences among the Cardi∣nals being introduc'd into the Conclave, after the death of Paul the third, by reason of the introduction of the factions of the Crowns, and the Nephews. The Princes would not have been so busie with the interest of the Conclaves, if the Popes had been contented to have been Christs Vicar, in the Government of Souls only; but seeing they thought good to joyn the Sword to the Cross, the Princes moved by the interest of the Sword, have interested themselves in the interest of the Cross; so that as the Popes have render'd themselves considerable, and great in Temporals, and the command of the people; so the Kings, to whom God has given the Government of the Earth, have been oblig'd to have an eye over that Temporal State which is taken from them by the Spirituals. In the time when the Popes were poor, and had nothing in their hands but the Keys of Saint Peter, which I call the Spirituals; the Princes medled in the affairs of the Papacy, either as Friends who were zealous of the Service of God, or as perverse Adversaries to the Di∣vine Worship. But since the Popes became rich, and inach'd up the Sword of Saint Paul into their hands, the Princes are concern'd to see that this Sword be not unsheath'd to the prejudice of their States, not to say of their persons, though the Popes do too often offend against them. In short, the love of God, and the interest of his Holy Church, for a long time elect∣ed the Popes, by the Votes of the Cardinals; now adayes, the interest of Crowns, and Princes, the policies of the World, and the reasons of State, if they do not choose them absolutely, at least they precede the interests of God, and his Church; and this I am sure, but few Cardinals with a good Conscience can deny. This way of proceeding so blindly in the Elections of the Pope, has prevail'd for above three hundred years; but for an Age past, it is so usual and rooted, that it seems a necessary virtue. Now the Cardinals who are ingag'd both to the Princes and the Church, do in the Elections of the Popes, stand as it were in a Precipice, and are in danger of running themselves upon Scylla, to avoid Charibdis, or upon Charibdis, to avoid Scylla, and this is it that obliges the Cardinals many times to endure imprisonment in the Conclave several dayes together.
And to render the Election of the Pope more tedious, and pernicious, that is, more adhaesive to the world, there is another thing introduc'd likewise into the Conclave, within this last Age, and that is the faction of the Nephews, which prevails dayly, and overgrows both the factions of Spain, of France, and all the Princes in Christen∣dome. The faction of the Nephews was the cause (as we shall show in its proper place) that after the death of Ʋrban, and Innocent, the Cardinals remain'd several weeks and months shut up in the Conclave, without being able to agree, the interest of the Nephews over∣powring the intreest of the Crowns, which ought to have been the greater of the two. And now behold the liberty of the Cardinals inslav'd to the Tyranny of the Nephews; the Ambition of the Nephews, Lording it over the Priviledges of the Church. Is it ne∣cessary then that young men be preferr'd before old? that Ganimed be ador'd before Ju∣piter? Is it reasonable to exclude those who can say, and speak truth, Quadraginta annis proximus fui generationi huic, and to admit them who but begin to say the Introibo in domum tuum Domine? Must it be then, that if in the Sacred Colledge there be found one Cardinal worthy of the Papacy, must it be (I say) that he must stand depriv'd, and uncapable, because he was not created by the last Pope? In this manner things are now carry'd, because they will have it so; but doubtless it ought to be other∣wise. At present (and for a hundred years past) the vote of the Cardinals is not free; the last takes place of the first, and the first are forc'd to give place to the last. The Here∣ticks laugh, and the Catholicks laugh, and some of those Romans who are neither Ca∣tholicks nor Hereticks, make Pasquins upon the subject; a subject indeed too scanda∣lous and reproachfull to the whole Colledge, but especially to those Cardinals, who laying aside their own liberties, and the liberty of the Church, adhere so close to the interest of the Nephews: manifesting thereby, that it was not their merit advanc'd them to the Cardinalitial Dignity, but their Devotion to the Nephews, and pronouncing themselves Cardinals of the Nipotisme, rather than of the Holy Church, seeing they do not serve the Church, but the Nipotisme. Some few dayes past, I had an accidental occasion of discoursing with a certain Prelate, or Abbot of Rome, who amongst variety of other things, relating to the interests of the Court of Rome, happen'd in the process of his discourse to declare, that he had been Conclavist to a Cardinal in the last Conclave of Chigi. I, out of my natural curio∣sity, and in order to my History, which I was then a compiling, giving thanks to Heaven for so propitious an opportunity, beseech'd the Abbot very earnestly, that he would inform me of some particulars touching the interests of the Princes in the Election of the Popes. The Abbot fetch'd a sigh at my request, and gave me this answer. Sir, in the Election of the Pope, the least thing that prevails, is the interest of the Princes, and especially of the Crowns; if you knew at what rate things are carry'd in the Conclave, you'd bless your self. There is not a word of any thing but the Ne∣phews; and the interests of the Crowns, are us'd but as a meer shadow, to the interest of the Nipotisme; for my part I believe the Princes, weary to see the interests of the Nephews preferr'd to theirs, in a matter of that consequence, will leave Rome to the Cardinals; and the Cardinals in Rome; who finding themselves depriv'd of the riches the Princes give them to defend their interest, will every one cry out without doubt, Quid faciam miser, quia Dominus meus aufert a me villicationem? And this I am sure of, that if ever the Princes shall resolve to take that course, their interests in the Conclave will be greater than they are now, which (if not nothing at all) are at least so little, they know not where to find them themselves. Certainly if things be consider'd impartially, it will be found that the Papacy is not Elective, as it seems in appearance, but Hereditary to the Nephews, for as much as the Nephews of the deceas'd Pope, are they which govern all in the Conclave, and will have it, one way or other, in spight of all those who endeavour to oppose them. But because a business of such importance desires better proofs, I shall proceed according to the order of Elections, and by experience of the successes of the Conclaves since Paul the third,
render the Reader so well satisfy'd and inform'd, that he may himself confess, the Papacy is now become Hereditary to the Nipotism of Rome. Paul the third pass'd from this, to a better life, on the 10th. of November 1549. and his obequies being perform'd, the Lord Cardinals to the number of 47. enter'd into the Conclave; they were divided into three factions, the first for France▪ govern'd by the Cardinal Guise; the second for the Emperor, manag'd by the Cardinal of Trent; and the third of the Creatures of Paul, conducted by Cardinal Farnese, a young man, but as well vers'd and experienc'd in Politick affairs, as was to be expected from his age, and something better. Amongst the Cardinals of the faction of Farnese, there were certain others, promoted in the time of Paul, and which is more considerable, they were able men, and mature both in judgement and age; by which means this faction being the greatest of the three, was courted and caress'd by both the other. At the beginning of the Conclave, the reputation of the Cardinal Farnese, began to be very great, all people acknowledging it impossible to put an end to the Conclave, without his concurrence; so that each of the two factions took what pains they could to draw him to their side; but because (to oblige his Creatures the more to him) he had de∣clar'd to do nothing but by the deliberation and consent of all his aforesaid Creatures together, Farnese, being weary of the importunities of the Imperialists, and the French, reolv'd before he engag'd himself, to consuit certain of his Creatures, more judicious than the rest, who fail'd not to advise him, with great reason and solidity. Some of them declar'd, that in case he would joyn with either of the factions, it ought not to be with the Emperors, for his reputation sake, because every body knew that Caesar was consenting to the death of Lewis Farnese, and for that reason he ought to incline to the French; but privately, and handsomly, lest the Emperor being provok'd, should attempt something in his passion, to the prejudice of him and his Family. Others advis'd him to declare openly for the French faction, and that to frighten the Emperor, who would not probably be provok'd to any violence, seeing him protected by the King of France, who would not fail to recover the States of Parma, and Placenza, for Octavio Farnese, which were in the possession of the Emperor, and by him illegally usurp'd from the said Octavio, who was the true Proprietor. To this others reply'd, that the Emperor was by no means to be abandon'd, for the French; that the Emperor, who was at that time very successful, would be able to ruine the whole Family of the Farnese, before any remedy could be brought, yea though the Pope himself was of his side; that the nature of the Emperor was such, that the more opposition he saw, and the stronger the Princes were confederate, the more was his in∣dignation and magnanimity excited; it having been found by experience, that neither  Pope, nor the King of France, have been ever able to give him the least apprehension. Thy added, that no notice was to be taken of the death of Duke Lewis, for the Emperor ha siciently expiated that, by giving Margaret his natural Daughter, to Octavio Far∣n in Marriage. But the greatest part were of opinion, that seeing their faction was potent of it self, and stronger than both the other, there was no reason to joyn with either of them, but that they should proceed to the Election of their Pope out of their own number, for the glory of Paul, his Unkle, and the encrease of his own reputation; whereby he would  a point, the Nephews of other Popes have not been able, or have not known how to obtain. Farnese hearing all these arguments, and many more like them, resolv'd to stand neuter, and to make a Pope in spight of all opposition, after his own mind, that is, out of his own Creatures. The Imperialists, who did not willingly consent to make any of the Cardinals Pope, who were created by Paul, being desperate of success by the old men, began to promote the interest of Cardinal Poole, a Creature of Pauls 'tis true, but very well affected to the Emperor, and because the said Poole had many friends in the faction of Farnese, they look'd upon the business as done. The Cardinals Sforza, and Maffei, great friends to Poole both of them, but one an Imperialist, and the other a Farnesian, were of opinion,
that they ought not put in their designs so suddenly for Poole; but that it was better to let the fury French spend it self in the Conclave, to the end that his enemies might tyre them∣selves out in the Exclusion of other persons. This way would have doubtless been the best, and the Imperialists confess'd it, when it was too late, for they making no account of the Frenches excluding of Poole, would needs have it brought to a Scrutiny: and to make the business yet worse, the same day they enter'd into the Conclave, there arriv'd two French Cardinals more, who were not there when the rest enter'd. In short, the French oppos'd him might and main, charging him with Heresie, and so uncapable of the Popedome. But Pooles friends knew well enough how to clear him of that, so they came to a Scrutiny, in which (with the Access) there were found 26 votes in favour of Poole, who ought to have had 33 of the 49 Cardinals: and thus all Poole's hopes vanish'd though the Emperours Faction attempted it again. The Exclusion of this person proceeded not so much from the opposition of the French, as from the envy of the antienter Cardinals, who could not endure to see themselves ex∣cluded from a concurrence in that dignity; esteeming it a great injury to give their con∣sents to Poole, and be themselves past by, and rejected: they opposed him therefore very vigorously, making great practices against him, drawing away from their side certain of the younger, most furious Cardinals, and most desirous of Novelties, which were they that made the greatest noise. In this manner they went up and down, contriving new designs, now for this Cardi∣nal, anon for another, every one endeavouring to try his fortune under the protection of his friends; amongst the rest, Cardinal Salviati, upon the exclusion of Poole, conceiv'd some hopes, but it was not long before he met opposition, Cardinal Farnese not en∣during him, as he was an enemy to the Emperour; the said Salviati having amongst all the Imperialists, only Sforza of his side. The Cardinals Sfondrato, of Lorrain, of Fer∣rara, San Macello, Ridolfi, and even the young Fry, put themselves forward one after another, but they were all excluded, some for one reason, some for another. The Election being so tedious, the chief of the three Factions met to consider of some way of finishing the Conclave, and the rather, because the people suffer'd much by so long a Vacancy of the See. They made an agreement therefore amongst themselves, that nine Cardinals should be named, of each Faction three, but that the nomination should be made by two only of the Faction of France, and that afterwards it should be lawfull for the Imperialists to take one of the said nine at their pleasure, and that the rest should be oblig'd to concur. Of the French Faction accordingly were named, the Cardinals of Lorrain, Tornone, and Bellai. Of the Imperial Faction, Theatino, Monti, and San Marcello, and three others of the other Faction, Salviati, Ridolfi, and Trani; and so the said nomination was publish'd to the Imperialists by Cardinal Sforza; who would not only not except of any of the nine, but finding they could not succeed in the person of Cardinal Poole, they began to have new designs in the behalf of Cardinal Sfondrato, but they were as in∣effectual as Pooles, or the French designs for the Cardinal of Lorrain. The Imperialists refusal of the nine persons which were named, gave great offence to the two other Factions, insomuch that it was propos'd by the French to the Farnesians, to unite amongst themselves, and to choose a Pope in spight of the Imperialists; but they could not agree in the choise of their persons, because there were several Cardinals amongst the Farnesians who were oblig'd to the Emperour, and much afraid of his dis∣pleasure. In the mean while, several Cardinals joyn'd with Cardinal Sforza, and endeavour'd what they could possibly in favour of Salviati, a creature of Leo the tenths; and after many turnings and windings, to affright Cardinal Farnese, who was resolute in his ad∣haerance to his own creatures, they spread abroad a report one night in the Conclave, that Salviati the next morning should be made Pope, on whose side they had voices enough. Farnese took the alarm, and was really affraid it was true, insomuch that he went away immediately, half undress'd, to the Chambers of his Confidents, imparting his apprehension, but was advis'd by them all to stand firm; and not to fear those ru∣mours at all, because they were nothing but juglings and artifices to discover the intrigue;
and amongst the rest, Cardinal Maffei, and Cornelio, assur'd him there should no Pope be chosen in that Colledge without his approbation; and that therefore he should for∣bear speaking in that manner with every body, and declare to all people, that he would not condescend to any, who was not one of his own well-deserving creatures. Forasmuch as the designs on all hands were grown desperate, every one having try'd his fortune in vain, Cardinal Sforza went to Farnese, and told him, that several Car∣dinals, weary of the tediousness of the Conclave, were resolv'd to create a Pope against the consent of the Cardinals of the Factions, if within two dayes time the said Cardinal Farnese was not resolved to conclude upon some body; and propos'd Cardinal San Mar∣cello, a man of an exemplary life, no small wisdome, and one who had many friends in all the Factions. At length Farnese being resolv'd to finish the Conclave, he bent his whole mind upon Cardinal Di Monti of the County of Arezzo, and the rather, because the Imperialists dispairing to obtain their designs for a person more affectionate to them, were resolv'd to joyn in the person of Monti; and the Cardinal Ferrara, not only gave his own vote for Monti, but promis'd to procure him several more. At this time, the minds of the greatest part of the Cardinals, appear'd to be inclin'd to the promotion of Monti, and he should have been saluted Pope in his Chamber one night, if the Cardinal Guise had not withdrawn several of the Cardinals, who being an enemy to Monti, made several bold attempts against him, and amongst the rest, he went to Cardinal Sforza, and oblig'd himself to bring several of his friends and adhe∣rents to Cardinal Salviati (his Kinsmans) side, if he would be content but to own the design; but Sforza told him, it was not time now (he having ingag'd himself to Far∣nese) to give his vote for Monti, which was almost concluded, and he could not fail to be Pope, by any means whatsoever. Cardinal Guise being astonish'd at his answer, entreated Cardinal Sforza, that he would be a means to reconcile him to Monti; Sforza conducted him to Farneses Cham∣ber, and went along with them both to find out the Cardinal Monti, reconciling them so effectually, that of an enemy, Guise became of his party, and brought all the voices he could get to it. And thus, after a tedious discussion of the Cardinals, i the space of three months, during the vacency of the See, Gio Maria del Monti was created Pope, the 13th. of Frebruary 1550. about three a clock in the night, by the name of Julius the 3d. And in this mauner, the Faction of the Nipotisme was introduc'd into the Conclave, having overpower'd the Factions of the Emperour, and King of France, with no small re∣putation and glory. On the 23 of March 1555. Julius the 3d. dyed, after he had Reigned five years, and some dayes; after which, the Cardinals to the number of 37. enter'd into the Conclave the 4th. of April, divided into two Factions; one of them Imperialists, supported by Cardinal Santo Fiore, Mantua, and Trento; the other French, and manag'd for the greatest part by Cardinal Ferrara; but there were several Cardinals likewise, which stood neuters, and comply'd some time with one, and sometimes with another. Julius his Faction was not considerable at all, there being but few Cardinals created by him, and which is worse, they were divided here and there, and not actuated by any one, so that there was no mention of that Faction. The Cardinal Ferrara, endeavour'd the exclusion of every body, in hopes to obtain it for himself; and Cardinal Mantua, and Trento, follow'd the same steps, thinking of nothing but their particular interests, having past their words one to the other, to give one another their utmost assistance, and the rather, because the Emperour had recom∣mended them both, with equal affection; if they fail'd, he propos'd Cardinal Santo Fiore, who was principal of the Imperial Faction, but thought little of being Pope, see∣ing things were so ill dispos'd for his interest. On the seventh they had the first Scrutiny, not that their minds were bent upon any body, but in pursuance of the Pontifical decrees, which required frequent Scrutinies, as likewise in honour to the pretending Cardinals, as indeed it happen'd, some of them ha∣ving more votes, some fewer, Ferrara amongst the rest, having ten. Cardinal Farnese (who had the Title of Saint Angelo) considering in the mean time,
and observing the many apparent difficulties, and obstructions by the creatures of Julius, and that by consequence the Popedome must needs fall among some of his creatures; he thought it but fit for him also to do his part, that some of his Confidents might gain it; and accordingly fixing his eye upon Cardinal Marcello Cervino de Montepulciano: who carryed the Title of Santa Croce, and was advanc'd by Paul his Unckle, he impar∣ted his design to his friends, and they contriv'd the way to exalt him. Cardinal Sforza had already set his brains a working for Santa Croce; but when he understood that Saint Angelo agreed with him in his desire to make him Pope, he rejoyc'd very much, and was incourag'd the more because he knew Farneses authority in the Conclave was not small. In this manner therefore, Farnese on the one side, and Sforza▪ on the other, began to mannage their contrivances more strictly, and that with so much order and se∣cresie, that they were agreed before the Adversary knew any thing of it; and the way was thus. They understood very well the prejudice the Emperour had to Santa Croce, and they had discover'd the Imperialists a version to a person so odious to the Emperour. Besides, Cardinal Ferrara being requested by them, as chief of the French Faction, that he would joyn in the creation o Santa Croce, he gave them this answer, That he had many things to think of before he would give his consent for Santa Croce. They seeing themselves refus'd by the heads of both the Factions, and knowing that in this last, Cardinal Cervino had many secret friends, they contriv'd to hit the mark, without communicating with the said heads, who fail'd not in the mean time to do what they could to prevent their design. They sent therefore Cardinal Lottino to Santa Croce, to understand which Cardinals he had most confidence would assist him; Santa Croce reply'd, it was a hard matter to make a judgement of that in a Conclave, where oftentimes friends pretended to be enemies, and enemies friends; nevertheless considering the offers many had spontani∣ously made him, and the course he had taken to gain the favour of others, he did be∣lieve he had twice as many Cardinals as would serve to make him Pope; and to that purpose he writ down with his own hand the names of the Cardinals, in which the thought he might confide; but he had not time to finish it, Cardinal Cesenna a great friend of Ferrara's, coming in▪ and he being cautious of giving him any caue of suf∣pition, he took the note, and gave it to Lottino, with these words, Take it, take it, these are sufficient. The note being receiv'd, the Cardinal Saint Angelo, and the Cardinal Chamberlaine, began to consider, of so great a number, what was sufficient to make him Pope; and ha∣ving found it with ease, they selected eight of the greatest authority, most powerfull to perswade, and most affctionate to Santa Croce: the rest of those who were written in the Note, they distributed to the said eight, to this two, to that three, to another four, as they knew they were friends, either to the one, or the other (a most remarkable poli∣cy) with express charge, never to forsake them, but to conduct them fairly into the Cha∣pel, where the scrutiny was to be made, and then to speak to their heads, and letting them know their design, to intreat them that they would comport themselves with pru∣dence and peace: and indeed every one of ehe eight executed their charges with that or∣der and decorum, there was not one of the contrary party understood it, but the Cardi∣nal of Cesena, who meeting Lottino in the Gallery, whisper'd him in the Ear, and told him, I know your design, and am pleas'd with it, tell the Cardinal Chamberlaine from me, if you please, that I also will be for Santa Croce. They sent Lottino to confer with Cardinal Trento likewise, who had many times de∣clar'd, that he would sooner give his vote to Ferrara, the head of the French Faction, than to Santa Croce, who was a Creature of Paul's: nevertheless Lottino perswaded so with him, that he consented at last, abandoning all his private resentments. Trento consulted with certain Imperialists, who were all of opinion, that though they did con∣descend to the Election of Santa Croce, the Emperour could have no cause of apprehen∣sion, seeing he was a person of inferiour condition, and by consequence without hope of assistance, but from the State Ecclesiastick, which was weak and unable, by reason of the impositions of the last Popes. Trento being satisfy'd with this answer, return'd this answer to Lottino, that he also did concur with the Cardinal Chamberlain, to make San∣ta Croce Pope.
All these things being related to Ferrara, who endeavoured his exclusion as much as possible, being to that purpose retir'd into the Chappel of San Sxtus, full of fear and anxiety to see a Pope created in his presence, in despight of him. He went with Lottino, who was come to speak with him, into the Chappel of Paulina, where the others were, and declar'd himself willing to concur with Santa Croce, to the great sa∣tisfaction of them all. The conclusion being ascertain'd in this manner, the Cardinals Farnese, and Sforza, would needs have Cardinal Santa Croce, taken from his Chamber, and conducted to the Chappel by the Cardinals of Trent, and of Mantua; which gave some little jealousie to Ferrara, which he was forc'd to swallow, as time requir'd. In the Scrutiny there were but three contrary votes, which were not so refractory, but they came with great cheerfulness to the Adoration. And in this manner it was Marcellus Cervinus was created Pope after the See had been vacant 17 dayes, which Election fell out the 9th of April, he being unwilling to alter his name, was publish'd by the name of Marcellus the second. And thus you have the Papacy hereditary to the Faction of Paul, the second time; behold now the Farnesian Ni∣potisme making a Pope again, at their own pleasures. The dayes of Marcellus were very short, for he dy'd the first of May, which was 21 dayes after his creation. The shortness of his life was the occasion that the same Car∣dinals were present, who had been in Julius his Conclave, and with the same conduct of Factions; unless in what I am about to say. There enter'd 45 Cardinals into the Conclave; a greater number than was in Julius his, because many were come a far off to be present at Marcellus his Election, and thought good to continue where they were till the creation of a new Pope. The 15th. of May at night they enter'd into the Conclave, in which day, they did nothing but give Audience to the Princes Ambassadors, and distribute such Orders as were necessary. The Cardinal Julius della Corgna, Bishop of Perugia, and Nephew to Julius the 3d. who had not regarded the forming of Factions in the preceeding Conclave, being advis'd by some of his friends, he resolved to make himself head of those Cardinals which were created by his Unckle, and he found so many of them as were sufficient for an exclusion, who were call'd by the rest Julianists. Farnese on the other side, being desirous to conserve the reputation he had had in two Conclaves before, intreated the Cardinals which were the creatures of Paul his Grand∣father, not to desert him, but to follow him unanimously in fixing the Election upon one of his creatures, his eyes being still upon Cardinal Pole, for whom he had alwayes an affection, and taken much pains in his behalf in the Conclave of Paul. And forasmuch as the Cardinal of Corgna, to make himself more strong, had joyn'd with the chief of the Imperialists, promising to concur with them in what ever should be for their satis∣faction, if they would oblige him by choosing one of the creatures of his Unckle Julius; Farnese combin'd on the other hand, with the chief of the French, to fortifie his own Faction thereby, and make the Julianists the weaker. The first point Farnese endeavour'd to weather, was to make Cardinal Poole Pope, but he found two great oppositions; the first was, that amongst the French Cardinals, there were some of them so averse to Poole, that they openly declar'd they would sooner lay down their Caps, than give their voices for him; the second was, that even those Car∣dinals who were friends to Poole, were scrupulous of consenting, because he was then in England, whence he could neither come, nor go, without prejudice to the Church, and infinite inconvenience to such as should be deputed to conduct him to Rome; to which sons he was forc'd to submit. The Cardinal of Perugia in the mean time manag'd his designs with the same vigour▪ to make one of the Julianists Pope, and that out of an animosity he had against Cardinal Farnese, who being us'd to give Laws to the Conclave, disdain'd any others creature but his own. He propos'd therefore to the Imperialists, Cardinal Giacomo Pir d Nizza, a person deserving in some measure from the Emperour, and a great friend to all the chief of the French, and the business went so far, that many went towards the Chap∣pel to make a Scrutiny, there being votes enough.
Farnese could not easily brook to see a Pope made by any hands but his own, and therefore though it was told him that Nizza was created already, he resolv'd immedi∣ately without the least diminution in his courage, to hinder the Election, by diverting it upon some person amongst the Imperialists themselves, and he propos'd Fano at first; but he refus'd to serve for a tryal in that Conjuncture, not being willing to ingage him∣self, when he was sure to meet with infinite obstructions. The envy of Farnese increasing hourly, he thought he might overcome that difficulty, by proposing of Caraffa, by an excess of malice, doing violence to himself, for he was alwayes averse to Caraffa's exaltation; and it is most certain, that his friendship and cor∣respondence was greater with Nizza, than with Caraffa: yet to shew himself a man of authority, and not seem to be over-power'd by Julius della Corgna, he was contented to take the Papacy out of the hands of his friend, and to bestow it upon his enemy; but in this the mysteries of the Conclave were known. Caraffa being a Neapolitan, was subject to the Emperour, however, he held great cor∣respondence with the French Faction, who no sooner understood the proposition of Far∣nese; but suspending the Election of Nizza, which was already preparing in the Chap∣pel, without diving into the bottome of the business, 25 Cardinals ran presently to Ca∣raffa's Chamber, by whom he suffer'd himself to be brought immediately to the Chap∣pel, without any security of his Election. But God, who had ordain'd an end different from that, which even they that conducted him had imagin'd, in this sudden and extem∣pore Election, caus'd all those propitious accidents to fall out, which contributed to the good fortune of Caraffa. Many of the Cardinals were astonish'd at the suddenness of the rumour, and went to∣wards the Chappel, imagining Poole had been chosen; but finding the face of things clear otherwise, there wonder was increas'd: amongst the rest, Cardinal Morone per∣ceiving the business, cry'd out with a loud voice, What extravagance is this? Farnese will have one of his enemies to be made Pope, the Imperialists, one excluded by the Empe∣rour, as being too much a friend to the French, and the French, a Subject of the Emperours, who may upon consideration of his family, desert the interest of the French: if it be so, it is Gods pleasure Caraffa be Pope, and therefore I'le not be against it. The Imperial Cardinals who joyn'd with Farnese, deserted their heads, who refus'd to concur, and us'd their utmost power to impede the Election; but God Almighty who had decreed in the secrets of his Providence, that the Papacy should fall upon Caraffa, took away all means to prevent it. But those poor Cardinals who were the first that put it forwards, had no reason to triumph, for the Emperour being incens'd, he punish'd their Purses, took away several of their Abbeys, and Benefices, and some of them es∣cap'd not without Personal affronts; but be that as it will, the good Caraffa obtain'd the Popedome, when he did not expect it, calling himself Paul the fourth, as the first fruits of his gratitude to Farnese, who went up and down the Conclave triumphing, that the Pontifical dignity was the third time hereditary to the Farnesian Nipotismne, inspight of all the politick reasons of the Cardinals. The Exaltation of this Pope happen'd upon Ascension day, the 23 of May, after seven dayes Conclave, and 22 dayes vacancy of the See, and after fierce, though no long dis∣putes; for Farneses resolution was taken, the whole contrivance laid, and executed, and the Scrutiny perform'd, in seven hours time at the most. Paul lived four years and three months, his Papacy unhappy for the Church, and unfortunate for the people; he dyed the 18th. of August 1559. his house having re∣ceiv'd no small injury by the fury of the people, who cut off the head of the Statue of the said Paul, and drew the body about the Streets of Rome, with great shame to the Pontifical Majesty. About the beginning of September, 42 Cardinals enter'd the Conclave, no other per∣son being before them, but only the Cardinal Queva a Spaniard, who being assured of the Imperialists, sent (by means of his Conclavist) to intreat several other Cardinals to give him their votes, and indeed he found enough of them willing to have made him Pope; whilst others, looking upon him as secure, went and offer'd it themselves, so that the next day after their entrance, they came to a Scrutiny, with confidence he was to be created Pope.
Whilst the Cardinals were writing their Schedules, the Cardinal Capo di ferro an Im∣perialist, turning to those who were next him, (who were Frenchmen) demanded, for whom they gave their Votes; and being answer'd, for the Cardinal della Queva, he began to apprehend whether it was in earnest or not, believing in truth, that all was but words, and that their promises made to Queva, were only to cajole him, and not to make him Pope; whereupon standing up, he demanded the same of the rest of the Cardinals, who all gave him the same answer, that they were for Quiva. Being fortify'd therefore in his former perswasion, he admonish'd them one by one of the Error they were falling into, by reason of their inadvertency, declaring to them the incapacity of the person. Whereupon most of them tore the Schedules in pieces, which they had writ in favour of Queva, and writ others, every one according to his inclina∣tions, several Cardinals being honour'd, some with more, some with fewer Votes; but Queva who had been concluded Pope by them all, had but nine, he attributing the me∣mory of so great an affront, to Cardinal Capo di ferro, who was without doubt the only instrument that prevented his being Pope. Queva being thus defeated in his hopes, Cardinal Cornaro began to set up for himself; he had the Cardinal Pisani in the French faction for his Unkle, and he was himself one of the Imperial, imagining by that means to gain both parties, and indeed there was great probability, many of the Imperialists having pass'd their paroles to Cornaro, and almost all the French to Pisani; but when it came to the point, all their designs came to nothing, for the Imperialists would not trust Cornaro, seeing the concurrence of the French procur'd by his Unkle, nor were the French satisfy'd to see him an Impe∣rialist. After this the French thought to pitch upon the person of Cardinal Turnone, a man certainly the most worthy of the whole Conclave, and being so, the French imagin'd that in the Scrutiny, even Conscience would prevail with many of the Cardinals, and they would give him their Vote, as the most meritorious; and so having joyn'd 24. cer∣tain Votes, they went one day towards the Chappel, secure, as they thought, he would be chosen Pope; and the rather, because many of the Imperialists knowing his deserts, durst not commence any practises against him: But the Italian Cardinals retaining their old fear, of having the Court again transferr'd to Avignon, oppos'd themselves against it: so that in two Scrutinies he had not above half the Votes which were necessary, and to the accession there was not one Italian would go, though the French with their wonted fury obtain'd one; and so Turnone was excluded with the rest. But all these projects and practises, though they were kept on foot for several dayes, were not so considerable, or troublesome to the Conclave, as the designs of Cardinal Carpi, who having only the favour of Paul the third, had such opportunity of making many of the Cardinals his friends, by procuring graces sometimes for this, and sometimes for that, that it came into his head, that he also might run for the prize, with some assu∣rance of success. The first thing he endeavour'd, or at least his friends for him, was to gain the faction of King Philip, which was manag'd by Cardinal Sforza the Chamberlain, and that he obtain'd without much difficulty, as well because he knew how little he was inclin'd to the Crown of France, as in respect of a Marriage which was in Treaty, and promis'd faithfully to be concluded, betwixt a Sister of the said Carpi, and il Signor Paolo Brother to Sforza, which was that which gave the greatest encouragement to Sforza, to procure his creation▪ Two things there were which promoted the Exclusion of this person; the first was, that Farnese, and Trent, Cardinals of the greatest authority, and Principals in the Col∣ledge, being disgusted that Sforza should have the honour to make a Pope, with the faction of King Philip, they began to think it not convenient to consent to such an Election, and therefore they conspir'd against it; which when Sforza had notice of, he declar'd that he did it not with the concurrence of any of the Imperialists; confront∣ing one another in this manner with their particular interests, to the great prejudice of the Publique. The other opposition proceeded from the enmity Cardinal Ferrara profess'd, who
being out of favour with Paul, kept himself out of Rome all the time of his Pontificate, out of an opinion, that Carpi contributed thereto; and from hence being jealous of the greatness of the said Carpi, and adding thereto a suspicion he had, that Carpi had but small affection for the King of France, whose faction he manag'd with principal authority, he set himself against his creation from the very first: But being press'd by the instances of the Grand Duke, who order'd Lottino to negotiate the exaltation of Carpi, in his be∣half; he excus'd himself, by saying, that he would not oblige himself by any promise, in a matter of such importance to the most Christian King, without communicating with the Cardinal of Turnone, who was not far off of Rome, and expected from day to day: Turnone being arriv'd, and Ferrara importun'd by Lottino to go over to Carpi, he reply'd, that the Cardinal Turnone thought it he should attend the coming of Cardinal Guise, who came with particular instructions from his Majesty. At length, after a months expectation, Guise being arrived, and prest for a resoluti∣on, things not being able to stand any longer without a Pope; and understanding there were gret clamours and exclamations without, Cardinal Ferrara, oblig'd as it were by the faith of a promise, declar'd that he would not concur with Carpi, but with the Cardinal of Mantua; a thing which succeeded beyond the expectation and opinion of Sforza, who had attended so long in expectation of Turnone and Guise, and fill'd the Conclave with confusion and controversie, Ferrara receiving no small curses from Car∣pi's friends. At last Farnese resolv'd couragiously to put an end to the Conclave, and without giv∣ing time to Mantua's friends to corroborate themselves in this noise, and distraction, he gave himself over, with the help of his confidents, to set up the Cardinal Medici, who immediately upon his assistance was created Pope, after 4 months and some days vacan∣cy of the See, with the votes of 44 Cardinals, at 7 a clock at night, on the 24 of De∣cember; and having made choice of the name of Pius the 4th. he was the next morning betimes publish'd, with great joy to the people; But above all to Cardinal Farnese, who triumph'd to see the Papacy the fourth time at his beck, and the Farnesian Nipo∣tisme, Conquerours in four several Conclaves. Pope Pius the 4th: Govern'd six years, and dy'd the 10th. of December 1565. and on the 2d. of January the Cardinals entred into the Conclave, to the number of 49. a number greater than had been formerly seen, which gave many occasion to believe, that amongst such a multitude, there must needs be great difference of opinions, the Election by consequence long, and the disturbances in the Conclave infinite. But experience prov'd, they were all mistaken, and because they did not conside, that 'tis the heads of the factions which make the Pope, and not the number of Cardinals, who follow the heads commonly, and (with respect be it spoken) 'tis upon their reso∣lutions the tediousness or expedition of the Conclave depends. And truly they who understood the mysteries and affairs of the Conclave, concluded this would be short, and without much contect, by reason of the fewness of the facti∣ons therein, for neither the Emperour nor the King of France, had any at all there. The Emperour had none, because he was immediately upon his assumption to the Empire, environ'd with so many difficulties, he had no time to think of the interests of Rome, the King of France had none, because he was very young, his Kingdom harrassed with civil and intestine Wars, and his Mother a Stranger; King Philip, though free and at leisure, and the example of Charles the 5th. fresh in his memory, who took more care to watch over the proceedings at Rome, then of all the rest, car'd not to give himself any trouble, but left that whole business to the Cardinals. In this manner the Conclave was divided into two Factions of the Nephews only, the one of the Creatures, and other friends of Paul the 3d. which was guided by the Car∣dinal Alexander Farnese; the other of the Creatures of Pius the 5th. managed by Car∣dinal Charl Borromeo, Nephew to the said Pope, each of them resolved not to let the Papacy slip out of the hands of their own Creatures: The Cardinal Ferrara, by reason of his infirmities, which confin'd him to his Bed, was not able to manage, or form, a∣ny faction, though Cardinal d'Este his Nephew attempted to have done it. Of these two Cardinals the heads of factions, Borrom had the greater number, and
it is certain, never any Popes Nephew entred the Conclave with a greater party than Borromeo, nor did the Cardinals ever shew themselves more affectionate, than they did in this. Cardinal Farnese, though he came short in the number of his Cardinals, yet he was before Borromeo in the Excellence of his judgement, and in the conduct of his designs; as being by a long experience become a perfect Master of the Conclave, whereas Borromeo was beginning only to be a disciple. The first attempts in this Conclave, were made by the Cardinals Mrone, Amulio, Buoncompagno, which being excluded for sundry reasons, Pisa, Montepulciano, and A∣ra-Celi were propos'd; but they met with as many difficulties as the other, and such in∣deed as were sufficient to put them out of all hopes. Borromeo who pretended to nothing more than to expedite the Conclave, pitch'd his eye upon Cardinal Alexandrino, of whom he had not thought in the beginning, con∣cluding he might make him Pope, because the whole Colledge loved him, for his good∣ness and worth, and by consequence knew him fit for so high a degree; having imparted his mind to Cardinal Altemps, who was a great friend of Alexandrino's, he demon∣strated to him, that he could not imploy his interest better, than in the behalf of a per∣son of his bounty and merit, and of great affection to Borromeo: and in this manner the judgements of Borromeo and Altemps, being discover'd to Cardinal Farnese, he con∣curr'd without much difficulty, as well because, he found it impossible to make any of his own Creatures, as for the love he profess'd to the said Alexandrino, with whom he had had some discourse, about his Election, advising to put himself into the number of Competitors, offering him his service, which was not penetrated by Borromeo. Things being in this posture, there was nothing wanting, but the publication of the state of affairs, in which Borromeo proceeded but slowly, out of a reverence he bore to Cardinal Morone, whom he durst not exclude openly from the Papacy, having pro∣mis'd to stand firm alwayes for him: but at length by the mediation of Cardinal Al∣temps, he let him understand it; wherefore Morone who was going on warily in his designs, seeing things impossible to be alter'd, commended the Election of Alexandrino, perhaps stimulated by his Conscience, for he could not deny but it pass'd to a person who was repleat with all necessary virtues. The conclusion therefore being discover'd, with no small admiration, to such as had not yet penetrated into any thing of the transaction, every body ran with emulation, to the adoration of Alexandrino, though many wondering much at the suddenness of the affair, could scarce believe it was true which they saw: and thus Michael Ghisilieri of the City of Bosco, six miles from the City of Alexandria della Paglia, was created Pope, and call'd from thence Alexandrino: which Election, and adoration follow'd the 7th. of January 1566. with the Votes of 52. Cardinals, three being arriv'd after the rest were enter'd the Conclave. He would be call'd Pius the 5th. as a token of his gratitude to Borromeo, by renew∣ing the memory of his Unkle, besides the esteem he had really for him; nor was he less unthankfull to Farnese. In this Conclave, the authority of the Nephews of Paul the 3d. and of Pius the 4th. was so absolute, it may be said they were but one interest, seeing two such potent factions agreed in so short a time, for the vacancy of the See was but 26. dayes. Seven years Pius the 5th. lived, and then pass'd into a better life, the first of May 1572. and on the 10th. after the usual celebration of his Funeral, 52. Cardinals enter'd the Conclave, and began their practises in manner following. The friends of Morone having tryed the first day of their ingress, to make him Pope, and finding all their labour in vain, they betook themselves to other designs. The Car∣dinal Granvela at that time joyn'd himself to Farnese, who had the most followers of them all; they had long discourse together about the Election of a new Pope, and at last came to an agreement, that Fanese should name three persons at his pleasure, and Gran∣vela oblig'd himself to choose one of the three. Farnese was contented, and named Cardinal Montepulciano, Buon compagno, and rreggio: The nomination being accepted by Granvela, he went immediately to find
out Cardinal Alexandrino, the Nephew of Pius the 5th. who seeing the Cardinals re∣solv'd not to choose any one Pope, who had receiv'd his Purple but lately, as all the Cardinals created by his Unkle had done; having consulted with his faction likewise, and receiv'd this answer, that he should take what resolution he thought best; he told Granvela, that of the three nam'd by Farnese, he was for Buon compagno; and so this was communicated to Borromeo, and Altemps, who passionately desir'd that Election; and moreover it being known that Ferdinando di Medici his Kinsman, was well affected to i too, the business was concluded, and publish'd through the Con∣clave, the Cardinals meeting in the Gallery, to go together and adore him in his Chamber. There were eight Cardinals only who knew nothing of this business, to whom a Conclavist was sent to give them advertisement; the Cardinal Vercelli ran first into the Chamber of Buon compagno, and taking him by the hand said, Will your illustrious Lord∣ship come to receive the Pontificate: To which he answer'd, My Lords, have you Votes enough? and Vercelli replying Yes, he rise up, and took certain Writings along with him, that they might not fall into the hands of others, who are wont to plunder that Cardinals Chamber who is made Pope, of whatsoever is found in the Con∣clave. In the mean time there arriv'd above 40. Cardinals, all of them conducting him in great triumph to the Chappel, where they held the Scrutiny, and he had every Vote that was there; being desir'd his name, he chose to be call'd Gregory the 13th. as well for the de∣votion he profess'd to that Saint, as because he was created Cardinal by Pius the 4th. upon Saint Gregory's day, the 12th. of March 1565. and in this manner Gregory the 13th. was made Pope, after the See had been vacant 13. dayes, and the Conclave 3. and no more; he was publish'd to the people the 13th. of May; a strange thing to see the three factions, of three Popes, agreed with so good order. Gregory dyed the 10th. of April 1585. after he had held the Papacy 13. years; he dyed a while after the arrival of the Japan Ambassadors, who were receiv'd with great magnificence in Rome. The 21. after, the Cardinals enter'd the Conclave, to the num∣ber of 39. there being no more at that time present at Court, and it was Easter-day in the Evening when they enter'd; a while after, there arrived three more, viz. Madrucci, Austria, and Vercelli; before Austria could be admitted to come in, there were many difficulties raised, but they being appeas'd, he was receiv'd, with the general satisfaction of the whole Conclave. The Cardinals were divided into six factions, Farnese was chief of one, d'Este of another, Alexandrino of a third, Medici of the fourth, Altemps of the fifth, and Cardinal San Sextus, Nephew to Gregory, of the sixth, which was the greatest of all. Those who were judg'd most worthy, and most likely to be Popes, were 14. Far∣nese and Savello, created by Paul the 3d. Sirletto, San Gregorio, Paleotto, Santa Croce, and Como, created by Pius the 4th. Moalto, Cesis, Albano, and Santa Severina, created by Pius the 5th. Torres, Mondovi, Santi Quattro, and Castagna, created by Gregory the 13th. The same day the Cardinals enter'd into the Conclave, they swore to the observation of certain decrees, resolv'd by them in the Congregation; and a while after, the friends of Cardinal Cesis began their practises, with more fury than fruit, Cardinal San Sisto opposing them publickly. After that there were some endeavours for Sirletto, Cardinal Medici and Altemps using all their art in his behalf, but 'twas impossible; he was pre∣sently excluded, Farnese, Este, and Sforza declaring against him. Sirletto being excluded as a person improper for the management of affairs, though otherwise of great learning; San Sisto attempted for Cardinal Castagna, his Creature, and a person certainly of very great worth; but all the antient Cardinals were against him, as being one of the last Cardinals that were created: Farnese also, and Savelli were mention'd, but in vain, they finding great obstacles too, but espe∣cially Savelli, who was reputed a person of too Majestick a nature, and rigid to excess.
In the mean time Cardinal Este, Medici, and Alexandrino, being agreed privately, concluded to make Montalto Pope, who being look'd upon by all people, as a person affectionate, bountiful, learned, quiet, and one zealous in the service of God, they thought he would meet with little opposition, especially there being none that gave the Cardinals so much honour as he, reputing himself inferiour to them all, and that so much, that he oftentimes suffered himself to be call'd Asino della Marca, by pretending either not to understand, or not to regard; and this happen'd in the Congregations, by reason he never contended with any one, to establish his own opinion, but alwayes commended the opinions of other people. Este, Medici, and Alexandrino went one night to Montalto's Chamber, where they found him a bed, pretending himself as careless and indifferent, as if there were not a∣nother person with him in the Conclave: being enter'd, they told him they came to give him notice of their resolution to make him Pope the next morning betimes. Montalto reply'd, Me Pope, a poor old man, full of infirmities, how can I think of the Papacy, who have scarce time to consider of my death; so short do I look upon my days, and so grie∣vons my distempers. The three Cardinals, as it were by consent, told him, that God would give him life and strength for the well Government of the Church. To which Montalto reply'd, with a sickly and weak voice, That he would never have accepted so great a charge as the Papacy was, if their most illustrious Lordships did not first promise to assist him, with their vertue and experience, confessing his own faculties very unable for the government of the Church, without their help and assistance. These words inflam'd the desires of these Cardinals, to hasten the exatation of Mon∣talto, concluding they should at their pleasure command both Church and Court 100, as soon as he was received to the Papacy; and they were the more confident, because they knew he had but two Nephews, sons to a Sister of his call'd Camilla, wo were young, and inexperient in all kind of Politicks, and learning. San Sisto understanding the practice of Montalto, and knowing the animosty he had born towards Gregory his Unkle, he had thoughts of opposing him, but he was over∣come by the perswasions of the three Cardinals aforesaid, and concur'd with them: So that on Wednesday the 24th. of April, after thirteen days vacancy of the See, by common consent they chose him Pope, who call'd himself Sisto, in complacency to Car∣dinal San Sisto, as some suppose; but the truth is, it was to renew the memory of Sista the 4th. who was a Fryer of the same Conventual Order of Franciscns, which he was of. The Cardinals Este, Medici, and Alexandrino were ready to bie their thumbs, re∣penting very much that they had made a Pope, who declar'd as soon as he was asm'd, that he had no need of Companions in the Government, and drove them all three out of Rome. Five years and four months Sextus reigned in an absolute Monarchical way, and with a Majesty much contrary to the humility he pretended when he was a Cardinal, and with a manner so austere, he was a terrour to the remotest of his Enemies: he dy'd of a Malignant Feaver the 27 of August at night, in the year 1590. His Exies of nine days being over, and the usual solemnities performed; on Friday the 7th. o September, 54 Cardinals enter'd the Conclave, divided into several factions, but particularly un∣der these three heads, Montalto who commanded the Creatures of Sextus, his Unkle; Sforza who conducted Gregory the 13th's Creatures; and the Cardinal Ascanio Colonna who had twelve Cardinals of several places at his devotion. For six days together Montalto, and Ascanio Colonna us'd all their art to make Marco Antonio Colonna Pope, who was a Cardinal of great worth, and signal vere, against whom Sforza and Borromeo oppos'd themselves with such violence, that all the friends of Colonna despair'd of his success. However Montalto being incourag'd by his Creatures, resolv'd to persist, and tire out the Cardinals with the tediousness of the Conclave, rather than recede one step from his resolution, although the Spaniards declar'd themselves averse, who ex∣horting him to name some other person, could get no answer but this, that when he should see the interests of Colonna desperate, he would throw himself upon his knees
before the Image of the Holy Ghost, and would draw lots as it were for a Cardinal to name. These passages being related to Cardinal Marco Antonio Colonna, he went to Mon∣talto, and told him, that it was not suitable to the mind of a Christian, to let the Church continue in her Widdowhood for his sake, or that he should go about to obtrude a Pastor upon the Flock of Christ: adding other reasons also, which so wrought upon Montalto, that he became inclinable to favour the interest of San Marcello, a Cardi∣nal of Genoa, call'd Gio. Battisto Castagna, which designs were laid by Cardinal Sforza, and the other Genoese Cardinals, who had got 25 votes, to whom Montalto being joyn'd, they publish'd all night long San Marcello to be Pope; and on the next morning the 15 of Sept. being Sunday, the Scrutiny was made, in which all the votes were in his favour, he being made Pope 18 dayes after the vacancy of the See, and interrogated about his name, declar'd he would be call'd Ʋrban the 7th. But here we must not omit the opinion Sextus the 5th. had alwayes, that the Cardi∣nal Castagna was to succeed him in the Papacy, and many times he gave him a hint there∣of; amongst the rest, going with the said Cardinal to see a Street which he had order'd to be made from Santa Maria Maggiore, to Trinita de Monti, and I know not how much beyond; turning to San Marcello, he told him in the presence of several Prelats, This way is begun by us, but will be finishd by you. Another time, not long before his death being at Dinner, towards the latter end they brought in (Peri) Pears, he cut one in the midst and found it rotten, he cut ano∣ther and found it so too, whereupon holding the Pear in his hand, he said, Li Romagni son satii de Peri, e cercano Castagne. The Romans are weary of Pears, and had rather have Chesnuts, by Pere, meaning himself who was of the Family of the Peretti, and by Castagne, the Cardinal Marcello of the Family of Castagna. Thirteen dayes Ʋrban was Pope, and dy'd on the 27th. of Sept. in the morning; the 8th, of October the Cardinals enter'd into the Conclave to the number of 52. and two that went in afterward, viz. Austria, and Gaetano, who arriv'd to compleat the number of 54. which were divided into 7 Factions, and was the principal occasion of the pro∣traction of that Conclave. The first practices were for the Cardinal Colonna, and they so brisk, that it was pub∣lish'd abroad that he was created Pope; but when it came to a Scrutiny, his votes were two few, though many had offer'd themselves before they gave their votes. Colonna being out of hopes, Sforza, and Montalto began to set up Mondovi, and were confident of effecting it, because he was a Cardinal very well worthy of that dignity; but for all that, neither his virtues, nor their perswasions, could do any good, for the friends of Aldobrandino undertook it in his favour, preferring his virtues before any bo∣dies; but the Cardinals took little notice of that, their private interest only being their aim, they excluded this person for this reason, and the other for another, inspight, of all the abundance of their virtue. Albano as soon as Aldobrandino was excluded, came next upon the Stage, and things seemed so well dispos'd towards him, that every one concluded him Pope; but to that concord of opinions, there appear'd a proportionable share of difficulties, every one be∣lieving him incapable of the Papacy, notwithstanding his great worth; and indeed though he was but 54 years of age, his infirmities were such, as oblig'd him to keep his Bed almost continually, a thing that made his Election a kind of scruple of Consci∣ence. Seven weeks were already past in the Conclave without any thing but proposing, and excluding, the Spaniards, and the Florentines, not so much as mentioning Santa Severi∣na, who was so much in their minds, judging it best to let the Cardinals tyre themselves out, and to put difficulties upon others designs, thereby at last to facilitate their own; but when they came to the stress of their business, they found more difficulty than they imagin'd: Cardinal Revere was put into the ballance against him, a man of great learning, and integrity of life, besides good experience in matters of policy; but his hopes lasted not long neither, he was forc'd also to lay down, as well as his Neighbours, who were in a better predicament.
To take away this great discrepancy of opinions, it was thought fit to select seven persons, one out of every Faction, but such as should not be suspected by any one, and these were San Gregorio, Sans, Rusticucci, Aragoga, Sarnano, Lancelotti, and Alano; but for all this, that design came to nothing, they being not able to agree of a single person. The Spaniards had several times attempted with great Artifice, to make Paleotto Pope, a Cardinal full of all requisite qualities to make an excellent Pope, and though he had many Cardinals against him, he mist very narrowly one morning of being crea∣ted, some running for friendships sake, others that they might not appear his profess'd enemies, insomuch that there were a greater number of Cardinals in the Chappel, than was necessary to make him Pope; the chief of his Domesticks imprudently upon this, without expecting the Scrutiny, publish'd it abruptly that he was already created, so that several Couriers were sent to know the news, and all the people were got into Saint Peters. But when they came to the Scrutiny, poor Paleotto had but 17 votes, and in the Ac∣cess (which was the first time it began to be given) he could come but to 14. receiving his exclusion, with such circumstances of disdain, as perhaps have not been heard of be∣fore, and with no little mortification to the Spaniards. After this, Cardinal Santi Quattro was recommended, a great Divine, a great Poli∣tician, and well practis'd in affairs of the Court, where he had been for above 52 years in continual employment in the Congregations; but God Almighty (who had reserv'd that greatness for another time) took away the necessary means of his Election in this Conclave. Cardinal Montalto last of all, (who had the greatest party, being follow'd by 26 Cardinals) resolv'd to put an end to these discords, by promoting the Cardinal of Cre∣mona, in whose person the Spaniards, and Sforza, had declar'd they would concur. On the 4th of December at night, he went himself to carry the news of his resolution, go∣ing up and down all night long, distributing such things as were necessary; and calling his votes together as much as he could possibly. In the morning betimes, in the company of Cardinal Sforza, he with many others, went to his Chamber, and conducted him to the Chappel where the Scrutiny was made with open votes; he receiv'd the suffrages of all of them in this manner, but gave his own for Cardinal Cecano. The Adoration was Pub∣lish'd to the people in the usual Balcony, with the name of Gregory the 14th. which laying aside his own name Nicholas, he took upon him as soon as the Scrutiny was over. And thus Gregory the 14th. was chosen, after two months and nine dayes vacancy of the See, and two whole months reclusion of the Conclave. After a tedious sickness of many dayes, and after he had been many times thought dead, Gregory dyed at last on Tuesday the 15th. of October 1591. having Reigned ten months and ten dayes. There were 65 Cardinals in the Sacred Colledge, but there en∣ter'd into the Conclave (which began the 25th. of October) but 56. nine of them being absent by reason of their distance, viz. three in France, three in Spain, one in Poland, one in Malta, and the other in Lorain: before they enter'd into the Conclave, it was the common opinion, not of the Cardinals only, but of the people in general, that Car∣dinal Facchinetti would certainly be Pope, and their opinion was much confirm'd, when in the distribution of the Chambers, which is done by lots, Facchinetti's Chamber happen'd to fall exactly in the same place where the Popes Chair us'd to stand  the Consistory dayes; besides which there was also another good Omen, which was, that whilst they were busie in the Church of Saint Peter about the Adoration of Gregory the 14th. his Miter fell off, by I know not what accident, and happen'd to rest upon the head of Facchinetti, whereupon the Pope himself said to him, You shall be our Suc∣cessor. There were two Factions the most prevalent in the Conclave, that of the Spaniards manag'd by Cardinal Mendozza, and that of Montalto which consisted of twenty. The Spaniards had no great difficulty to exclude all the Competitors which they did not affect, and to include one of their own followers, Montalto being oblig'd in several respects, to gratifie that Crown, from which he had receiv'd many Advantages, and injoy'd many
priviledges in the Kingdoms the Spaniards were possess'd of; besides which, his Brother Don Michael had bought the Principality of Celano in the Catholick State; all which put together, ingag'd him not to relinquish his affection to Spain. The Spaniards being secure in all this, and knowing according to the subtilty of their principles, that they were able without controversie to govern the Conclave, and make a Pope at their pleasure; they signify'd to Montalto his Catholick Majesties intention to make Antonio Facchinetti (who was Cardinal di Santiquattro) Pope, and therefore they desir'd his most Illustrious Lordship to concur with them in the Election of a per∣son so exquisitely worthy, and proper for the Government of the Church in such times as those. Montalto immediately consented, without making any trial of his creatures, or at∣tempting to try the fortune of his friends, so that his answer being return'd, and favou∣rable to their designs, the Spaniards, Mendozza, Sforza, Borromeo, Gaetano, the two Colonna's, Ascanio, and Marco, Antonio, Mattei, Lancelotto, and others went to the Chamber of Montalto, and taking him out, with the greatest part of the follow∣ers (who were already come together at the congratulations of the others) into the Chamber of Facchinetti, where several others were met before, and particularly Sfon∣drato and his Adherents, the 29th. of October in the morning. Medozza, and Sforza, took Santi Quattro under the arm, and conducted him to Pau∣lina's Chappel, whether even those who had the Gout, and kept their beds, made them∣selves be carry'd, to have the honour to give him their votes, which votes were given open, and he afterwards publish'd to the people by the name of Innocent the 9th. This Conclave may be said to be the best, and most peaceable, that ever was seen, many things concurring to make it wonderfull; the first was the shortness of time, the See being vacant but 13 dayes, and the Conclave continued but three; the second, the quality of the person, as being most worthy of so honourable a dignity; the third, that though there were seventeen Cardinals pretenders, and of great reputation in the Col∣ledge, yet there was but one as it were spoken of; and last of all, that all Factions should comply with the Spaniards, and make a Pope according to their directions. Innocent lived but two months, and dy'd the 29th. of December; and the usual dayes of solemnizing his obsequies being past, 52 Cardinals enter'd the Conclave on the 10th. of January, all of them divided in their inclination, so that many believ'd it was im∣possible but the Election of this Pope must be with great difficulties, and disturbances, seeing things in so ill a way. Yet the Spaniards made no doubt to finish it in three dayes, as they had done the Conclave before, having gain'd the Venetians already, and looking upon Montalto as their own, who as they presum'd could do no less than follow the inclinations of their King, seeing that he injoy'd an annual Rent of above 50000. Crowns in his Dominions. The first day therefore the Spaniards began their practices very eagerly for Santa Se∣verina, having gain'd Montalto also, who promis'd to imploy all his interest with his party in favour of the said Santa Severina. There were 32 Cardinals in the Conclave for the Election of that person, and twenty for his Exclusion; but they so united and firm for his Exclusion, that there was never seen in a Conclave, so invincible a com∣bination. The Spaniards try'd all wayes, promises, offers, threats, stratagems, and at last with Montalto they left no stone unturned, that might mollifie the excluders, and pre∣vail with them to give their votes for Montalto; but all was to no purpose, and there∣fore seeing things desperate, they took up another expedient, but with no small displea∣sure to Santa Severina who was already by several saluted Pope. But before they came to any other resolution, having gain'd three Cardinals more to their 32. and made them up 35. which was exactly two thirds, which were necessary to the Creation of a Pope, they pitch'd upon a day when the excluders were careless and dispers'd, and without much noise shut themselves into the Chappel, with intention to make Santa Severina Pope, with open votes; but it being understood by Sforza, Sfon∣drato, Aquaviva, Borromeo, and Altemps, who were the chief of the Excluders, they flew immediately to the Chappel, beating impetuously at the doors, and protesting a
Nullity so fiercely, that they which were within, to prevent the inconvenience which might follow, open'd the doors; where when they were enter'd, they doubl'd the cryes of their protestation of Nullity. Santa Severina full of humility and moderation said, If I be the occasion of all these ru∣mours, open the door of the Conclave, for I will go out with all my heart, if that may quiet this storm. Cardinal Sforza's coming into the Chappel, turn'd some of their votes, in∣somuch that the favourors of Santa Severina, persisting still to come to a Scrutiny, of 35 which they thought they had, they had but 28 only that stuck to him. Santa Severina by this means being perfectly out of hopes, Madruccio was propos'd, but without any success; after him Como, and Peleotto, were in nomination, but with as little fortune as the other, in sundry respects, after which it was negotiated for Colonna, Salviati, Mondovi, and Rusticucci, but to no more purpose than the rest. The excluders of Santa Severina, to free themselves from a continual jealousie where∣with they were agitated, resolv'd to send to Montalto, and to let him know then when he resolv'd to create a Pope out of his own creatures, that they would condescend with all their hearts, and he should have all their votes; which message was carry'd to Mon∣talto by Cardinal Borromeo, and receiv'd with great satisfaction. Montalto had already plac'd his thoughts upon Cardinal Aldobrandio, for the wor∣thiness of his qualities, and for the great esteem the Sacred Colledge had of his person; he made choice of him, and propos'd him to them from the bottom of his heart: his in∣clinations being known, all those Cardinals who sent first to him, and made him that proposition, embracing the tydings with great joy, desir'd him to proceed in the design with all possible expedition. Montalto began immediately to set his Engines a work, and to communicate his resolu∣tions to his creatures, which he found all most readily dispos'd; afterwards he went to Ma∣druccio, who had a great party, in the Conclave but had no good correspondence with Al∣brandino; yet considering the merit of the person, and waving his particular passions, he declar'd himself in favour of Aldobrandino, and went to him to his Chamber, where he found him full of so much modesty, that though he saw himself as good as Pope al∣ready, yet he shew'd not the least token of ambition or joy; but on the contrary, he seem'd more desirous to avoid, than acquire the Papacy. Montalto publishing thorough the Conclave, the common resolution of making Al∣dobrandino Pope, the Cardinals went unanimously to his Chamber the 30th. of Jannary at night, in the year 1592. and taking him out with incredible applause, they conducted him to the Chappel of Paulina, where by a publick Scrutiny he was Elected Pope by the votes of all the Cardinals, with unimaginable concord, after the See had been vacant a month, and the Conclave shut up 20 dayes. The Election being made, he fell down upon his knees before the Altar of the Chap∣pel; and the Masters of the Ceremonies, asking him according to the usual manner, whether he accepted the Election; he gave them no answer, but with his tears, which the Cardinals beholding, answer'd for him, Yes, Yes, he accepts it. But the Masters of the Ceremonies insisted, that it was necessary he should confirm it with his own mouth; after a thousand protestations to Heaven he confirm'd it, and being ask'd his name, he said he would be call'd Clement the 8th. he was publish'd with incredible acclamations of the people, and it may be said that he was the third Pope made by Cardinal Montalto, which added no small reputation to the Nipotisme of Sixtus. Clement liv'd 13 years and a month, and dy'd to the great regret of all Christendome, in the year 1605, the 3d. of March, his Funeral was celebrated most sumptuously with universal tears and lamentation, after which in the evening the 14th. of the said May, 60 Cardinals went into the Conclave, in order to the Election of a new Pope, one of Pius the 4th. which was Como the Dean, four of Gregory the 13th. eleven of Sixtus, five of Gregory the 14th. one of Innocent the 9th. which was his Nephew Santi Quattro, and eight and thirty of Clements, of whom there were 25 who follow'd Aldobrandino with great affection, as the chief of the Clementines. The greatest practices were for Baronius and Bellermine; but Baronius being supported by Aldobrandino, who was follow'd by a great number of Cardinals; in the Scrutinies
which were made, he had alwayes more votes than all the rest of the Competitors, ha∣ving had 30 at one time, 31 at another, and 32 at a third; but in four Scrutinies which they had, he could never arrive at two thirds, by reason of the brisk opposition made by the Spaniards, Montalto; and others. The Cardinal de Joyense, who had no other design but to make a Pope to the satis∣faction of his King, despairing of Baronius, began his practices for Fiorenza, and he knew how to manage them so well, that all difficulties overcome, he prevail'd, that on the first of April, after 29 dayes vacancy of the See, all the Cardnals went to the Chamber of Fiorenza, and saluting him Pope, conducted him to the Chappel, where they gave their open votes; and thus Alexander di Medici was made Pope by the name of Leo the 11th. and publish'd to the people who had understood his Election the Evening before. The joy of the Friends and Relations of Leo, lasted not long, for he dy'd 25 dayes after his creation: the suddenness of his death, made many believe, that the same Car∣dinals being still in Rome, divided into their old factions, and full of the obstinacy of the last Conclave; that for these reasons the Election of the next Pope would be difficult and long, and not without clamour and disorder. But for all these conjectures, humane imagination was oversway'd by Celestial influ∣ence, for the Cardinals entring the Conclave the 10th. of May, to the number of 50. Madruzzo, and Marcello being sick without: they discharged themselves from their old combinations, the Spaniards constituting a particular body, dividing themselves from their Colleagues the first of all. Then the French thought good to withdraw themselves from their allyance which they had made with Aldobrandino in the last Conclave, and stand upon their own legs, Montalto, Farnese, Sforza, Este. Santi Quattro, Sfondra∣to, and Visconti, united themselves, and their dependants, and made up a body of 21 votes: Aldobrandino continued in his usual Monarchy with 26 votes at his devotion. The design and object of all these Factions, was the same with the design of the last Conclave, that is, to procure advantages every one to himself, to keep their Enemies as far from the Papacy as they could, and to advance their friends as much as was possi∣ble; but with this difference, that in the other conclave, the aim of the Colleagues, was (I mean the Colleagues against Aldobrandino) to exclude all the creatures of Aldobran∣dino, though they were their friends, whereas in this, they were only for choosing out a friend, let him be of whose Faction he would. The Papal Cardinals were many, five, creatures of Montalto, viz. Pinello, Ascoli, Saoli, Camerino, and Montalpano; ten of Aldobrandino's, Baronlus, Bianchetto, Ari∣gone, Panfilio, Bellarmine, Ginnasio, San Marcello, Tosco, Borghese, and Saint Clement; and Como, and Virona, who were neuters, and would not enter into any Faction. Of these, some were excluded by the Spaniard for their interest, some by the French for theirs, others by Aldobrandino for his, and others by the Colleagues for private reasons, and perhaps more capriccious than prudent. The greatest practices were begun by Aldobrandino in Tosco's behalf, and perhaps with greater ardour than was ever seen before in the Conclave; and because the Spaniards, and French, he discerned, were favourable enough, he made after a great deal of clamour and, dispute, all his creatures meet one day in the Fountain Gallery, and then discover'd his re∣solution to carry Tosco to the Chappel, and create him Pope. But this advice was not approv'd by Sforza, perswading him to use the utmost of his power to gain Montalto, without whose concurrence, there would be nothing done. Aldobrandino was perswaded for the present, but it lasted not long, for in the morning betimes being assur'd of 35 votes, certain, and profess'd, besides others who had pro∣mis'd to concur upon a necessity of two or three votes; he went into the Chappel with the Cardinals, resolving firmly to come to a Scrutiny, and leave out all the excluders of Tosco; who having news of all this, they took up Baronius by the way, and carrying him into another corner of the Chappel, they cry'd out, Here is the Pope; Aldobran∣dino's party shewing of Tosco about, and crying out, He is here. This dayes insolence was very great, both on the one side and the other, every one en∣deavouring to draw the Cardinals from their parties, not only with perswasions, but
with juglings, and the strength of their hands; so that in the controversie, Serafino was hurt in the arm, and Visconti tumbled upon the ground, who being angry, got up and cry'd, I would not make a Pope at this rate, though 'twere Saint Peter himself, and went out immediately; but the two parties continuing obstinate, had given order to have meat brought them into the Chappel, and several Tables were preparing, when Mon∣talto fearing Tosco would be chosen at last, he went to Aldobrandino and told him, That for his part he would joyn with him for any other of his creatures but Tosco, yea though the promotion of San Clement should be re-assum'd, who was excluded by him before; and so they fell upon the said practice. To be short, this I shall say, that that day several were very near the Papacy; Tosco was excluded by the favourers of Baronius; Baronius by the Adherents of Tosco. San Clement was look'd upon as certain to be Pope, and perhaps was nearer it than either of the other, had not Cardinal Farneses perswasions prevented his Election. The French, who with more prudence than all of them, stood neuter in all this clutter, were advis'd to make Serafino Pope, and to go forth of the Conclave with the reputation of having made a French Pope; but they would not venture, though the common opinion, as was afterwards reported, was, that if they had try'd, they had certainly carry'd it. At last Aldobrandino being inspir'd, as we ought to believe, by the Holy Ghost, re∣solv'd to put an end to these scandals, and the rather, because a report ran about the Ci∣ty, that the Cardinals were together by the ears, and had beaten and batter'd one ano∣ther bravely; for this reason, he propos'd to Montalto, and the rest of the Excluders of his creatures, the Cardinal Borghese, a person look'd upon by him as the most affectio∣nate of all his creatures; which proposition was acceptable both to Montalto, the Spa∣niards, and the French, who went all to him, conducted him from his Chamber to the Chappel, (some little difficulties being first remov'd) and so on the seventeenth of May, after 19 dayes vacancy of the See, Camillo Borghese was saluted and elected Pope, by a general vote, in the 53d▪ year of his age, he being the youngest of all the Cardinals which stood for the Papacy, and being ask'd his name, he told them he would be call'd Paul the 5th. and with that name he was publish'd to the people. Paul being dead the 28th. of January 1621. after he had been 16 years in the Pontifical Chair. The usual obsequies being over, on the 8th. of February 52 Cardinals divided into 5 Factions, enter'd the Conclave; the first was Montalto's, who was follow'd by five which were his creatures; the second was Aldobrandino's, who had nine; the third Borghese, who had twenty seven; the fourth of the Spaniards which consisted but of three; and the 5th. of the French, who had but one Cardinal only: besides which there were the Cardinals Medici, Farnese, Sforza, and Este, who every one made a Faction for himself. Being enter'd into the Conclave, all these Factions reduc'd themselves to two; the first and greatest was Borghese's, who was follow'd by the Spaniards, Montalto, Medici, Este, and Farnese; the other was Aldobrandino's, who had on his side the French, Ʋbal∣dino, Orsino, and two or three Cardinals, segregate from the other Factions. Borghese began the promotion of Cardinal Campora, with great impetuosity, and be∣cause it was so violent, it lasted but a day, Aldobrandino, Orsino, and Ʋbaldino, ap∣pearing as fierce for his exclusion: in short, there were above twenty excluders, and the rather, because Campora being a profess'd enemy to the Republique of Venice, the Se∣nate had writ to three of their Cardinals, that they should by no means concur with such a person, unless they had a mind to be declar'd Rebels, and all their Families. Borghese in the mean time found out an occasion of discoursing with Cardinal Ʋbaldino who made the greatest noise against Campora of them all; he endeavour'd to perswade him to change his thoughts, and to remember his obligations to Paul the 5th. his Unckle, from whose hands he receiv'd his Cap: urging that he ought not to shew himself his profess'd enemy, by denying to concur with him in the Election of one of his creatures. True it is, reply'd Ʋbaldino, I have, and will still do my utmost against Campora: not that I deny to second your Eminence in any of your creatures, but because I know the person unworthy of such a degree; and if you will make experiment of my fidelity, and that I am not otherwise ingratefull to his memory who gave me my Cap, change your
person, and choose another amongst so many of your creatures, as are worthy of that honour; adding some other words, more particular and express, and naming of his creatures, Millino, Lanti, Crescentius, and Araceli, and at last he told him if he resolv'd to name Ludovisio, he would oblige himself, not only to assist him with his own vote, but he would draw off all the opposers of Campora, to Ludovisio's side. To this Borghese reply'd, that he would not name one out of the Conclave, seeing he was then in his Bishoprick of Bologna; but that which was most strange, was, whilst Borghese was speaking these very words, news was brought in, that Ludovisio was then at the door of the Conclave, whether his friends were running to receive him: from whence Ʋbaldino took the courage to say, and now your Eminence cannot but name him. Borgheses heart was on fire, to see the Excluders so violent against him; so that he went to the chief of the Spaniards, and concluded with them; that all the Cardinals who had any affection to Campora, were to be call'd, and to resolve upon the last course that was to be taken, and if by accident they should have votes enough, they should make the Election, both with suffrages, and access. The Excluders having notice of all this, they met in the Chamber of Cardinal Bevilac∣qua; particularly Orsino, Sforza, Ʋbaldino, Fonti, and Pio, who were they which insti∣gated the rest: Now whilst Aldobrandino and his party were studying the exaltation of Campora, and what way they were to compass his Election; the other Lords were considering what allegation they were to use, even in the Chapel, for the Exclusion of the said Campora: Amongst other contrivances, it was resolv'd they should cry out with a loud voice, that he was altogether unworthy of the Popedom, in respect of the great offences of his youth, his Homicides, his Simonies, and other things; of which they produc'd the Processes in the Conclave, to make his guilt evident to all the Cardi∣nals: To which it was added, that Campora being a profest Enemy to France, and the State of Venice, to make him Pope, would be no less than to put the publique peace of Italy in danger, and be perhaps the destruction both of Christendome and the Church. But these things were not publish'd, as was resolv'd, in the publique Chapel, only the Cardinal Excluders were there, went up and down, and made long harangues a∣bout the Conclave; However the heads of the Faction resolv'd upon a Scrutiny, in which Bellarmine had the greatest number of Votes, and which is most wonderful, there were not above three for Campora: In so much that Pignatelli, a great friend of Borghe∣ses said to him, This is their Master-piece, let us think of another: and Orsino being very well pleas'd, went out of the Chapel, discoursing with Ʋbaldino of a business they themselves could not have expected. The promotion of Campora being found so difficult, Montalto, Ʋrsino and Ʋbaldino went together to Borghese, intreating him to name another person, and not to think a∣ny longer of one, who was belov'd but by very few, and those only in order to Borghe∣ses service. Borghese was already resolv'd to make Ludovisio Pope, and therefore gave them only this answer, That the Pope was made, and that was Ludovisio; which rejoyc'd them all so much, that they went immediately to his Chamber, and forcing him with their congratulations to the Chappel, the Election was made, and all the votes on his side, Alexander Ludovisio remaining Pope, after so great, but short a contention, for the See was vacant but 14 dayes. He would needs be call'd Gregory, though Borghese de∣sir'd him to suffer himself to be call'd Alexander. Two years and three months Gregory liv'd, and dyed the 8th. of July 1624. his exe∣quies being performed, the Cardinals enter'd 52 into the Conclave, the 19th. of the said July, and the next day there came in two or three more. The Factions of Cardinals were five, one of the French, one of the Spaniards, one of the Neutral or Independent Cardinals, another of the creatures of Paul the 5th. and the last of the creatures of Gregory the 15th. but these two last were the greatest, and had most followers, and were manag'd, the one by Cardinal Borghese, the other by Car∣dinal Ludovisi, it being in the power of either of them, to choose, or exclude, who they pleas'd.
The pretending Cardinals were many, three of Sixtus the 5th's creation, Sauli, Monti, and Borromeo; three others of Clement the 8th's, Bandino, Ginnasio, and Madrozzi; eleven of Paul the 5th. Mellino, Caraffa, Barbarino, Lanti, Verallo, Ascoli, Araceli, Campora, Santa Susanna, Cennino, and Scaglia; and three of Gregory the last, which were Gaetano, Sagrato, and Sant Severino. Cardinal Borghese finding himself back'd by so many Pretenders, and with so nume∣rous a party, he resolv'd not only to be pertinacious in the Election of one of his own Creatures, but not so much as to consent to the nommation of any, unless of his parti∣cular Friends: Ludovisio's designs were clear otherwise, for seeing his three Papable Creatures not like to succeed at that time, and himself at the head of a Faction of Cardinals, though numerous, yet drawn together from this place, and from the other; he pretended only to elect some wrthy person, but above all, one that was an Enemy to Borghese, who was his Enemy; or at least, if that could not be obtain'd, to endeavour to place it upon some body, in whom for the universality of affection, and his indifference to all parties, there could be no occasion of jealousie either to the one side or the other. But to lay aside all the reasons of either side, for the Inclusion or Exclusion of the Papable Creatures; I shall say, that there was not one person ignorant, that in Barbarino all the qualities were resplendent which are necessary in a good Pope, viz. goodness of life, variety of learning, and prudence, experienc'd in all manner of business, all which virtues were so equally conspicuous in him, it was not known to which of them the pre∣heminence was to be given. However many people thought it difficult to overcome so many impediments, as they must meet withall, who should endeavour to take away the Papacy out of his hands, whose virtues deserv'd it so well. The greatest obstruction against him was, the diffidence the Spaniards had of him, by reason of his inclination to the French, amongst whom he had twice been Nuntio, once in Ordinary, and another time in Extraordinary. The suspicion the Great Duke had of all the Families of the Noble Florentines in general, but of the Barbarino's more particularly, who in the time when it was a Republick, did not hold a due correspondence with the House of Medici. The little inclination Cardinal Borghese had alwayes shewn to him, founded upon some false informations of the severity and rigour of his nature, (which was indeed alwayes sincere in matters of Justice) when he refus'd to gratifie the recommendations of Borghese in the Signature, excusing himself and declaring, that in such a Court as that, there ought to be no place, but for the recommendations of Justice. The open Enmities which had pass'd betwixt him and the Duke di Bracciano, Paulo Orsino, and Cardinal Montalto, by which means he became an Enemy to two Cardinals more, Orsino and Peretti, the most considerable in the Conclave. All these things put together, made a kind of Medley of Contradictions amongst the Cardinals, when they discours'd of Barbarino, and the rather, because the rest of the Pretenders excluded him, to promote themselves: But at last instructed by the Counsel of the Divine providence, the Cardinals resolv'd to change their opinions, on the same day our Saviour was transfigur'd, which was on the 6th. of August, and being assembled on that day, they put an end to the vacancy of the See, which had lasted 28. dayes, the 17. in which they were shut up in the Conclave being included, creating Maffeo Barbarino Pope, whom they judg'd the most worthy of all, to sustain the Charge of the Universal Empire. There were present at the Scrutiny 52. Cardinals, with the Votes which they took of the Cardinal heads, in the Chamber del Infirmi; but in numbering the Suffrages they found they wanted one, without knowing how it came to pass: Some said it was of no importance, but the major part affirm'd that it was necessary to give the due perfection to the Election: So as the Lottery was renew'd, and not one receded from his former Vote; there were fifty of them, naming Barbarino almost in the same words, there being but one Negative, given to Cardinal Mellino, and his own which he gave to the Cardinal Deacon. In this manner Maffeo was receiv'd to the Ponti∣ficate
in the 55th. year of his age, and which is more, he was of a lusty and robust com∣plection. This Election, to speak the truth, was held one of the most considerable which was ever seen, in many respects, but particularly for the number of Cardinals, antient and Papable, who seeing so young a person created, lost all hopes of ever seeing another Conclave, and obtaining at another time, what they could not get at this; nor were they mistaken, for Barbarino being Pope, thought the least of dying, of any thing; and it was strange, for he lived so long, till all the rest of the Competitors in his Conclave, were gone into the other world, except Caraffa only. Barbarino having receiv'd the Papacy, and which is considerable, without being twice demanded, as Clement the 8th. had been; he fell down before the Altar to give God thanks for the great blessing he had received; but being told by the Cardinal Dean, that it was convenient afore all things that he should choose his name, which having done al∣ready in his heart, he told him he would be call'd by the name of Ʋrban the eighth. In the year 1644. the 29th. of July Ʋrban dyed, after he had reigned 21 years and some months; his Obsequies past, the Cardinals enter'd into the Conclave the 9th. of August, to the number of 66. divided into four Factions, one of French, another of Spaniards, a third of Neutrals, and a fourth of Barbarini, which consisted of more than 30 Cardinals, and it is certain there was never any Faction so numerous. In the shutting up of this Conclave, there was a great breach betwixt the Barbarini, and the Duke Savelli, Marshal of that Conclave, they pretending it belong'd to Don Tadeo, to keep the Keys of the Conclave, as he was Prefect of Rome, a thing they could not determine; but the Colledge order'd they should remain for this time in the hands of Savelli, till the new Pope should publish his particular decree in the case. The next day which was the tenth, the first Scrutiny was not made according to the Order in the Bull, by reason the dispute about the Keys protracted the clausure, inso∣much that they were forc'd to begin it late at night; in which, Cardinal Arbenoz, head of the Spanish Faction, consisting of 24 Cardinals, play'd his part so, that he brake the designs of the Barbarini, who were confident the same day to have gone out of the Con∣clave with a Pope of their own, whom they believ'd would have been Sacchetti, in whose behalf, all their designs were intended. The Spanish Faction thought it expedient to give their votes alwayes to the Car∣dinals of the old Colledge, which were Lanti, Cennino, Crescenzio, Cappori, Benti∣voglio, and Roma; so that in many Scrutinies, these Cardinals were honour'd, some time this, sometimes that, with several votes. It is not to be imagn'd what wayes were us'd by the Barbarini to make Sacchetti Pope, and what the Spaniards found to exclude him; it is sufficient, that after many dayes being in the Con∣clave, and after innumerable projects and designs, the Barbarini seeing they could not compass the creation of Sacchetti, they endeavour'd to make Fiorenza Pope, who was a creature of theirs, which had deserv'd well of their Family; but he having no reputation in the Conclave, nor credit amongst the Papable Cardinals, they desisted from that enterprize likewise, and the rather be∣cause the French Faction would not admit him, as a person not at all ac∣ceptable to Cardinal Mazarine; besides which, he was excluded publiquely by Montalto, with particular disgust to Albernoz, not that he loved him, but that being head of the Spanish Faction, he would not have had the Exclusion past but by his participation; of which Faction Montalto was one of the Principal Members. This business occasion'd some words betwixt Montalto, and Albenoz. Afterwards the Cardinals Altieri, Monti, and Filomarino, were propos'd, but with∣out any foundation; from whence many people Collected, that it was done more to procrastinate, and spin out the Conclave, than out of any real desire they had to have any of them chosen; and that the rather, because they observ'd no great zeal either in the Excluders, or Includers, but a certain coolness and indifference, as if they pretended to play, and did not play at all.
Cardinal Cennino, created by Paul the 5th. being Procurator of the Order of the Con∣ventual Fathers, was nearest the Papacy of any of them, except Sacchetti; but the oppo∣sitions of the Barbarini alone, did not so much prevail against him, as the doubt which tormented several Cardinals who recommended him. They had the memory of Sixtus the 5th. who had been of the same Order, and was call'd Fra. Felice, too fresh in their minds: Not but that the said Sixtus was a good Pope for the Church, and perhaps one of the best have been seen in the Vatican; but because he was not a good Pope for the Cardinals, his humour being to Govern alone, without any Companions; wherefore the Colledge were affraid of falling into that precipice again, and remain excluded from the Dominion. At length Cardinal Pamphilio being named by Cardinal Barbarino, and his practises begun on all hands in his behalf, he refus'd with great moderation to be propos'd, if Cardinal Anthonio did not name him, who for some particular interests of his own, had procur'd his Exclusion by the French. Anthonio deny'd it, and declaim'd bitterly against his Brother Francisco; but at last laying aside all pretence of distast, or else seeing he could not secure his Exclusion, he consented to name Pamphilio, after an in∣finite number of perswasions and promises, both from Francisco his Brother, and Car∣dinal Panzirolo his Friend; and the better to recover the favour of Pamphilio, he brought over the Marquess di San Simon, the King of France's Ambassador, to approve his reso∣lutions, by the mediation of Cardinal Teodoli, and the Marquess of San Vito his Brother; but the truth is, there were some treaties and promises in the case, which savour'd a little of Simony. The 15th. of September, though Bichi and Lione labour'd his Exclusion, as much as was possible, there were 50. Cardinals went to the Chamber of Pamphilio, to con∣gratulate his Papacy, as if he were chosen already; which so alter'd the minds of Bichi and Lione, and all the rest of the Excluders, that they all resolv'd to submit, and humble themselves to the fortune of Pamphilio, and went therefore to joyn them∣selves to that Troop of Cardinals which was rejoycing in Pamphilio's Chamber, from whence they conducted him to the Chappel in triumph, to give a prosperous consum∣mation by the Scrutiny, in which there were 48. Votes in his favour; and thus Gio. Battista Pamphilio, a Noble Roman, was proclaim'd Pope, after the See had been vacant 45. dayes, including the 35. from the clausure of the Conclave: He assum'd the name of Innocent the 10th. in memory as he profess'd of Innocent the 8th. a Genoese, of the House of Cibo, a Kinsman and Benefactor to the Family of the Pamphilii. This Election was not at all displeasing to the French, though they were not a little displeas'd, that Cardinal Anthonio, who for his own private interest had by his reiterated instances, perswaded that Crown to the Exclusion of Pamphilio, and afterwards consented to it, contrary to the Kings order, and without expecting the return of a Courier, which was dispatch'd to that Court, that they might con∣sult upon the business. For which his most Christian Majesty thought good to degrade Cardinal Anthonio from the Honour he possess'd of being Protector of France, and to take away his Royal favour from Teodoli, and the Marquess of San Vito his Brother, and to recall his Ambassador San Simon into France, to render an account of his proceedings; yet in the mean time, his most Christian Majesty fail'd not with all actions of goodness and generosity, to en∣deavour a correspondence with the Person and House of the New Pope, giving him to understand, that the chastisement of the aforesaid persons, proceeded from the aversion they had to his Election, or at least for that they had per∣swaded that Crown to his Exclusion, with arguments much contrary to the truth. Innocent being dead on the 7th. of January 1655. after he had reigned ten years and three months, the Cardinals according to their usual rights enter'd the Conclave the 18th. of the same month, to the number of 62. Cardinals, who were at that time pre∣sent in Rome; which number in few dayes was encreas'd by the accession of 4. more, from their Residencies and Provinces, after the clausure of the Conclave. I will not de∣scribe
many particulars of this Conclave, because that it is fresh in every ones memory, and many pens have already wearied themselves with the relations of it, though amongst those there is nothing to be found but ambiguity of words. I shall only relate, that the most curious thing in that Conclave, was the faction of the Squadron di `Dio, or the Factione volante, as they call'd them, which was so nume∣rous, it was sufficient to have given Exclusion to all the rest; and which was of more importance, all of them resolv'd vigorously to maintain the Priviledges of the Electors, and to imploy themselves unanimously for the Exaltation of a person, in whom all the qualifications necessary for a good Pope, might concur. These Cardinals were creatures of Innocent, who seeing the Prince Pamphilio was not a Cardinal Nephew, and therefore could not be made head of the said Creatures, desir'd the said Cardinals, that they would unite themselves under such a head as he (who was Nephew to the Pope which gave all of them their Caps) should name, and accordingly he propos'd Gio. Carlo di Medici, the first Cardinal created by Innocent; but they re∣ply'd, they had heads and feet already to manage themselves withall: However for all this they did not forbear corresponding both with the said Prince, and Donna Olimpia, who had as great an interest and authority, as if she had been in the Conclave, and under∣stood how to comport her self so well, that her very interests were those which pro∣long'd the Conclave. But passing by the particulars of the 22. Cardinals, which were Candidates and Com∣petitors for the Popedome, and the subtilties and stratagems us'd for the Inclusion of this person, and the Exclusion of that; I shall only say, that amongst all the Cardinals which were in the greatest and most general favour with the Colledge, Cardinal Chigi was the man; upon whom all the designs and desires of Prince Pamphilio, Innocent's Nephew, were plac'd, not only for the reputation he had every where, for the exemplariness of his life, and his intelligence in Politick (especially Foreign) affairs, but because he seem'd likewise to conform himself to the good intentions which his Unkle alwayes had had, who (as is reported) discoursing one day with Chigi, and Cardinal Azzolini, (both of them Secretaries of State) about the Election of his Successor; Innocent stood still, and looking stedfastly upon Chigi's face, smiling as it were, he said, Let us talk no more of that, God will provide for his Church; and it is certain, he cogn'd to Chigi before his death, certain Breviats concerning the establishment of the affairs of his Family, recommending it to his care, as if he presag'd his succession to the Papacy. The difficulties which were met with in the promotion of this person, were many notwithstanding, and such as begot no small discords and delayes: The Cardinal di Medici head of the Spanish Faction, had no inclination to Chigi; Cardinal Barbarino's Faction kept a loof likewise for several respects, and Grimalai had engag'd the French Faction to his Exclusion, upon I know not what little trifling jealousies which had got into Mazarme's brain. But God Almighty, who walks in wayes impenetrable to the abject apprehension of man, after eighty dayes continuance in the Conclave, by an unexpected union, recon∣cd the minds of the dissenters, so that all differences being compos'd, they met by common consent to create Chigi Pope: Upon which a Cardinal of good judgement, being surpriz'd to see them run with that zeal and impatience to his Chamber, to make him Gods Vicegerent, said to his companion, What extravagances are these? the Spaniards will have a Pope with no interest; the French will have one whom they have ex∣cluded before; the young Cardinals will have an honest man, and the old ones a young man; the Medici will have a Stnese, and the Barbarini one that is not their Creature. To which the other reply'd, These are the mysteries of the Holy Ghost. On the sixth of April at night, almost all the Cardinals went to congratulate with Chigi, at first he seem'd to weep and bewail, and hold his eyes with both his hands; but having taken a little courage, he gave them thanks for their affection, with the kindest demonstrations imaginable. The night seem'd very tedious to every body, by reason of the impatience they had to see the Conclave concluded by so sacred an E∣lection.
For all this Cardinal Rosetti, a capital enemy of Chigi's, forbore not to run up and down all night long, as if he would have resisted, even heaven it self; but he gain'd no∣thing but the imputation of imprudence, to contend alone, against the common agree∣ment of all the rest. Some of them took great pleasure to see him run from Chamber to Chamber, and especially to see more than four Cardinals deny him audience, by telling him, they should be seen to morrow in the Chapel, and there was one told him aloud, I know what your Eminence would have, and therefore you need say no more, I shall see your Eminence in the morning. On the 7th. in the morning, the most zealous of the Cardinals went to take Chigi out of his bed, as well as out of his Chamber, and conducted him to the Chapel, where the Scrutny was begun; in which, together with the access, there were as many votes for Chigi, as there were Cardinals, there being not one against him, which was an unu∣sual thing at the Elections of other Popes. 'Tis believ'd Rosetti himself gave him his vote, and it may be argu'd from what Rosetti said to one of his Confidents, that he lit∣tle thought to have given his vote for Chigi. As soon as the Scrutiny was publish'd, he fell upon his knees before the Altar, pray'd, and wept a while, and being askt by the Masters of the Ceremonies if he consented to the Election, he answer'd, yes, (accompanying his answer with a most profound sigh) he would be call'd Alexander, in memory of Alexander the 3d. his fellow Citizen; and so the adoration being perform'd in the Chapel, he was publish'd to the people, who rejoyc'd not a little to see so worthy an Election, after three months vacancy of the See. But before we proceed to the Election of Clement the 9th. (which being a thing not written before, will require a longer reflection) it will not be amiss to give a general de∣scription of the Election of Popes, for the greater clearness and illustration of the Reader, which cannot but be grateful to the curious, especially Forreigners, who for the most part are desirous of as much light as may be, for the better observation of what they read. I shall say therefore that the Election of the Pope is usually in three manners, the first first by Scrutiny, the second by Access, and the third by Adoration; true it is, there is another way mentioned in the Chapter of Elections, and it is when the dissentions are so great amongst the Cardinals (as it happens too often) that they cannot by any means agree; in that case by common consent, they engage themselves to two or three Cardi∣nals, and smetimes to one, that what person soever they choose out of such a number as shall be propos'd by them, he shall be their lawful Pope; but this is not now us'd; in case of any difference they betake themselves to one of the three ways aforesaid: and therefore I think it not pertinent to make the Reader to lose his time, about a thing that is out of use, it being sufficient to have given him this hint. As to the Scrutiny, which is the principal, and most usual way in the Conclave, it is made in this manner. Each of the Cardinals orders his Conclavist to bring him a Polizy, or Ticket of the vote he desires to give in the morning, which is done thus: they take a leaf of paper, and fold it in the middle long-ways, then they cut that fold in the midst again, taking one of the pieces and folding it long-ways, about the length of a finger, upon which they make five folds, and cut it off at the fifth; after this the Car∣dinal writes with his own hand, in the outermost fold, his own name; as for example, Flavius Cardinalis Chisius, having written his name, he folds up the Paper again, so as his name is conceal'd in the innermost plate. After this, there is laid upon the other side of the third fold, a piece of red Wax, or a Wafer, which is seal'd on both sides with two little seals, which every one of the Car∣dinals bring along with them into the Conclave on purpose; and the two uppermost folds being empty, the Conclavist writes the name of the Cardinal to whom he is pleas'd to give his vote in this manner, Ego Elig in summum Pontificem, Eminentissimum Do∣minum meum Cardinalem; N. The Cardinal uses not to write this vote with his own hand, least it should be observ'd and known, and that vote which should be secret, be∣come publique, and give occasion of hatred or distrust▪ this being done, the vote is folded up, and on the out-side there is alwayes of necessity some word written at the
Election of the Cardinal; to the end, that if it should fall out an Access should be made, (which they cannot do to the same Cardinal, to whom the vote is given) it may without difficulty be known by finding out the extrinsick word of the Cardinals vote who accedes, otherwise they must open them all, which would be a prejudice to the secresie requir'd in a case of that importance; and therefore the Cardinal who has a mind to accede, is wont to say, Accedo ad Cardinalem, & possum accedere, ut patet ex voto me suscripto sic. In the morning in which this Scrutiny is made, these votes are put by the Cardinals into a Chalice of Gold which stands upon the Altar of the Chappel, in which they or∣dinarily meet to make the Scrutiny; and first the Cardinals who are the heads of the Orders, go to the Chambers of the Cardinals that are sick, to take their votes, and ha∣ving put the votes of the sick Cardinals, with the votes of those who are personally pre∣sent, altogether, they pour out the votes out of the Chalice upon a Table plac'd on purpose before the Altar; they are read, and mark'd by every Cardinal in his proper seat, where the names of all the Cardinals are stamp'd by order, and under the names, a line being drawn, the Cardinal by reiterated marks, or by Arithmatick, casts up how many votes every one in the Scrutiny may have had; and if it happens, that of three parts of the Cardinals then present in the Conclave, two have agreed in one person, that person without more adoe, is to be Pope by the Scrutiny: and in such case the votes are to be open'd in the lower parts, and the names of every Cardinal that is for him, com∣municated; but this happens but seldom or never, it was done once in the Election of Adrian, but not having happen'd since, 'tis look'd upon as a miracle. There is another way of Electing the Pope, which was introduc'd above two ages since, and it is call'd by Access; being much like the antient custom among the Ro∣mans, which was, that those Senators who adher'd to the opinion of any of the said Senators, in the publick affairs that were transacted in the Senate, they rose from their seats, and going towards the place where the said Senator sate, they approv'd his judgment in express terms, or else said accedo ad talem, as they do now in the Conclave; so that of∣ten amongst the Latins this way of going is read, ire in sententiam. The third way of creating Popes, is by Adoration, which is perform'd in this manner; That Cardinal, who out of friendship, or Conscience, or any particular interest, de∣sires to favour any other Cardinal, he puts himself before him in the Chappel, and makes him a low Reverence; and when it falls out that two thirds of the Cardinals do the same, the Pope is then understood to be created; but if there wants but one person of that number, the creation is void. And sometimes it has been seen that some persons were adored, which never came to the Papacy, because they wanted a sufficient number of Cardinals to compleat their Adoration; and this way is usually try'd by any consi∣derable number of Cardinals, obstinate in the promotion of some person, propounded by themselves, for fear lest some of them may be wanting in the private Scrutiny, who had pass'd their words firmly to them; which has happen'd a thousand times, whereas in the Adoration which is publick, he to whom the promise is given cannot be cousen'd. But here it is to be noted, that both the Access and Adoration, are ordina∣rily confirm'd with the Scrutiny, which is done without any prejudice to whatever hath been done, either in the Adoration or Access; and the parties concern'd, when any such thing happens, make protestation, not only in words, but in writing also, or∣dering a Copy of their Protestation to be taken under the hand of the Notary. But here may arise a question in the mind of the Reader, which he may propose in this manner; If by accident a Pope be created by way of Adoration, with so many votes, or more than amount to the two thirds, if afterwards in the private Scrutiny, the Car∣dinals change their minds, and give their votes to another person, so that the number necessary to make up the two thirds be defective, to him that had before suffrages enough in the Access or Adoration; shall he remain Pope? and may it be resolv'd in favour of  Pope created by Adoration, and excluded by the Scrutiny? I answer in few words, that this case having never happen'd in any Conclave, there has been by consequence no occasion to decide it; for it is not usual to determine of cass, before they fall out: for my part I am of opinion if such a thing should be, the
Lords Cardinals would either create some Schisme amongst themselves, or to prevent that Schisme, would agree in favour of him who was elected by Adoration or Access; seeing that both those wayes, are decreed by several Popes sufficient, and valid. But yet this case cannot happen, because the Adoration or Access being made, all is confirm'd by giving open votes in the Scrutiny; and perhaps that method is observ'd, on purpose to avoid any sort of Schisme which might proceed from the contrary. Another question was ask'd me not long since, by a German Gentleman at Rome, who was present in the Solemn Cavalcade on the Coronation of Clement the 9th. and all the particulars of that Solemnity; it being an antient custom for the Popes after they are created, to be Crowned in Saints Peters Church by the hands of the Cardinal Deacon: on which day also the ceremony of the Flax is observ'd, which is thus, they put a quan∣tity of the finest Flax upon the end of a stick, which is burnt in the presence of the Pope, whilst one of the Assistants pronounces to him these words, Sic transit gloria mundi, Sanctissime Pater. But this ceremony is modern, and was thought convenient, after the Popes began to degenerate from what they observ'd in the Primitive times. Then the Pontificate was a trouble and an affliction to the Popes, and an honour and reputation to Christianity; whereas in these times, 'tis an honour to the Popes, and a grievance to Christendome. In short, heretofore the Popedome was a Glory to the Church, and a Martyrdome to the Pope; but now 'tis a Martyrdome to the Church, and a Glo∣ry to the Pope. And this ceremony imports no more, than that if their Glo∣ry be past in this world, they will go into another to receive the affliction prepar'd for them there, for glorifying themselves so much in this. But to return to the German, he ask'd me, if a Pope might exercise the authority which is given him by the Papacy, before the ceremony of his Coronation; and whe∣ther if it should happen that he dy'd before his Coronation, he is to be understood a Le∣gal Pope? To which I made no great difficulty to answer, yes; for 'tis clear, the de∣fect of a ceremony cannot abrogate a Law; as those are exactly which create Popes by way of Scrutiny, nay Adoration or Access. The Creation of a Pope being a formal Law, and the Coronation an external Ceremony only. Ʋrban the 7th. who liv'd as many dayes as there are Letters in these two words, ƲRBANO SETTIMO, dy'd before he was Crown'd; and yet in the space of the thirteen dayes of his Papacy, he establish'd certain Ordinances, which have been punctu∣ally observ'd. This Ʋrban having remitted to Cardinal Albano the sum of 3500 Roman Crowns, which he was indebted to the Chamber for so much lent him by Sixtus the 5th. there were some of the Cardinals, no great friends to the said Albano, did propoe that he ought to be constrain'd to pay the money, because as they pretended, the Pope not being Crowned, had no capacity to release it. But the soberer of the Cardinals over∣rul'd it in favour of Albano; and the succeeding Pope would have all observ'd, which was ordain'd by the said Ʋrban: and certainly it is not to be maintain'd, that if the Pope dyes before he be Crown'd, he is no true Pope, for he is a Legal Pope as soon as he is chosen in the Conclave, and may act with as much freedom and authority, as if he were Crown'd; and to confirm this, there are several Pontifical Bulls extant, and one amongst the rest, in which these words are to be found, Ʋt is qui electus est in Apostola∣tum, si juxta consuetudinem intronizare non valeat, electus tamen sicut verus Papa ohtinet auctoritatem regendi R. Eccl. & disponendi omnes facultates illius, quod B. Gregorium ante suam Coronationem cognovimus fecisse, &c. Besides Clement 5. excommunicated all those who dare affirm that the Pope before his Coronation cannot do what he may do after it. And although, as some Lawyers will have it, the Emperour before his Coronation by the Pope, may administer, and do, whatever a true and lawful Emperour may do; yet before his Coronation by the Pope, he is not said to be absolutely Emperour, but Em∣perour Elect; whereas the Pope is call'd absolutely Pope, and never Pope Elect, though he be not Crown'd, which is obvious in the words of Clement the 5th. in one of the Ex∣travagants, in which the Case is discuss'd, and the difference made clear, why one should be call'd Emperour elect, before his Coronation, and the other absolutely Pope, before his. Some believe it arises from this reason, because the Pope owns not any Su∣periour upon Earth, but God in Heaven: whereas the Emperour must acknowledge the
Pope to be superiour to him; but this is nothing but the flattery of the Ecclesiasticks; because the Popes have been many times declar'd inferiour▪ to Councels, and Coun∣cels have many times deposed them; and they that depose, are certainly above them that are deped. The Emperour 'tis true confesses the Pope head of the Church, of which he is but a Member; but that does not conclude he is subject to him; for the Pope can∣not command him (nor any other King) in any thing, but in certain general Cases, as he does to the whole body of Christians. But I shall pass now to other particularities of the Conclave. In the Chapel of Sixtus the 1st. and likewise in the Hall of the Consistory, and if need be, in the Royal Hall, there are as many little Chambers, built of little Beams of Wood, nail'd together, and laid a thwart, as there are Cardinals alive; every one of them 20 foot wide, and 22 foot long, about one foot distance from one another, and no more, having nothing but a small vacuity to part them; these pieces of timber aloft are rais'd in a four square form, like a Canopy, supported at the four Corners by certain larger pieces of Timber. Over every Chamber there is a letter of the Alphabet, in order; and because the Car∣dinals are many, and more than the Lettess, they are doubled once or twice, as occasion requires. Now whereas nine days together after the death of the Pope, the Cardinals perform the Obsequies, in Saint Peters Church; on the tenth, the Chamberlain, in the presence of several Prelates, puts the names of all the Cardinals, written in little Billets, into a Vaze, and in another. he hath as many Chartels put, signed with the Alphabetical Let∣ters, fastned (as I have said) upon the Chambers, and drawing, a a venture, the the names of the Cardinals one by one, he draws likewise the letters for every one, and then distributes them according to their Lots; and the Letter of the Cardinal to whose share it falls, is fixt upon the Chamber. At this Lottery there are always present some of the Cardinals servants, who immediately furnish and hang the same for their Ma∣sters with Cloth, so as they resemble a plain Tent. They furnish them with Beds and a Table, carrying in several Utensils for the Table, and other necessaries; The Raf∣ters are cover'd with Linnen, or the fairest Wollen-cloath, with Curtains of the same hanging down the sides, of what colour they please; so that the Cardinals created by the last Pope have Green, and the rest Purple; but they have chang'd the colours some∣times, and us'd red, and white. During the said nine days, the Cardinals do constantly meet, either at the Chamber∣lains house, or in the Palace, to deliberate on such provisions as are necessary for the good government of the State Ecclesiastick; They write Letters to the Presidents of Provinces, and to the absolute Governours, using the same titles of Son and Brother, as the Pope does. They do confirm and order the guard of the first gate of the Pallace to their Swisses; the second, which is the gate of the Inner Court, to the Caporioni, or Conservators of Rome, which are indeed the chief of the Wards of the City: The third guards consist of the Ambassadors of Princes, and other persons of great worth, but they must not be Ecclesiasticks. At the fourth gate, which is the nearest to the Con∣clave, there are eight or ten Prelates, of the highest condition and quality. These guards do not attend (unless it be the Swisses) but when the Cardinals are enter'd into the Conclave. Almes are given for the soul of the Pope, choice is made of the Concla∣vists which are to enter with them; after that every Cardinal proposes him which he desires to have with him, and then the Chamberlain proposes such others as are usually wont to be there, which are chosen by private votes by the whole Colledge, except the Vestry-keeper, and the Master of the Ceremonies; and then in one of the ten dayes the Chamberlain gives an Oath of fidelity to all that are so Elected, in the presence of the Col∣ledge. There are three Cardinals deputed every day to superintend all the Expences that are made, as wellin the conclave, and funeral, as in other things, which is plac'd upon the account of the Apostolick-chamber, but with observation of the Bull of Pius the 4th which prohibites the expence in Rome, to exceed ten thousand crowns: And lastly to appoint when they must enter into the Conclave; that is, whether in the Morning, or af∣ter Vespers, on the eleventh day.
The eleventh day after the death of the Pope, in the morning, every Cardinal exhorts his Family to live piously, and serve God: Those which can, do say Mass, and then all of them at the hour appointed repair to Saint Peters Church, where, upon which Altar the Dean pleases, he sings the Mass of the Holy Ghost; and those Cardinals who have not celebrated already, do communicate there. Mass being ended, a Prelate is appoin∣ted by the Chamberlain, in an Oration, to admonish the Fathers of their duties, and the importance of the affair they are going about. After this is over, according to the time appointed for going into the Conclave, Mass being said, the Master of the Ceremonies to the Pope, taking the Papal Cross in his hand, he goes towards the Conclave; The Cardinals servants go before, after them the singing men, singing the Hymn, Veni Creator Spiritus, &c. in the last place, are the President Cardinals, and the Cardinal Bishops, in the second place the Priests, in the third the Deacons, all habited in Purple, and after them the other Prelates, and Clergy of the Court. As soon as they are enter'd the Conclave, the Dean of the Colledge, before the Al∣tar in the Chapel of Saint Nicholas, says the Prayer, Deus qui Corda, invocating the Holy Ghost: But if their entrance be i Vespers time, they meet in Saint Peters, and go in Procession (as is said) moving according to the command of the Chamberlain. The Dean having done his Prayer, the Chamberlain in the presence of all people, and at the request of the Notary, before the said Altar, gives an Oath upon the Holy Evan∣gelist to every one of the Deputies, at the second and third gates, that is to the Roman Barons, and the Ambassadors of Princes, obliging them to be diligent, and faithful to the Apostolick Pallace, and the sacred Conclave, and that they shall not permit the Cardinals to be aggrieved by any body, contrary to the Pontifical Bulls: The Deputies at the fourth Gate of the Sacred Conclave, do swear the same and more, viz. that they shall not suffer any body to come near the said Gate, nor to speak with any one within, nor to write or receive Letters without express leave from the Colledge; that they shall search with all diligence what meat and provision is carry'd in, that there be no Letters or advice, convey'd therein, that they shall take care their Wine, and their Water be given in Glasses, to prevent any juggling that way. Every one shall depart the Conclave, but the Cardinals, and such as shall be chosen, which are as follow. The Vestry-keeper to the Pope, with a Coadjutor, two Masters of the Ceremonies, a religious Regular for Confessor, a Chyrurgeon, two Physicians, and an Apothecary, with two Servants, eight or nine persons for the service of the whole Conclave, and none of them to be of the Family of any of the Cardinals: Every Cardinal may have two Servants of his own, and if sick, three, provided it be with the approbation of the Colledge, but they ought to have been with each Cardinal one year: they must be no Merchants, no Ministers of Princes, none of their own Brothers or Ne∣phews, neither are they to have any temporal Jurisdiction. There shall be a Governour of the Conclave, a Prelate of worth, and of parts, who shall take care that things be carried within as they ought to be, and that the Cardinaals want nothing that is conve∣nient; and all these particulars were ordain'd by Pius the 4th. All those being departed, which are not allow'd to remain in the Conclave, the per∣sons deputed shall be plac'd at the second and third Gates, and the fourth which belongs properly to the Conclave, shall be lock'd with four Keys, and so remain fortifi'd with four locks, having in the middle, a little VVindow, or a VVheel, as the Cham∣berlain pleaseth. Two of the Keys are kept without, one for the Gate, another for the Window; and the other two within, for the same; those within are in the keeping of the Master of the Ceremonies, those without in the custody of two principal Prelates; so that nei∣ther these, nor the other, can open either gate, or window, unless they come all four to∣gether, and when they are open'd, there is a cloath drawn at some distance from the gate, that they which are without can see nothing within. The Captain of the first Guard, is to have a care, there be no insult or attempt made upon the Pallace, and he sends Petrols of Souldiers constantly about to secure every place: The Barons of the second guard, suffer not any body to enter, but at feeding times;
and then they are very curious that no intelligence be conveyed in: The third are to obviate, and oppose any outrage that may be made; and the Prelates and those of the fourth Guard, do see that there be nothing wanting which is necessary, that no Letters, nor Notes, be sent in or out, and examine the meat▪ and the drink. As soon as the Cardinals are shut up, the Chamberlain with two Cardinals which he pleases to choose, having lighted their Torches, shall make diligent search through all places in the Conclave, whether there be any remaining in the Conclave, who are not deputed or allowed. No person can enter into the Conclave, upon the most urgent occasion whatsoever, without license from the Colledge; nor can a Cardinal that goes out, come back again: No body can go out as he pleases; a Cardinal may be constrained by the Colledge not to go forth, and if he does go without leave, he must not be receiv'd again, if he be not admitted de novo by the whole Colledge: If a Cardinal arrives, when the rest are enter'd, he puts himself in the same condition, in which he finds the Conclave, and his Servants are to be sworn by the Chamberlain, as the Servants of the other Cardinals were. And last of all, every body withdrawing, this first day of the Conclave, which is the 11th. after the death of the Pope, in the Chappel of Saint Nicholas, which is at the upper end of the Royal Hall as aforesaid, on the left hand towards the entrance; the Chairs being plac'd, and all people put at a distance by the Governour of the Conclave, the Dean makes an Exhortation to these Lords, and afterwards reads the Bulls of Julius the 2d. and Pius the 4th. which treat of this Election, prescribe the order thereof, and prohibite all Simoniacal and undue practises; as also the Bull of Pius the 5th. that the Goods of the Church cannot be alienated; and which every Cardinal swears, that if it happens he shall be created Pope, he will observe strictly and confirm, as soon as he is Crown'd. There are other Orders made as they please; they swear to keep secret the transactions and argumentations, they promise their Conclavists their Priviledges, they enter into discourses about the person they think proper for a Charge, that makes even the Angels tremble at the weight of it: And almost alwayes the first day of the Con∣clave is spent in these kind of things, without coming to an Election, which is perform'd afterwards with more leisure and opportunity, for the most part by Scrutiny, or Adoration. There are many other Ceremonies and particularities, partly hinted, and partly omit∣ted by me, as well because they have been described by several Authors already, as also to avoid being tedious to the Reader, in obvious things, and such as are common to every body that make profession to enquire into the interests of the Court of Rome. It is suffi∣cient that I have selected the most curious matters; seeing that many are moved by their meer curiosity, in that which regards their information of the affairs of Rome, and par∣ticularly of the interests of the Conclaves in general, and of this Conclave in particular.
Il CARDINALISMO di Santa Chiesa, OR THE HISTORY OF CARDINALS. In III. Parts. PART III. BOOK III. The Contents. In which is discours'd, of the difference betwixt the Election of the Pope, and of the Emperor. Of some particulars which render the Election of the Pope difficult in the Conclave. Of the time the Papable Cardinals had to negotiate their interests, in the long languishing of Alexander the 7th. Of the great fear some Cardinals were in, of not arriving time enough in Rome for the Election of a new Pope. Of Cardinal Rosetti's distrusting the infirmities of Alexander the 7th. and the cause. Of an answer which Alexander gave to Cardinal Barbarino, after his recovery from his infirmity. Of the Reasons that moved the French Cardinals to mend their paces, to come in time to the Conclave. Of the arrival of the Marquiss di San Romano, the Catholick Kings Ambassador. Of the diligence used by the French in sifting and investigating the transactions of the Spaniards. Of the arrival of Cardinal Grimaldi in Rome. Of the great broyls and contests amongst the Cardinals
about obtaining the Papacy, whilst the Pope was yet alive. Of the Spyes the Spanish Ambassador kept. Of the apprehension Chigi had, that his Crea∣tures would be perverted by the French, and Spaniard. Of a Letter writ by Chigi to the Cardinal Gabriele. Of the great fault the Court found with Chigi for alienating Cardinal Nini from his devotion. Of the reconciliation of these two persons, by the mediation of Cardinal Rasponi, and Corsini. Of the Assembly that was in the House of Cardinal Albici, to treat of the Papacy. Of the great train of Followers, that was most eminently visible in the Houses of Cardinal Rospigliosi, and Farnese, as persons which were esteem'd nearest to the Papacy. Of the practises which Cardinal Imperiale began, in the behalf of Bonelli his Kinsman. Of the death and funeral of Pope Alexander. Of the passage of the Chamberlain to the Apostolical Palace. Of certain villanies committed at the windows and doors of Chigi's Palace. Of the great number of Gabels impos'd by Alexander. Of the Obsequies perform'd for the said Pope. Of the difference betwixt certain Cardinals for place. Of the Conclave. Of the number of Lodgings in the Palace of the Vatican. Of the great silence, and taciturnity, which was observ'd in Car∣dinal Chigi. Of an Oration made in a Congregation, by the French Am∣bassadors and the Venetian. Of the alienation shew'd by Alexander from the French interest, towards his latter dayes. Of several persons which believ'd that Cardinal Chigi, to gain the favour of the King of France, would condescend to the Election of a French Pope. Of the number of Car∣dinals enter'd into the Conclave. Of those Cardinals who remain'd without. Of the qualities, merits, and adherences of the Papable Cardinals. Of the answer one Cardinal gave to another, who ask'd him his judgement about the Election of a new Pope. Of the facilities and contradictions in the Election of Rospigliosi. Of the division of the Cardinals in the Conclave. Of the great Faction the Barbarini had, after the death of Urban the 8th. Of the weakness of the Faction of the Barbarini. Of the number of Urban's Crea∣tures which were present in the Conclave. Of the differences betwixt the Factions. The description of a Muster of Souldiers. The application an Abbot made of that Muster to the Conclave. Of the Faction of Chigi, and how numerous. Of the industry us'd by the French, to oblige the Chigi. Of a notable saying of a Cardinal, upon Chigi's obstinacy, not to forsake his own Creatures. Of the Faction of the Flying Squadron. Of the disorder in the French, to see this Squadrone volante managed by Cardinal Imperiale. Of the first Scrutiny, which prov'd vain. Of the Cardinals which receiv'd Votes in the Scrutiny. Of the open practises of the French in favour of Farnese. Of the promise made by Imperiale when he went into France, that he would concurr to the Election of a French Pope, and how he brake it. Of an idle report spread about the City, that Cardinal Rospigliosi was created Pope in the beginning of the Conclave, and from whence it proceeded. Of the practises for Rospigliosi recommended to Azolino, by the Cardinals Barba∣rino and Chigi. Of the entrance of Cardinal Donghi into the Conclave. Of Cardinal Ginetti, who presented himself to Barbarino, and the answer Barbarino gave him. Of the creation of Rospigliosi, and the Politick Aphorisms of Azolini.
AMongst all the conferences and politick actions, amongst all the manage∣ments and publick negotiations transacted by the Cardinals, it is cer∣tain the action of the Conclave is most worthy to be inquir'd into, by all such as have the management of publick affairs. The Election of the Emperor, carries a Magnificence along with it, for being in the power of six or seven Princes, partly Temporal, partly Spiritual, of which number four being obtain'd, the Empire is gain'd. But the Election of the Pope is after another manner, there being many more Princes considerable in this, than in the Election of the Emperor himself, and that because the Pontificate is of both Spiritual and Temporal consequence. The Conclave is not manag'd by six or seven voices, but by sixty, amongst which there are some who are neither for God, nor the Devil, others devoted to their own interest only, others obliged to follow the resolutions of the Nipotisme, others of the French, others of the Spaniard; some promise fairly with their tongues to one, and with their hearts to another; and there are some also to be found, who take delight in excluding all parties, to give a longer impediment to affairs. The learnedest of the Cardinals, are those which prevail least; the most politick, are follow'd the worst; the most ignorant, are the most obstinate; in brief things are ma∣nag'd in that manner, that those very men who have the chiefest share in the whole trans∣actions, can scarce give an account of what they have done; the affairs of the Conclave to some persons seem easie, and easily to be penetrated, and for that reason they desire to be prying; but as to the point of the Keyes, there are so many intricacies and Meanders, they can hardly find the way thorow. So many Conclavists as there are in the Conclave, so many Conclaves are represented to the ears of the Court; people imagine things according to their representations and figures, but the business is, the figures of the Conclave have feet and walk not, have eyes and see not, have ears and hear not, and tongues and speak not. The French make many Popes, to amuse the Spaniards with jealousies of such plots, as they never think of themselves. The transactions of the Conclave are of two sorts, publick, and private; the private are managed by the Cardinals in secret, where the sound of their voices can scarce penetrate the air, much less the ears of any body, and these are good; but those which are in publick, are full of hypocrisie and dissimulation, to lull and illude one another, and therefore not to be commended. They who at the opening of the Conclave, do make relation of the managements and transactions in the Election, can speak no more than they know, which commonly is nothing but what is common, because the most politick, and most occult affairs, are kept close in the minds of the Cardinals, who either will not, or care not, to communi∣cate them to any body. For this cause, the Conclavists themselves are oftentimes con∣founded in their relations; and I have heard two of them contending about the Con∣clave of Innocent, with great heat, one pressing and persisting in what the other did de∣ny, and perhaps both of them disputing upon that, which was never so much as mention'd in the Conclave. But I believe there was never (to this day) seen a Conclave more imbroyl'd, with∣out broyls, more confounded, without confusions, than the last, in which Clement the 9th. was created: a Pope certainly very worthy of the charge, as we shall demonstrate in its place. Imbroyl'd in sundry respects, because France is in its achme of Grandeur, and upon the brink of a rupture with Spain, which has neither King to govern the Helm, nor Cardinal to manage its Faction; because the number of Cardinals was so great, and many worthy pretenders amongst them; because the Faction of Chigi was resolv'd to have no other Pope whatsoever, but one of the creatures of Alexander; and for several other reasons sufficient to render the Conclave tedious, and yet all succeeded without any trouble at all. Certainly the facility of concluding this Conclave so soon, is commendable and wor∣thy to quicken the curiosity of all people, to inquire into the reasons of it. If the time of fifteen dayes be consider'd, it seems to be long, being in Summer time, and in the
City of Rome; but if it be compar'd with the time of other Conclaves preceeding, and the variety of interests, crossing and thwarting one another, it will be thought but short. But to speak the truth, the Conclave of Clement was much longer than it seems in ap∣pearance, because the transactions were more without than within, and things were re∣solved before they enter'd the Conclave. Two months together Alexander continued dangerously ill, whilst Posts were sent every where up and down, not only with the news of his languishing condition, and the impossibility of his living above two or three dayes; but with the certain tydings of his death; and twice it was believ'd in the very City of Rome. In this tedious agony of Alexanders, every one had time to adjust his own business, and to bring his affairs to such a pass; that his deplorable death could produce no great novelty in the Court, nor more pretenders to the Papacy. It may be said therefore, and with reason, that the Conclave of Clement lasted little less than three months, that is, two before the death of Alexander, and the rest after∣wards. The Cardinals seem'd to precipitate, running towards Rome as it were with wings on their feet, which hast was occasion'd by the news, that the Conclave would be much imbroyl'd, and their celerity was so great, some of them were arriv'd before the Pope was expir'd; and particularly the French Cardinals, who were there at the due time, but as I have said with wings on their feet. There was never in times past so great a fear observ'd in the Cardinals of not arriving at Rome in time, nor so impatient a desire of being in the Conclave, as at this time; from whence it is imagin'd, they had some strict orders and instructions from their se∣veral Crowns. Cardinal Rossetti was the only person which kept to his residence in his Bishoprick, and though he was inform'd of the arrival of almost all the Cardinals in Rome, and of the condition of the Pope, continuing firm to his resolution, not to depart so soon, he sent this answer to his Agent in Rome, that he would not stir a step, before he saw from good hands an account of the Funeral of the Pope; as remembring that when they were Nuntio's together in Colen, his Holiness being to comply in some great resolutions, he counterfeited a fit of sickness for two months together, for which he received the Sacra∣ment three times as a Viaticum, and had the Psalms for the recommendation of his Soul recited four times. The reports of things being in this hurry, and of the arrival of the Ambassadors in such hast, being told to the departing Pope, and withall, that the transactions, and practices for a new Election was already begun: His Holiness began to look about him, and force that little remainder of his breath, to prevent their troubles, if it were possible: coun∣terfeiting himself herefore to be on the mending hand, and his Eminence Cardinal Bar∣barino entring one day to make him a visit, he ask'd him how he did; the good Pope re∣ply'd, I am like those who play at Goose, implying, that as at the game of Goose there is the house of death, into which whosoever falls, he must begin again, and return to the first hole of the game, so he having been near death, began as it were to live again; & this he said to perplex and mortifie Barbarino, whom he knew very well to be one of those, that being pretenders to the Papacy, had rather see him in his Tomb, than in his Bed: But Barbarino who saw his condition, ceast not to drive on his interests, by striking in one place, and guarding in another, but very privately. One reason that spur'd on the French Cardinals to mend their pace in their journey to Rome was, the great hast they were inform'd the Marquess di san Romano the Spanish Ambassador made; who having news of the ill condition his Holiness was in, made all hast imaginable; Of which the French on the other side being jealous, as doubting the arrival of so fresh a Minister, might render the Spanish Faction too potent, they began likewise to put on, that they might be there time enough to frustrate his designs. His Excellence the Marquis enter'd into Rome the 25 of April, attended by a great number of Coaches, and amongst the rest Cardinal Chigi, to whom the Spanish Am∣bassador had promis'd the protection of Spain; but in a short time 'twas discovered to be only a subtlety, to oblige him to concur with his Creatures, in the Election of a Pope depending cordially upon the Catholick Crown.
The same night he made his Entry, his Excellency went immediately to Cardinal Chi∣gi, and Cardinal Sforza, in which audience though it was but short, they desir'd many things should be agreed of, relating to the new Pope: The Ambassador continued his vi∣sits every day without intermission, though it rain'd very much, to whom it is not to be believ'd what noble treats the Papable Cardinals gave; but above all Farnese, who was imbarqu'd in the business more than all of them, as if the concurrences of the Crowns were to be drawn on by the throat. The French carry'd their affairs very cunningly, prying into the actions of the Spani∣ards perpetually: and these were not much behind in discovering the designs of the French, whose party they look'd upon to be very strong, there being some of the Cardinals oblig'd to follow it for love, and others for fear; and it was look'd upon as the more potent, by reason of the weakness of the Spanish Faction, there having none declar'd openly for the same but Langravio Sforza and Raggi, of whom also there was no certainty; in regard of the injury he receiv'd dayly from them. In the mean time the greatest of the Prelates did not forbear endeavouring to concili∣ate the minds and affections of them both; though not to villifie their opinions of their own merits, whether real, or pretended, they did visibly desire se longius ire, a thing which seems natural to the Clergy of his age. About this time Cardinal Grimaldi arriv'd in Rome, and sent away immediately to Cardinal Barbarino, Dean of the sacred Colledge, to let him know he would come and visit him; but he suspending his answer till his Coach was got ready, would needs pre∣vent his Eminence (which had he not pretended to the Popedome, he would never have done) with whom he held long discourse, about the Emergent affairs, and afterwards according to the Deans example, all the rest of the Cardinals came to visit him; and particularly those who stood for the Papacy, were none of the last. Indeed when the Spanish Ambassador arrived, the Spanish faction seem'd for some days to be made stron∣ger, and the French weaken'd; but on the contrary; as soon as Grimaldi was arriv'd, the Spaniard grew weak, and the French faction strong. It is not to be imagin'd, what passages, what messages, what visits were made by night and by day, in order to the acquisition of the Papacy, whilst the Pope was alive; The Spanish Ambassador had his Spies in all places, to observe the motions of his adversaries, he fail'd not with his promises to allure all people to his party, particularly he offer'd very largely to Cardinal Caraffa a Neopolitan, and by consequence a subject of Spain: but as the Spaniards were jealous of him, so he was diffident of their promises, and re∣solv'd to stand neuter. The Cardinal Chigi, though oblig'd to the assistance of his Unkle, and the care of the Church; yet he manag'd the new Election with great order, and had his eyes open over his own Creatures, as being fearful they might be debauch'd away, either to the French faction, or the Spanish; for which reason he gave the care of that to Caraffa, whom he ordain'd his director in all his affairs, and was not ill serv'd by him. Cardinal Chigi writ a very courteous letter to Cardinal Gabriele in Ascoli, a creature of Ʋrban the eights: which said letter gave great occasion of jealousie to the rest of the Pretenders, but most of all to his own creatures; in so much that several well affected to the Pretendants, did very much lament it; however Chigi, by the Councel of Caraffa knew well enough how to satisfie all parties, and take away all manner of suspition. The greatest thing that was blam'd in Chigi was, for having in that conjuncture, alie∣nated Cardinal Nini, which was attributed to several causes, but particularly it was said, his Eminence was dis-oblig'd, because Nini had declar'd, that he would concur in the Exaltation of no body but Farnese and Rospigliosi, two persons not at all desir'd by Chigi, unless in case he could not carry it for Bonvisi, or Celsi, for both which he had a kindness, and kept them in the first place of his memory. The Cardinals Rasponi, and Corsini, not liking to have such a person dis-oblig'd from the faction of Chigi, they undertook to reconcile them, and perform'd it to the satisfa∣ction of both parties. The same Chigi went to visit Cardinal Bonvisi, designing by that subtlety, as some people imagine, to sweeten the disgust which Francisco Bonvisi, (the said Cardinals
Brother, and Maestro di Camera to Chigi) had taken, for some ill usage he had re∣ceiv'd, and not without his fault. In the house of Cardinal d'Albici, it seem'd the place for the Conclave was appoint∣ed; whilst they assembled by night many times, and many times by day, (but the greatest part French) to treat about the new Election: he negotiating in the mean time wih the Spaniards also, insomuch as he was reckon'd a good Swiss after that, which is as much as to say, one who would willingly give himself to him that would give most for him. Yet the greatest train of the Prelacy, and others, was observ'd to frequent the houses of Farnese, and Rospigliosi, from whence the common opinion of the Court was (and indeed it fell so afterwards) the Pope was to proceed; although Cardinal Barbarino us'd all the industry was possible to acquire a reputation, by multiplying his good works, and redoubling his actions of Charity, which he before did exercise to the people. In the huddle of practices which the Cardinals tumultuously carry'd on, it was Impe∣riale's good fortune to advance so much under hand the interest of his Kinsman Bonelli, that there was nothing more left for him to desire; but the Mine being discover'd, it was immediately blown up by the French, by declaring openly, that that Crown was for his exclusion. It is believ'd nevertheless, that if the French had not excluded him, he would never have succeeded, because the Spaniards had only put him in hopes, never intending it in earnest; and the Squadrone Volante (of which Imperiale was head) did not approve of a person of whom the Crown of France had a diffidence, least they should draw some ill consequence upon their backs. About this time the Pope dy'd the 22th. of May, being Sunday, betwixt one and two a Clock in the morning, and immediately the Piscatory Ring was broken by Car∣dinal Barbarino, though he was then in a Feaver; as he came out of the Apostolical Pal∣lace, attended by the Pontifical Guards, thousands of the people cry'd out with a loud voyce, Viva il Cardinal Anthonio, using many other injurious words against the Chigi, and calling them Tyrants. The body of the Pope being open'd, and embalm'd the same night, they found his Reins to be wasted, and two Callous Glandules (which the Physicians call Turberculi) obstructing the passage of his Urine; and hence came his excessive pains, his long watchings, and his want of appetite, which made his Holiness endure a tedious agony of two months long, during which time, he was sustain'd continually with exquisite Re∣storatives, and Cullises of great price made of Gold, and of Pearl. It was afterwards affirm'd by several Physicians, that the two much nourishment of those restoritives, ex∣ceeding his natural heat and power to digest them, had done him hurt, and shorten'd his dayes, his nature (in regard of his age, and the quality of his disease) requiring meat of nourishment; nor was it less disapprov'd by the Physitians, that the Pope for several years could scarce ever satisfie himself with the most violent cold imaginable, in his Wine, Water, and Fruits; causing them to be set in Snow for several hours, and never thinking them fresh or cold enough, of which his Domesticks complain'd very often. About midnight the Corps was convey'd from the Quirinal where he dyed, to the Cathedral of Saint Peter, with usual Solemnities by the Guards, and two pieces of Ca∣non. It was afterwards expos'd in the Chappel of the said Cathedral, infinite numbers of people running thither to kiss his foot, not out of Devotion so much, as Cu∣riosity. On Tuesday at night, in the presence of 23 Cardinals of his creation, the body was put into a Cypress Coffin, which was put into another of Lead, lyn'd with the richest Cloth of Gold, of excellent work and colours, and cover'd again with a sumptuous Pawl, embroyder'd with Gold and Silver; and with it, a rich Purse emboyder'd like∣wise, and full of a great quantity of Medals of Gold and Silver, with the Effigies of the Pope: which Purse was put there by Cardinal Chigi, as a perpetual memorial, that it might be known after several ages to be the body of Alexander the 7th. The putting in Medals is usual to other Popes, but not (as they say) with that innovation of
lining the Chest with cloth of Gold, and covering it with so rich a Pawl as that was: a thing which made the people murmure the more against the Chigi, as those who buried other peoples wealth under ground, and not their own. On Munday at break of day, there were seen two or three windows all black'd over with Ink, and dawb'd over with dung, in the noble Palace of the Chigi, whether the Cardinal was retir'd (that they might be all together) till another most noble Palace (which will be the Cardinals own propriety) was finish'd; a high affront doubtless, and such as is us'd by the Rascality of the people, to the gates and windows of publique Bawds only: and because there were infinite Pasquins and Satyrs against the said Chigi, he attributed the reason to the new Gabels, impos'd upon Grist, Wine, Wax, Paper, Hay, Straw, Sope, Aqua-vitae, Tobacco, and other things, to the number of fifteen or sixteen; though the people were already oppress'd with 46 other Gabels impos'd by Ʋrban the 8th. whereupon Pope Innocent forbore the laying of any new Gabels, though he us'd such other wayes, that he left his Nephews many and many millions. But the greatest offence the people took at the Government of Chigi, was to find a new way of ingrossing of Corn introduc'd, which hindred the free Trade of their Merchan∣dizing, by which he gather'd a great quantity of Grain together, to the great grievance of the people, who were not able to apply themselves to sow their Land, because they could not have liberty to dispose freely of what they reap'd: all which they attributed to the rapacity of Don Mario, who finding himself affronted so highly, as to see some of his Servants bastinadoed by the people before his face, he began to excuse himself, and say, he could not imagine the reason why he should be so odious to the people, it never ha∣ving been in his power to relieve them in the least; that the Papacy of his Brother, was an unhappy Papacy, infested successively with the Plague, Famine, Inundations, Wars, and the disbursement of great sums of Moneys in assistance of the Emperor and Venetian, against the Turk, which had totally exhausted the Apostolical Treasury. On the 23th. the Sacred Colledge met in the Cathedral of Saint Peter, to celebrate the first Obsequies of the deceas'd Pope; after this, in the Vestry of the said Church, they held the first Congregation of State, for the well governing of the Ecclesiastick Republique, in which all Offices were renounc'd, and afterwards confirm'd; as particu∣larly, the charge of General of the Holy Church, to Don Mario, to prevent dissentions and tumults of the people, during the vacancy of the See. Monsignor Borromei was confirm'd Governour of Rome likewise, and with much more satisfaction to the people, in respect of the prudence and justice wherewith he hath alwayes executed his Office, as a Gentleman, and as a Prelate of great merit and judgement. And because it was reported the Conclave should be held not in the Palace of the Vatican, by the Cathedral of Saint Peter, but in the Palace Quirinal, in the middle of Rome, where his Holiness dyed, (though not for that consideration, but in regard the Vatican was suppos'd to have an ill air, and the dust was great by reason of the continual building of the Portico's;) this point being propos'd in the said first Congregation, and the Scrutiny being made, there were only 14. Votes for the Vatican, and all the other (about 40. there being above 50. present) for the Quirinal. But Cardinal Barbarino having made a couragious Speech, as he was Dean; remonstrating in several heads, the convenience of holding the Conclave in the Vatican; for its vicinity to the Church of Saint Peter; for its immence capacity, as containing no less than 5500 several Rooms, great and small, with 13000 Doors and Windows, with large and pleasant Courts, Gar∣dens, and Fountains; his opinion prevail'd to have a new Scrutiny, upon which, three Cardinals were deputed, to take some Architects along with them, and survey the streightness and incommodities of the Quirinal: which order was immediately observ'd, the Architects reporting, that besides the insufferable streightness of the Quirinal, it would cost 5000 Crowns more to be there, than in the Vatican: by which means they discredited a Pamphlet written, and prepar'd during the distemper of the Pope by Car∣dinal Pallavicino, and publish'd after his death, to induce the Cardinals to hold the Con∣clave in the Quirinal Palace, and not in the Vatican. In the Congregations which follow'd dayly in the aforesaid Vestry, there was no∣tice taken of a great silence, and modesty in Cardinal Chigi, to the admiration of such
as did not know he was advis'd to it, by reason that he was of a nature to be easily per∣plext; yet for all this he gave them boldly to understand, that he and his faction would never be perswaded from their own creatures. The Ambassadors of France and Venice,, in the second Congregation made their usual Orations as formularies, in the names of that King, and Republique, intreating the most eminent Cardinals, to create some most worthy person, for the universal benefit of the Church, offering any aid, or assistance, for the security of the Colledge in the mean time: The like Office was perform'd the Thursday following by the Catholick Ambassador, who appeared likewise with a considerable train. In one of the said Congregations Monsignor Casanate was chosen Governour of the Conclave, who was Secretary to the Congregation de propaganda fide: It was decree'd likewise, that no Cardinal for the future, do admit any person to sit by his side in the Coach, though honour'd with the Prelacy, or any other charge: as also that no Cardinal shall stop his Coach to any body, Except the Ambassadors of Crowns only. During the 9 days devoted to the Obsequies, the Cardinais visited one another inces∣santly, after dinner (for in the morning they were hindred by the Congregations) but he Ambassadors of France and Spain visited them much more, to confirm the several practices which were agreed upon whilst the Pope was alive, and to incourage the Car∣dinals to stand firm to their promises. About this time there were several discourses, and Pamphlets publish'd, concerning the Papable persons, written according to the passion, or affection of the Author, with obloquy, or commendation of the same persons, who are prostituted, as a man may say, to the liberty of so many tongues. By reason of the alienation shew'd by the Pope from the French, to the very end of his days, upon occasion of the Extravagance of the Corsi Souldiers (which happen'd with so much scandal to Christendom, and so much disturbance to Rome) in the time of his Papacy, towards the Duke of Crequy, Ambassador from the Crown of France; the memory of the revenge, or satisfaction of his most Christian Majesty remaining too fresh in the Pyramede erected in Rome, in the very Quarter of the Corsi Souldiers. It was suppos'd that Cardinal Chigi, to pacifie in some measure, and appease the King of France, and to take away all umbrage of malevolence out of his mind, would have been ready to endeavour by all fair means, to promote the satisfaction of the said King, by concur∣ring with his Creatures in some such person as his Majesty should approve. For several days, reflection was made upon this point, and no small hopes, (though ambiguous) given to the French, who believ'd themselves sure, because Farnese was the man they pitch'd upon; who being a Creature of Chigi's, it seem'd natural for him to agree to a Creature of his own, and at the same time to gratifie France, who would not be wanting in testimonies of affection to them: and this was one of the inducements that prevail'd with Farnese to imbarque himself in the business, and to court several of the Spanish Cardinals, and of the Squadrone volante, to make up his compleat number of Votes: and indeed he reckon'd upon more than 20 of Chigi's Creatures, of his side, for the reasons abovesaid, about eight or ten of the French, about 14 others of his friends of the Spanish Faction; and a party in the flying Squadron which promis'd to serve him; in so much that being confident in all these, he thought the Papacy as cer∣tainly in his house, as I believe the Pen is in my Hand, and perhaps he try'd in his Chamber to make Papal Crosses of benediction. In the mean time Cardinal Chigi having consider'd of his affairs better, he believ'd it would be an occasion of an eternal prejudice, and disgust to the Spaniard, and therefore he thought best to tack about as nimbly as he could, least he should disturb or interrupt his hopes of being made Protector of the Crown of Spain, which he thought as surely in his hands, as Farnese did the Papacy; but they at last understood better the subtlety of the Courts both in Spain and Rome. Chigi believ'd that the Pope his Unkle had recommended him to the King of Spain by the mediation of his Ambassador, to whom he gave audience eight days before his death, upon which he resolv'd to adhere to the Spanish Faction, as hoping thereby to obtain the Protection of the Church of Spain, which was then vacant by the death of Cardinal di
Medici, it being a Protection of great honour and advantage. But the general opini∣on was, that it was to be reserv'd for a new Cardinal of the house of Medici, which would be promoted by the next Pope: upon which score it was concluded by every bo∣dy, that Cardinal Chigi, being in fear of the French, and in hopes of the Spaniard, was to temporize so, that upon what person soever the Papacy fell, he was to remain in the favour and protection of one of the two Crowns. After the usual Exsequies were perform'd by the Cardinals, and a Funeral Oration recited, on Thursday morning the second of June, the Cardinals being assembl'd in the Church of Saint Peter, having sung the Mass of the Holy Ghost, and recited an exhorta∣tory Prayer for the Election of a Religious Pope, they march'd in Procession towards the Conclave (the singing men before them, singing veni Creator Spiritus) which was much more inlarg'd than formerly, not only because they made use of the Lodge of Bene∣diction, but because they had furnish'd some of their Cells very neatly with Silk, leaving the top open to the Sky, which they could open and shut with Cords, to receive the benefit of the Air, as the Season requir'd. The whole day long, free entrance was al∣low'd to every body, especially to the Ambassadors of Crowns, who visited all the Car∣dinals one by one, all the Princes and Prelats of the Court, and an infinite number of others performing the same Complements, each of them as his affection inclin'd him. Farnese and Rospigliosi▪ were the most regarded by the people, and by the generality of the Prelats, many of which began to acknowledge them as Popes. Never was there so great a number of Cardinals seen in any Conclave before, above seventy entring in at the same time, viz. Francisco Barbarino, Ginetti, Harrach, An∣thonio Barbarino, Pallotta, Brancaccio, Carpegna, Durazzo, Gabrielli, Orsini, Este, Facchinetti, Grimaldi, Rossetti, Romanini, all of them creatures of Ʋrban the 8th. Cibo, Sforza, Odescalco, Raggi, Maldachini, Gondi, Homodei, Ottoboni, Imperiale, Borromei, Hassia, Carlo Barbarino, Spada, Albici, Aquaviva: Pio, Gualtieri, Azzo∣lini, creatures of Innocent the 10th. Chigi, Rospigliosi, Bonvisi, Elci, Farnese, Bichi, Vechiarelli, Franzoni, Vidoni, Barbarigo, Mancini, Boncompagni, Bonelli, Piccolomi∣ni, Caraffa, Celsi, Savelli, Litta, Corsini, Paluzzi, Rasponi, Conti, Nini, Roberti, Spinola, Caraccioli, Delfini, Vandomo, created by Alexander the 7th. The Cardinals, Aragon, and Moncada, were in Spain, and thought it not conveni∣ent to undertake such a journey, when the weather was so hot; besides Aragon could not leave that Court, being chief Minister there. The new Cardinal Visconte, sent word likewise, that he could not come, because there was never an Apostolical Nuntio there, and that Court would not admit his Audi∣tor, either as Nuntio, or Envoy; upon which the Spanish Ambassador dispatch'd an express to hasten his coming, desiring the Ministers of Spain, to adjust the difference, and to receive the Auditor as an Envoy. Almost at the same time, the Cardinal of Salsburg, writ word he could not be pre∣sent at that Conclave neither, in regard of the Imperial Dyet which he could not possibly leave; this advice was not over welcome to the ears of the Catholick Ambassador, who sent a Courier on purpose to solicite the Emperour that he would be pleas'd to dismiss him. But all this importunity had no other effect, than to make the French believe, the Spanish Faction were too timerous, and by consequence, weak. Bandinelli, and Pallavicino, were absent, and so, as never to be present afterwards, for being very sick, and infirm, they dyed within three or four dayes, leaving the Con∣clave possest either with a spirit of contradiction, or folly. Pallavicino dy'd so poor, there was not enough found in his house, to pay the charge of his Funeral, but was forc'd to be beholding to the affection of Chigi even after his death, whose Eminence sent a 1000 Crowns to effect it. There were two other Cardinals likewise who were absent, Ludovisio, and Donghi, both of them indispos'd, and forc'd to stay away to perfect their Cure. However it is sufficient, that the two thirds of the votes which were necessary for the Election of the Pope, according to the decree of Alexander the third, ought to be 41 at the least, and of that number only which enter'd the Conclave the first day: in which, towards the Evening there happen'd a fray betwixt the Souldiers of the Marshal of the Conclave, and
the Halberdiers of the Governour of the Conclave, about their Posts, the last of which had the worst of it, and in the heat of the quarrel, some of the Marshals Souldiers, broke into certain of the Cardinals Kitchins, and took away a good prize of Silver Plate; but they injoy'd it not long, for they were taken a while after, and process of death order'd to be made out against them, yet not so much for their theft, as for the fright and con∣fusion they occasion'd in the Conclave. Before they went out of the Conclave, the French Ambassador (having for a long time negotiated privately with the Cardinals of his Nation) he produc'd a Letter from his Master, in which he declared his indifference, either to one person, or other; his Ambassador in a long Oration, pressing, and exaggerating, that his most Christian Ma∣jesty desir'd nothing but a virtuous and uninterested Pope; yet when it came to the point, they did what they could, to have had all to themselves. The Ambassador of Spain receiv'd not the satisfaction he would have done, from the Spanish Cardinals, observing some of them tottering and uncertain, he would not permit them therefore either to exclude, or include any body, he only charg'd them to tempo∣rize and protract, till he receiv'd an answer which he expected from Spain. But to Car∣dinal Sforza he declar'd himself more freely, and 'tis believ'd he told him the intention of the Councel of Spain, about the Election of one of the two persons, Rospigliosi, or Farnese, who were they, which seem'd to have come Popes into the Conclave. About 5 a Clock in the morning, all went out of the Conclave, which being lock'd up immediately, the Cardinal Chamberlain, accompany'd with two others, went about visiting all places, to see if there were any body staid privately behind, besides such as were deputed by the Colledge; after which, the usual Oaths were given, and the Car∣dinals holding a Congregation amongst themselves, several Laws were establish'd, eve∣ry one promising to observe them if he was elected Pope; they had very strong debates amongst themselves; the Mass of the Holy Ghost was sung; the Cardinals receiv'd all of them the Communion; and after that, in the accustom'd Order, they began the first Scrutiny. And here before we proceed any further, it will not be amiss to discourse of the quali∣ties, merits, and adherences of the Papable Cardinals of the aforesaid Conclave, as also of their number, and of whose creation; which will give some light to the Reader, and enable him to consider of the adherences and hopes, both of one party and the other; but I will not omit to insert what pass'd betwixt Cardinal Sforza and N. the day before they enter'd into the Conclave, which will serve to give some illustration of the quali∣ties of some of them. Cardinal Sforza, and Cardinal N. being in discourse, Sforza de∣manded of N. what his judgement was as to the new Election; the other wanted not an answer, but reply'd immediately, My Lord, I believe, if the French shall make the Pope, Cardinal Farnese will be the man; if the Spaniard, Cardinal Rospigliosi; if the People of Rome, Cardinal Barbarino; if the Holy Ghost, Cardinal Odescalco; if the Devil, either your Eminence or I. Then it shall be Rospigliosi reply'd Sforza smiling; and so they pass'd to other discourse. But to return to the Papable Cardinals, they were twenty in number, and no more, the rest of the Cardinals being all declar'd Spaniards, or French, or too young; for youth, by reason of the inexperience wherewith it is usually accompany'd, and for fear of a tedious Reign (a potent exception against any of them all) is enough to hinder the best persons exaltation, as we see dayly by frequent examples. Of these twenty Papable Cardinals, eight were created by Ʋrban; Barbarino, Ginet∣ti, Palotta, Brancaccio, Carpegna, Gabrieli, Durazzo, and Facchinetti. Three by Inno∣cent, Odescalco, Albici, and Spada, call'd commonly Santa Susanna; and nine by Alex∣ander, Bonvisi, Rospigliosi, Farnese, Caraffa, Elci, Celsi, Bonelli, Litta, and Bandinelli. But this last was mention'd without the Conclave, not within, for he dyed at the begin∣ning of it; so as there remain'd then but nineteen, all persons of competent age, the youngest of them being above 56. Barbarino was in his 70th. year, which was no small advantage to him; his creatures, and some other of Innocents, his Correspondents, as Raggi, Santa Croce, Spada, and Pio, seem'd to concur willingly in him; the Spaniards were not against him, though
they would never declare possitively for him; and it appear'd to be some advantage too, that Sforza was not head of the Faction, who upon several scores had but very little affection for him; so that if he had persever'd in the good management of the business which he began with Chigi, and had obtain'd his concurrence, and his creatures, he had been certainly Pope as most people believe. But one which penetrated deeper into the Machinations of the Priests, was of opinion, Chigi could not have done it without dis∣gusting several of his creatures, and losing their votes for himself; and indeed being agreed with Barbarino, he endeavour'd to discover the intentions of the principal of his creatures, and to draw them to joyn with him for the exaltation of the said Barbarino; but he found so great repugnancy from the beginning, especially in Cardinal Celsi, who was upon several accounts an implacable enemy to Barbarino, that he had much adoe to appease them, by obliging himself to speak no more of the exaltation of Barbarino. It is reported, that in the heat of their dispute, Celsi should speak openly to Chigi in this manner; your creatures follow you, because you have promis'd them all, not to suffer the Pa∣pacy to fall, but amongst your creatures; and if it happens to light amongst the creatures of Urban, your Eminence will be left alone in the Conclave, and if you lose it now, you will lose it for ever. Barbarino was advis'd by some persons, to open his purse, and to leave all the hopes of his pretensions to the operation of his Coyn, according to the abomina∣ble example of Alexander the 6th. and some there were who suppos'd the business was concluded; but that report proceeded only from the malice of his enemies, to fully and obfuscate the reputation of a man, who certainly for more Papacies than one, would not have defil'd, or eclips'd the lustre of the esteem which he enjoy'd amongst the people. Ginetti's pretensions were founded only upon the benevolence of the Spaniard, (towards whom he had alwayes carry'd himself with great circumspection) and his great age, which was 82. but in other respects there was but little appearance for him. Palotta was put into the number of the Candidates, not that it was believ'd he could be exalted in that conjuncture, because Barbarino was his profess'd enemy; and he was hated by the Spaniards for the integrity of his life, they being alwayes jealous of a per∣son of worth, or parts extraordinary. But in consideration of his merits only, true it is every one thought there was but lit∣tle hopes of his exaltation, perhaps as a judgement upon all Christendome, as well as the people of Rome, who were not worthy of so excellent a Prince; for this I dare af∣firm, that of all the Sacred Colledge, he only, and Farnese, are the most proper to un∣dergoe the charge of the Papacy, in respect of their uprightness of mind, their integrity in matters of Justice, the love of the people, and which is yet more, that they are disin∣terested, and no passionate promotors of their Kindred. His being 70 years old, and ha∣ving the Gout, gave him but little assistance, because his complection was strong, and in other respects he was perfectly sound. In the last Conclave but this, there was some talk of Carpegna, because the two Me∣dici's endeavour'd his promotion; but in this of Clement the 9th. he remain'd in his or∣dinary infirmity, which is only in a desire of pretending, and no more, there being no Medici's then to advance him: nor indeed did he put himself much forward, as con∣scious perhaps, that he had nothing, but his being a Cardinal, and a Servant to the Great Duke, to recommend him. Cardinal Rossetti, who had the management and interest of the Great Duke, made some kind of proffer, but he durst go no further, for he was sure never to compass his designs; and he did well, for there was need of better heads than his, in the Apostolick Chair. Brancaccio was discours'd of, as an excellent Lord, not only in respect of his birth, being a Gentleman of one of the best Families in Naples, but in consideration of several good qualities that were in him; but there were two things, and very important, which hinder'd his friends from entring into treaty for him: the first was, that they saw Chi∣gi's Faction resolv'd to have no other Pope, but a creature of Alexanders, and there was but small hopes to see the Papacy amongst Ʋrbans, seeing Barbarino had try'd the impe∣diment: the second, because the Spaniards had no great kindness for him, and although they pretended to be reconciled, yet the quarrel continued at the heart still, and 'tis most
certain they would never have concurr'd in this man, whilst there was any body else to create: and a third reason was, the great fondness Brancaccio express'd alwayes to his Kindred, it being confidently believ'd he would have run a great hazard of being misled, by his love to them, who were numerous; the Family of the Brancaccio being divided into several houses in that Kingdome, would have afforded persons enough to have fill'd up, not only the Governments, but all the Offices and Benefices belonging to the Apostolick See: so that these obstructions were sufficient to keep him still in his Cardi∣nalship. Durazzo, had nothing to speak for him but his age, being 75. his infirmities, and de∣crepitancy, which many times are sufficient alone to open a door to the Pontificate; for the Cardinal Pretenders, when they find they cannot reach it themselves, they endea∣vour to create some old and decrepid man, that they may have another vacancy quickly, and their old hopes be renew'd. It was reported there was a Kinsman of Durazzo's come to Rome with 50000 dubles, to work upon the minds of some of the poorer Cardinals, but this story was known to be a lye, and only the invention of his Enemyes, to disgrace him; for he was generally taken for a man of a most irreprehensible life, though illite∣rate, and of no great parts; but the worst thing in him of all was, that he was of Genoa, which is no small impediment. During the weakness of the Pope, which in effect serv'd for a Conclave, there were many so confident Gabrielle was made Pope, that they laid wagers on it. And the grounds of that opinion were, that they saw the Spaniards inclin'd to him, and doubt∣less had they sound things better dispos'd towards him, they would not have fail'd to have favoured him, he having express'd himself alwayes very well towards that Crown; to this they joyn'd the affinity and allyance he had with the new Cardinal Vandome, who they thought would prevail with the French Faction to concur; and indeed he attempted it, but rather to satisfie him, as it is suppos'd, than out of any desire he had to it in ear∣nest. Besides this, the Letter which was writ to him with so much affection by Cardi∣nal Chigi, made them believe he would joyn with him, with all his creatures; and all these reasons being put together, his friends would needs fancy him Pope. But they found themselves out in their confidence, not being able to dive into the most profound and recluse mysteries of State. First, because the French would never have concurr'd (at the importunity of a new made Cardinal, though of never so great qua∣lity) in a person, who upon divers occasions had shewn himself too partial to the Spa∣niard; besides this, the Spaniards themselves who protected him, and pretended to ad∣vance him, would not have had him Pope, as not knowing his humour; for their poli∣cy consists in preferring such persons to the Papacy, as they know very well, and are ac∣quainted with the very bottom of their qualities, lest they should run upon such rocks as they have formerly done, and particularly in the Papacy of Paul the 4th. and Sixtus the 5th. Barbarino had promis'd him his assistance, but it was when he saw his own hopes desperate; so Gabrielle's hopes, and his, vanish'd together. His age was 73 years, but it did him no good, his complection was so healthfull and strong. Facchinetti knowing his years too few, had not courage to venture in a Conclave, in which he saw so many other persons of greater maturity and merits than himself; and yet he is an excellent person, indifferently well learned, of a good judgement, and so∣lid, but something too resolute. He was consider'd as Innocent the ninths Nephews Son, and one that has kept a good correspondence with the Baloncse, Gentlemen his Country∣men. In his Nuntiature into Spain, he gave great satisfaction to that Court, nor was he ingratefull when he was come back again to Rome, insomuch that the Spaniards held him as a Confident. He recommended himself to them with great modesty, declaring he had not much to pretend in a Conclave so rich in other persons of merit; yet if there should happen such contests and competitions, as there usually do, he desir'd the Spani∣ards, as his friends, would be mindfull of him; but no great controversie arriving, his friends had no occasion to concern themselves in his behalf. Odescalco's hopes consisted in the good opinion the whole Colledge had of him, as a person of Integrity, Generosity, and Charity, and one that was well affected by the Spaniards, as one of the Subjects of that Crown; but there were many more potent
obstacles to obstruct them: The first was in his age which was but 56 years, as strong and as lusty as was possible, an obstacle so great, that as often as he was mention'd the 22 years Papacy of Ʋrban, was immediately remembred, and by consequence took away the good inclinations the Cardinals had to his person, and to his advancement: the Cardinals being resolv'd they would never again see the Keys of St. Peter grow rusty in the hands of one man. The second was, that Sforzá had lost the management of the Spanish Faction, who was his very great friend, and would not have fail'd doubtless to have us'd his utmost endeavour, to have drawn the Spaniards to a concurrence: I say his utmost endeavours, because though the Spaniard may love Odescalco very well, as a subject, and well deserv∣ing person of that Crown; yet 'tis most certain, at their hearts, they had rather he should remain a Cardinal, than be made Pope; and the reason is, because they look up∣on him as an obstinate person, too rigid, and severe to his first impressions, which a∣grees not with the Spanish Policy, that requires an honest down right Pope, easie to be commanded, and not refractory to command. The other obstacle was the aversion of the French, who would never have consented to the Election of a Milanese, at a time when there was a breach betwixt the two Crowns; and indeed when any friend of Odescalcoes propos'd him to any Cardinal of the French, they answer'd him according to the modesty of the French, He is a worthy person, but let us talk of some body else. Yet there was no body declar'd himself his Enemy, but Cardinal Imperiale, and that upon an accident which happen'd in Rome the 20th. of August 1662. at which time Odescalco, either that he believ'd in his Conscience things ought to be so, or that he had a mind to oblige the French, and take away the suspicion that Crown had of him, as he was a Spa∣niard, that he might not have their Negative in the Conclave, or for any thing else, it is enough he was one of those which decreed his banishment: and so much the more rea∣son had Imperiale to be angry, by how much he was inform'd Odescalco was the pro∣moter of the business: and all these things consider'd together, at the very first put all Odescalcoes pretensions out of his head. Albici had little or no thoughts of demanding the Papacy, not that he dislik'd the morsel, but because he knew very well the Cardinals would not choose him, as know∣ing him to be of a turbulent head, and a pungent, if not virulent tongue. In short, though in all the rest there were some visible hopes of Exaltation to be found, yet in this Cardinal there was not the least spark, or inclination to be discover'd; first because he was abominated by the Spaniards, as a person of too deep a reach; for 'tis a maxim amongst them, to have a care of such persons as by the greatness of their parts, or designs, may disturb the present quiet of Italy, during the minority of their King: Some people believe, that for the same reasons for which the Spaniards hated him, the French lov'd him, but yet with very good Policy, he was but little or not at all men∣tion'd in the Conclave. The other impediment was a pique Chigi had taken against him, Albici having been always an enemy to his Government, murmuring continually against it, as well in pub∣lick as in private; Cardinal Chigi for all that dissembled it very well, yet he could not contain from saying one day to a friend of Albici's, who recommended him to him, for a Pope (but he spake as by the by) That when he gave his voice for Albici, there should not be another Cardinal in the Colledge. These following Memoires of this Cardinal, came too late to my hands to put them into my second Part, which indeed was their proper place; but coming from a good hand, I have chosen rather to insert them here, than to suffer them to be lost: I desire the Reader therefore would compare what is written of this Cardinal in the second Part, with what follows. Francesco Cardinal of Albici was born in Cesenna the 25th. of October 1593. he is de∣scended of Albici's in Florence, a person of great learning in all kinds of Sciences, but in the Law, and Ecclesiastical History, he has but few equals in this age. He is so great a lover of Justice, that when he was young, and exercising his Advocateship in Cesenna, because he would not do that which was unjust, he was forc'd to fly, to avoid the mis∣chief which was threatned to him, by the person which desir'd to have had sentence in
his favour contrary to Law and Justice. Upon this occasion he came to Rome, where he exercis'd his profession with great applause; Monsignour Monti a Milanese being declar'd Nuntio of Naples by Ʋrban the eight, the advocate Albici was propos'd to Cardinal Francisco Barbarino, to be Auditor of the said Nuntiature. Monsignour Meltio Lieute∣nant to A. C. who was a Cardinal afterwards, was desir'd to give his Character of him, which he did so much to his advantage, that he was sent to Naples, and after∣wards into Spain with the said Monti, where he carry'd himself with great commendati∣on; after three years he was call'd back again to Rome by Ʋrban, made Assessor of the S. Office, and sent with Monsignour Macchiavelli Assistant into Germany to Cardinal Ginetti, who went Legate a Latere from Ʋrban the eighth. There was some unkindness betwixt the said Legate and Albici, by reason of the sordidness wherewith the Legate used all his attendants in his Legation. Whilst he was in Germany, the charge of Assessor dl S. Officio, was kept voyd, and restor'd to him at his return to Rome. Ʋrban at the request of D. Anna Colonna, gave him the Canonship of Saint Peter; and amongst the rest of the favours which he did him, he declar'd himself his Kinsman upon occasion of a Marriage betwixt one of the house of Barbarino, and a Lady of the Albici's. He had thoughts of making him a Cardinal, if death had not prevented his making another promotion. He was afterwards made a Cardinal by Innocent the tenth, for the pains he took in the cause of Jansenius; condemn'd by Innocent, although his Emulators whis∣per'd about the Court, that he was created, only to obstruct the Assumption of Cardinal Fiorenzuola to the Papacy. But that report could not continue long, it being well known, what joy the whole Court, and all the Princes had at his Promotion, and amongst the rest, there was a Prince who congratulated with his Eminence, that by his bare merits, without Bribery, or Subornation, he had attain'd to the dignity of the Purple. At that time he was the only Instrument that made Alexander the 7th. Secretary of State at Colonia, as appears in a book Printed by the said Pope, before his Ascension to the Papacy; in which he has inserted one of the many secrets which were writ to him by Albici: and after the said Chigi was made a Cardinal, he omitted not any thing that might contribute to the assumption of his friend to the Papacy, gratitude and friendship being one of his most singular virtues; and amongst other of his policies, he express'd more than ordinary civilities to a Kinsman of Alexander, who did not return that gratitude, which such a friend did deserve; only in the latter part of his Pontificate, upon the instance of Car∣dinal Chigi his Nephew, who knew very well the affection of such a friend deserv'd a greater recompence than this, he made one of his Nephews resign the Title of an Abbey to him; and this obligation he owed not to the Pope, but to his Nephew. The Cardi∣nal is of a good complection, and lusty, though he be in the 75th. year of his age. He is courteous in his Speech, a lover of Poverty, indifferent as to the Princes, for being ask'd one day by Cardinal Aragon, whether he was French or Spaniard, he reply'd, That where Justice was, thore were his inclinations. He is belov'd of the Cardinals, but it is for fear; he is resolute and studious enough. At present he has four Nephews, Sons of his Son, first the Abbot Rinaldo; then Nicolo a Layman, marryed to a Daughter of the Marquess Calcagnini of Ferrara; the next is Lutio Arroni, a youth of many good qualities; and lastly Logo an Abbot. He uses his Pen very willingly in defence of such as are accused, as he did in the Papacy of Innocent the 10th. in behalf of Horatio Falco∣nieri; for which, being reprehended by a Prelate who was his friend, he reply'd, That it was Justice that he defended; That he could not abandon his friend in his distress; That such was his practice formerly, and such it should be for the time to come. In the Pontifi∣cate of Alexander, he made several Sermons, which by several were interpreted, as in∣tended against the Government of Alexander; and being rebuk'd for it by some of his Relations, he gave one of them this answer, That Pulpits were invented for the repre∣hension, not for the incouragement of Vice. He is a person of a quick resolution and . Upon an occasion in the time of Alexander the 7th. who fram'd a Congrega∣ for adjsing the matters of Ceremony betwixt the Cardinals and Roman Barons, by  ey were grown but little consider'd, this Cardinal said, If I were to advise his Holiness, I would tell him, that he ought first to set a value upon the Cardinals, and when
they desire any favour for the Barons, his Holiness should grant it at their Suit; By which means, the Sacred Colledge will become more estimable to every body; but if the Pope villi∣fies them, all the world contemns them: which was very wise Councel. All the pleasant and facetious things that are said in the Court, are father'd upon this person, of which he never so much as thought: and this proceeds from the liberty he takes in his discourse, having lived alwayes with that freedom. He is a man that perplexes his enemies, by the multitude of his civilities, and has never ceas'd to assist them, who were the cause of his coming to Rome, although since he was a Cardinal, it was in his power to have mis∣chiev'd them; but he confesses himself beholding to them, and that if it had not been for their threats, he had never come from Cesenna. A rare virtue to draw good out of evil. But to return. Spada was talk'd of, both without the Conclave, and within, for some certain dayes, and had it not been for the obstinacy in the creatures of Chigi, to have no other Pope but a creature of Alexanders, he would doubtless have put fairer for the Papacy, than Bar∣barino himself, or any other creature either of Ʋrbans or Innocents. Barbarino had a great affection for him, and finding he could not compass it himself, he set his interest on foot, and endeavour'd to bend and incline the minds of some people to him, by cry∣ing him up for one of the greatest Polititians in the world, affirming the Church had need of such a Pope in such times as these. But all this was only in satisfaction to the said Spada, he knew very well he was not likely to succeed; besides Cardinal Rospigliosi, driving at the same thing with more zeal, and better means, and being oblig'd to Barba∣rino, more than if he had been his creature, Barbarino would never have propos'd it to Spada, lest he should take away the Papacy from the creatures of Chigi, or give an oc∣casion of jealousie to the Grand Duke, by hindring the Exaltation of a common friend, and creating one of his own only. Two reasons oblig'd the Grand Duke to deny his assistance to Santa Susanna, who is vulgarly call'd Spada. The first was his being a Luccaese, that is a worthy Citizen of a Republique, upon which the Great Duke looks with an eye of compassion, and would rather have it in his own hands, than in the midst of his State. But if the interests of his Countrey had not been of importance, his immoderate affection, and dependance upon the will of Barbarino, would have made him resolve upon his Exclusion. The Spaniards look upon him as their friend, and would not have fail'd to have as∣sisted him effectually, both for the confidence they had in him, and the opinion that he was a quiet and peaceable man, which is the thing the Spaniards do principally regard; but either by the natural iniquity of that Nation, or the want of fidelity in the Mini∣sters of that Crown, it appears that it is enough to exclude any one from the Papacy, to be propos'd and recommended by the Spaniard, as Innocent said very plesantly. At first they believ'd they might obtain their design, and so much the more zealous were they for his promotion, by how much they were inform'd of the King of France's resolution to fall into Flanders with his Army; judging it convenient for the quiet of Italy, to put a Pope into the Vatican inclinable to peace, and affectionate to Spain. The French pre∣tended very fairly they would exclude nobody, and his Majesty had given them such or∣der; but underhand they labour'd the contrary, endeavouring to turn away that water from the Mill, which the Spaniard supply'd. There were certain Satyrical Libels publish'd against Santa Susanna, suppos'd to have come out of the Family of Cardinal Farnese, who being farther engag'd for the Papacy than any of the rest, he had a mind to dismount every body else, and remain on horse∣back himself. The Court would have desir'd his exaltation, because he was generally beloved; but his having so few Adherents, especially of the Cap, except Barbarino, was no small prejudice to his affairs. It was believ'd it was a great advantage to him, that there was never a Cardinal of the house of Medici, and that the interests of the Great Duke were manag'd by Cardinal Rosetti, who is a good Cardinal, though unfortunate in his Negotiations; and indeed it had not been ill for him, had the Spaniards had Car∣dinals of Authority to have manag'd their Factions; for 'tis the head which gives vigour to all the rest of the Members.
And now I shall pass to the person of Cardinal Farnese, a true Roman, and of whom they discours'd as if he were created already; there were certain Parasites and Flatter∣ers which fail'd not to assure him of the Papacy, but he refus'd with great prudence to put his Nose to that incense. And to the end the Reader may be better inform'd of all passages, I will set down the reasons upon which they believ'd him Pope, and which gave him so great probability; and afterwards give an account of the impediments which obstructed him: and the first thing that enabled him to contend for the Papacy with any of the rest, was his age, he being above 70. years old, of a weakly complexion, and of a very extravagant course of life, going to dinner when others went to bed, and to supper when others rose: another was the many and principal charges which he exerci∣sed in Rome after his return from his Nuntiature in Switzerland: another, his great zeal and incorruption in matters of Justice, which he exercis'd with that excess as one may say, that he became very terrible to the wicked, and very grateful to the good, for his uprightness, and diligence in business: another reason was, that he was the last of his Family, having only two Nephews by his Sister, one in Bolonia, and the other in Rome; This latter was a Prelate of a competent age, but both of them hated by their Unkle, who by natural instinct, bears a kind of natural aversion to his own Kindred, and ser∣vants. Which humour made the Cardinals open their Eyes, and judge him worthy of the Papacy, in these times, when the Church was so lacerated and perplex'd by the He∣reticks, and so ruin'd and destroy'd by the Nephews of the Popes. The French and the Spaniard were inclin'd to concur with him, either in appearance, or in earnest, for one and the same reason, he being descended from the same house with the Dukes of Parma, and by consequence not in any suspicion with the Spaniard, there being at present a Brother of the said Duke of Parma's in the King of Spains service against Portugal; besides the honourable memory of the tryumphs of Alexander Farnese in Flanders, in the service of the said Crown: So that the Spaniard could not desire greater security, than to have a Prince of the Farneses as it were a hostage in the middle of Spain, which said Prince is reported to have recommended the interests of the said Cardinal Farnese, his Kinsman, to the Spaniards. And this very consideration was thought sufficient to prevail with the French King to concur likewise; he having undertaken the Protection of the Duke of Parma, as to the restitution of the Dutchy of Castro, according to the agreement with the Apostolick Chamber under Alexander the 7th. in the Treaty of Pisa, but without effect, they being forc'd to attend the conclusion of that Treaty, from the new Pope, but that is not done neither; So that in respect to that Protection, his most Christian Majesty could not, as many believ'd, refuse his assistance to the said Farnese, the Dukes Kinsman; but they which look'd further into the secrets of their intrigues, have discerned that to be obstacle clearly, and a reason to destroy, as well as to obstruct that machination, and therefore they never esteem'd their mediations for his promotion to the Papacy, to be real. For first it facilitated to the house of Chigi, the acquisition of the Lands of Farnese, which were his jurisdiction, by which means at present Don Augustino is Prince of them; and suggested a way to Pope Alexander to exclude the Duke of Parma, who in default of this branch of Farnese, was to succeed; Whereupon the Duke was not a little disgusted with the said Cardinal, who kept little or no correspondence with him all a∣long, especially when he was Legate of Bolonia; and therefore it was not to be be∣liev'd the Duke would desire the exaltation of a person, who upon the score of the inte∣rests of his family, has for a long time had so little intelligence with him: though for some years since, upon his particular advantage, the Cardinal procur'd a reconciliation, in appearance rather than in sincerity, and so perhaps the Duke did believe, who was wise enough to understand the drift of that reconciliation; and therefore appearances, not being able to remove what is fix'd and imprest in the hearts of Princes, it is to be believ'd the Papacy could not fall into the hands of this Cardinal, by means of the Dukes recommendation. Moreover he had many other impediments besides, but the greatest was the real, and verbal aversion of the Spaniard, Farnese having render'd himself suspicious to that
Crown, by his excellent qualities, and the opinion they had of the headiness and turbu∣lence of nature, which as I have often said before, is an occasion that such persons are never desir'd by the Catholick Crown; and perhaps they would obstruct the creation of such a Cardinal if they could, though he was born in the very Court at Ma∣drid. In short, though the Duke of Parma, should have recommended him as his Kinsman, yet could not Farnese expect to be Pope, because the Spaniards have an eye at present upon the house of Parma, as being oblig'd to France in several particulars; so that in such a conjuncture, they would not have consented to the exaltation of a Kinsman of the Dukes; nay I will go further, and say, that if the Duke as his Kinsman had underta∣ken his assistance, the Colledge would have oppos'd it, at least those Cardinals which are promoters of the Grandure of the Ecclesiastick State, if for no other reasons but the interests of Castro, which are so considerable. The French on the other side could not be sincere in his Election, not only upon the score of the affronts offer'd the 25th. of November 1650 to the Ambassador, the crime of the offendors, being by a policy of Innocents; thrown upon the back of his Minister, which was Farnese, and by the French (who could do no other) acknowledg'd to be such, but because they knew also they could not have any intire confidence in him. To all this there was added a private disgust betwixt him, or to speak more properly, his Confidents, and some other Competitors for the Papacy, as particularly Celsi, and San∣ta Susanna; whose infirmities and defects were publish'd in writing, but little comport∣ing with the decorum or honour of the Church: which upon good grounds were sup∣pos'd to have proceeded from his Family; so as they were oblig'd to pay them in their own Coyn. A loss that cannot be counterpoys'd by his private league with▪ Pallotta, Albici, and Pallavicino, which league, by the death of the last, came to nothing: and now all these things being presuppos'd, and consider'd together, Farnese's exaltation could not be ex∣pected; yet the French did not fail to assist him, whether it was that they knew him to be a proper person to interrupt and disturb the repose of the Spaniards, or for any thing else, I know not; it is sufficient, that (either to please, or oblige him, or for some other reasons) they did assist him. Some there were who pry'd more narrowly into the policies of the French, and found, that the exaltation which they endeavour'd for Farnese, was but to bring him into dis∣grace with the Spaniard, and draw him over wholly to their party, the French being assured, that the more they sollicited his creation, the more jealous would the Spaniards be of him, and by consequence more zealous for his exclusion; and he finding himself afterwards without hopes, would not fail to resent, and revenge it upon the Spaniards; but they being more practis'd, and prying into the intrigues both of Rome, and of France, knew how to save both their Goat and their Cabbadge. Bonvisi was the only person and object that Chigi aim'd at amongst all his creatures, believing for certain to make him Pope, being his creature so well deserving, and the Spaniards concurring out of a desire they had to a young Pope, that they might not be lyable to continual mutations and changes, there being less exception against this person also, than against any of the rest of the creatures of Chigi; and the more, because, as a dextrous and discreet man, Bonvisi shunn'd all occasions of shewing himself violent for any of the Crowns, and therefore could not be formally excluded by them. Cardinal An∣thonio likewise acknowledging Bonvisi for his greatest Confident from the time of Ʋrban his Unckle, and of whom he made use, as his most faithfull Minister, at the breaking out of the Wars; endeavour'd his exaltation likewise, and fail'd not to invite all the French party to his side. But he also was found to have his share of exceptions, and that so large, as was suffi∣cient to put his designs upon the Papacy out of his head. The first objection was against his age, being but 62. and no more, and which is considerable, strong and sound, and likely to live twenty years longer; and the rather, because he was a man that loved his recreations, and did not apply himself too fiercely to business. So that the rest of the Cardinals who desir'd to have their share in other Conclaves besides this, thought of no∣thing
less than giving the Keys to one that would open a door to them all into another world. Nor was his Countrey a small impediment, being of a Republique adjacent to the Territories of the Great Duke. Another obstacle was, Francisco Bonvisi his Nephew, who is Maestro di Camera to Cardinal Chigi; he is a person so proud, fierce, cruel, and vindicative in his nature, and tainted with principals so pernicious to the Government, that the Cardinals could not resolve to give the Papacy to one who had such a Nephew, as with his ill qualities, obscur'd all the virtue and lustre in his Unckle, and one that in my fancy may hinder his exaltation in another Conclave. Chigi had a mind to have endeavour'd the exaltation of Cardinal Elci, not only a Sie∣nese, and joyn'd in the same interests with the house of Chigi, but a person depending wholly upon it: however being confident he could never succeed, he desisted, and spake no more of him, reserving that design, till the differences and contests of the several par∣ties, should spin out the Conclave a little longer. His qualities certainly render'd him worthy of the Papacy, and there was none could have excluded him, as defective in parts; but if he had been but mention'd, the Cardinals would have oppos'd themselves, who were weary already of seeing the Dominion remain so long in that Family, which had made it self the object of the common Odium by his ill administration, and besides the French would have been against him, having never to have been brought to con∣descend to the election of a person so firm to the house of Chigi, from whom they have receiv'd so little satisfaction. Litta was look'd upon as a very deserving Lord, advanc'd to the Cardinalship, meer∣ly for his merits, adorn'd with many good qualities, and worthy of any Government, Ecclesiastical or Politick. Yet there was no occasion to talk of him, unless it were that some of his Friends affirm'd, and with good reason, that there was none would serve, and govern the Church beter than he, as being an approv'd person, well skill'd in Go∣vernment, and very assiduous in business. But there being persons of greater, years, of greater interests, and greater merits, there was but little notice taken of what they said, every one replying that he would succeed better in another Conclave, than in this; and so much the rather, because as he was Arch-Bishop of Milan, there being a necessity of interfering with the Spanish Ministers, he had gain'd so much the ill will of that Na∣tion, and in particular of Don Lewis Ponte du Leon, the Governour of Milan, that they are his implacable Enemies; and Don Lewis declar'd, that if he should see things dis∣pos'd in his favour, he would ride Post to Rome to frustrate and exclude him. Caraffa seeing he could not compass it for himself, though he wanted no good will, he negotiated the interest of Chigi, who had given him directions in every thing, and made him the Secretary of his heart: but some believ'd that he serv'd him not faithfully in the business of Bonvisi, endeavouring his exclusion under-hand, to make an elder man Pope, to the end that he might see a new Conclave once again, and set his own interest once more on foot, as fearing the long life of Bonvisi. But to me these reasons seem as frivolous, as his pretensions; for if he be a Politician, as he is reputed, he may very well judge, that the memory of Paul the 4th. a Pope, not at all propitious to the Spa∣niard, lyes upon him like Original Sin; which obstacle is so great, that I may say 'tis impossible to be remov'd, being already so radicated in the Conclave, that the Spaniards have upon that very score, excluded several other Cardinals of the house of Caraffa. Had it not been for this, he might have past in some Conclave or other, his qualities being proper enough for the Papacy, saving that he is a little too severe in his admini∣stration of Justice, and yet a great preserver of the immunities of the Church. He has very good allyance in Rome, which another time may give him assistance; but in this Conclave, they will not so much as attempt his exaltation, for several re∣spects, particularly because they are sure the design will not take, by reason of his youth. Bonelli likewise imbarked without Biscott, and Cardinal Imperiale would have done better, to have expected till another Conclave, because those oppositions which are discover'd to him now, may perhaps be sufficient to obstruct him hereafter. He is (ac∣cording to his name) but little in goodness, in parts, in learning, and in Stature. He
was prefer'd in the Papacy of Alexander to considerable charges, viz. of Governour, and Nuntio into Spain; but more by the powerful intercession of Imperiale (whose autho∣rity with Chigi was suitable to his name, commanding him in every thing like an Em∣perour indeed) than by any merits of his own; In the Exercizes of his Offices, and particularly in his Nuntiature, he has neither lessen'd nor increas'd his esteem amongst those that knew him. Of himself he would never have launch'd forward, seeing the wind in his teeth, and too much dispos'd to beat him back again. But Cardinal Imperi∣ale, who was always most propitious to his hopes, would have it so, and he accord∣ingly permitted it; but neither the one nor the other did any thing, but run themselves into greater animosities with the French, and with other Cardinals also. Imperiale had promis'd Barbarino to do his utmost for his Exaltation, upon condition that if things succeeded not in his favour; that he should then assist him afterwards in the Election of Bonelli, and so by a politick fetch, pretending with the remainder of his Squadron to labour with might and main in the behalf of Barbarino; at the same time, he fix'd his Eye upon, and drove on the interest of his Nephew Bonelli. He cry'd up the virtues of Barbarino to the highest Region of the Air; but Bonelli's to the first Quire of the Angels, and that not only with his tongue, but with all the Rhe∣torick of his heart: In so much that a Cardinal of his acquaintance seeing him one day in a little confusion, betwixt his commendations of Barbarino, and Bonelli, he said to him, Nemo potest duobus Dominis servire. In short, two dayes before they entred into the Conclave, Imperiale according to the finess and subtlety of his transactions, deprest the practices of Barbarino, and advanc'd Bonelli's so, that he endeavour'd to procure him the applause of the Prelates, and of the whole Court. Accordingly he made it be reported round about Rome, that he had 40 Votes sure, and that he doubted not to make Bonelli Pope; using that as a Stratagem, to no other end but to stop the mouths of the adversaries, believing most certainly, that by spread∣ing abroad such a report, they would forbear to make any opposition, and endeavour a reconciliation, that they might not have the Pope to their Enemy: But those who un∣derstood the state of affairs, and how the Cardinals were divided this way, and that, did but laugh at all this. The French Ambassador in very good earnest made his com∣plaint to the same Cardinal Imperiale, telling him that these endeavours ought to be re∣serv'd till another Conclave: And in that thing the said Ambassador was to be commen∣ded for his modesty, being not willing to publish any of his defects, nor to urge any o∣ther reason for his Exclusion, but his Youth. For all this Imperiale desisted not from promoting the Election of Bonelli with all ima∣ginable contrivance. And on the other side Albici, Odescalchi, and Palotta, having o∣penly declar'd against him, they conspir'd all ways of excluding him, and not without some reflection upon the incapacity of the person. The Spaniards recommended him, and would have been glad of him with all their hearts; but finding things going clear another way than what Imperiale propos'd, they dis-intangled themselves, as nimbly as they could, and left the greatest part of the care upon Imperiale himself. The French who had declar'd that they had no order for the Ex∣clusion of any body, temporiz'd, and delay'd, to profess themselves Enemies, yet they forbore not to cast rubs in his way. But if they had once seen things growing hotter in favour of Bonelli, I am satisfy'd they would have appear'd publiquely for his Exclusion, not only because he was Nephew to Imperiale, who was not much affected to France; but because he was a Spariard both in interest, and profession; and it would not be con∣venient for the French, at a time when the two Crowns were so near a rupture, to have a Pope in Italy too much addicted to the Spaniard. At the beginning, when it came first into the head of Imperiale to advance Bonelli, his friends advis'd him to desist from that enterprize, foreseeing the difficulties which disco∣ver'd themselves afterwards; exhorting him to leave that dignity to the pretensions of several other persons of greater desert, as well for their experience in Government, and integrity of their lives, as for their plurality of years: But he thought Bonelli above them all, and did but laugh at their discourse, and perhaps on purpose that they might do as much for him afterwards: And indeed he would have done much better, to have
suffer'd his Nephew to have got some more years upon his back (seeing he is the young∣est of all the Competitors) and to have attended some other time more proportionable to his designs, which would not have redounded so much to the prejudice of Bonelli, who is become totally suspected by the French; and he will not only have a great trou∣ble to bring them to his side, the next Conclave, but run a great hazard of having them conspire his Exclusion. Celsi was excluded upon four sorts of accompts (and which is most strange, they be∣gan to talk first of his Exclusion, and of his Exaltation afterwards) The first was the great Enmity which Barbarino profest to him, which he has publickly declar'd, not only since he was made a Cardinal, but even in the time of his Prelacy: In so much as when he was recommended to him by some persons, pretending great modesty, he reply'd, That he would not give any impediment to his Papacy, provided he would not hinder him for going out of Rome. Those who recommended him knew what he meant very well, which was never to concur at all. But these reports are false, for there are some persons that affirm that Celsi had de∣clar'd, That he would have renounc'd Paradice, as well as the Papacy, if he had thought to receive it from the recommendation of Barbarino. But be it as it will, Barbarino took a∣way a great part of the inclinations of the Colledge from him. Cardinal Pallavicino discover'd him to be his Enemy likewise, but upon other occasions; However though he look'd upon the first as a powerful enemy, especially in that juncture of time, yet he little regarded the animosity of the other, by reason of his debility, and the small reputation he had in the Colledge: Death took away this obstacle from him, but he would much willinger, he had taken Barbarino in his room. The second reason of his Exclusion was the friendship of Ravizza, which Prelate, (ei∣ther because some malignant Star that persecuted him would have it so, or that he was really guilty of several actions that were blame worthy) by his Conversation render'd himself abominable to the whole Colledge; except Cardinal Chigi, who held him for an Oracle, and it may be said of these three persons, Funiculus triplex difficile rum∣pitur. Chigi did his utmost, to bring the said Ravizza into the Conclave, as his Conclavist; and because he saw several difficulties that were likely to arise, he procur'd a particular Brief from his Unkle before the time; But the Cardinals suspecting it was done with design to put the whole Colledge into a distraction, they refus'd openly to receive him; and though Cardinal Celsi went about intreating this man, and the other; yet Chigi was forc'd to be patient, and get another; and so much did the Colledge look askew upon Ravizza, that they could not resolve to concur with Celsi, for the great confidence and familiarity was betwixt them, being satisfy'd he would not only have advanc'd him to the Cardinalship, but to the highest charges about the Court. The third Cause of his exclusion, was his too much rigour, being indeed of so severe a nature, that he many times adher'd to Justice more than he ought, and would willing∣ly punish that offence with the Gallows, that was scarce worthy of the Whip; in some Congregations, his judgements resembled the Sentence of Phalaris, written in Cha∣racters of bloud, they were so severe, which made the Cardinals apprehend, as they alwayes will, that to exalt this person, was but to make the whole Colledge tremble, and to be treated with greater rigour than in the dayes of Paul the fourth, and Sixtus the fifth. For this reason the Spaniard excluded him with their heart, though not with their tongue, they promis'd to run over Mountains, and Seas, to do him service; but they were very tedious in setting out, and could not find in their hearts to begin their journey. For all this, he ceas'd not to negotiate with them still, and to offer them the utmost of his affection, but in vain, for they were resolv'd not to have a Pope so severe, and so singular in his authority. Furthermore his Enemies prais'd him, and prick'd him in his exclusion, making use both of the honey and the sting. They said he was indeed a great head-piece, a man of great learning, politick, dexterous in business, and in short, a person of no ordinary Ta∣lent; but to these gifts, the integrity of his life, and the goodness of his manners,
(wherewith a Pope ought to be indued) did not correspond: and this I dare affirm, that if to the Politicks, which are so resplendent in the Cardinal, the moral virtues of life and conversation were conjoyn'd, there would not be a person more deserving than he in the whole Colledge. Farnese was no Enemy to Celsi, but doubting this person more than any of the rest, to be most likely to take the Papacy from him, which he thought he had sure in his hands; he procur'd his exclusion as I have said before, by the help of certain Libels which are suppos'd to have proceeded out of his Family, with which Celsi is not a little offended, and in time will shew greater revenge, than what he has shown as yet. In this manner therefore, much being said for all the Competitors, Rospigliosi re∣main'd alone, exempt from the usual Torrent of contradiction. He was generally esteem'd by the whole Colledge, and from the very beginning the reasons were plain why the Papacy must needs fall into his hands. To see in him all the virtues that can be desir'd in an excellent Prince, with the reputation of having carry'd himself honourably in all his charges, having executed them all, with splendour, impartiality, and ho∣nour, and particularly in his Nuntiature into Spain, from whence he return'd poorer, in a manner, than he went. The opinion that he was a person of a most sincere judge∣ment, free from all Interests and Faction, not fond of his own opinion, but indued with a thousand other good qualities, made him be thought worthyest of the Popedom; and the rather, because the Spaniards recommended him in the first place, and the Emperour desir'd him, because he Christen'd the Empress in the year 1650. when he was Nuntio in Spain; the French were not diffident of him; Barbarino loy'd him for having open'd the way to his preferments in the Pontificate of his Unckle; and last of, all Chigi could not but concur as he was his creature: and all these reasons being put together, he could not fail of the Papacy. And yet he himself was not without his impediments, one new one or other springing up every day. The first was, the Lords Cardinals judg'd him improper (by reason of his infirmities, and particularly an Apoplexy had befallen him lately) for so considera∣ble a Government, they being very unwilling to choose a Pope, that should be bed-rid all his life, and commit the Government to the discretion of they knew not who. The multitude of Kindred which Rospigliosi had in Pistoia, and particularly five Ne∣phews by his Brother, appear'd a necessary obstruction in these times, in which the de∣sire of inriching their Relations, seems a disease hereditary to the Popes, of which ex∣amples the memory is too fresh in Rome, with no small detriment to the Church. Chigi's declaration to some of his friends, that he could not concur in him, but in case he saw his designs for Bonvisi desperate. The affection shewn to the exaltation of Farnese by the French, who were instrumen∣tal in making of difficulties, and inventing obstructions to hinder Rospigliosi from the Papacy; but the Divine Providence having chosen him to be the Conductor and Shep∣herd of his Flock, by the fiery Pillar as it were of his Protection, shew those Israelites the true way (which follow'd him) to the end, that the mists of difficulties being dis∣pell'd, the affairs of Rospigliosi might be brought safe into the Harbour, to the shame and confusion of all that oppos'd them. And thus behold the Conclav is finish'd, before the Reader is aware, the work is at an end, in the very beginning of the work; behold them gone out of the Conclave, at the very time we believ'd them but entering. In earnest, speaking of particulars, we seem to▪ have forgot the universal, and whilst we insist upon the Competitors of the Pa∣pacy, to have omitted the most profound and occult maximes of the Conclave. So it would be if the Conclave made the Pretenders, and not the Pretenders the Con∣clave: so many Cardinals as we have hitherto describ'd, so many Conclaves have we made. Maximes, Treaties, Managements, Negotiations, Oppositions, Exclusions, In∣clusions, Subtleties, Animosities, Threatnings, and Supplications, are the things which constitute Conclaves; and of all these materials, we find something in the particular de∣scription of every Cardinal. I have read several Conclaves of several Popes, and amongst the rest, five of Innocent the 10th. alone, it being true that every Conclavist makes his own Conclave; but to
speak truth, without offence to any one, I have found so much confusion by the redun∣dancy of matter which presented it self to the Pens of those Authors, who have de∣scrib'd those Conclaves; that to avoid that confusion my self, and make things more easie for the memory of the Reader, I have separated them as much as possible, and made a particular Conclave for every Cardinal Pretendant: and though in my judgement it ought to be sufficient, yet for the compleat satisfaction of the curious, I will omit not to say something of the General likewise. The Lord Cardinals were divided in the Conclave into these three Factions, viz. one of the Creatures of Chigi, another of the Squadrone volante, or flying Squadrone, and the third of a few of the Creatures of Barbarino: But all of them so weak of themselves, that one without the other would not have had votes enough to have made an Election, though they had enough to obstruct any person propos'd: Before the Decree for the two thirds was made, and whilst one half was sufficient, the Factions were so numerous, they chose Popes as they pleased; but since they were restrain'd to two thirds, there has never Faction been so great, as to prevail for any thing more than an Ex∣clusion. After the death of Ʋrban, the Faction of Barbarino consisted of above 40 Cardinals, Creatures of the said Ʋrban; so that in appearance the Election would happen to the sa∣tisfaction of Barbarini, and yet they had the least share in it; For not being able to hit upon a Pope, as they desir'd, they consented to chose Innocent (at least Francisco did, for indeed Anthonio was always against it) because they could prevail for no other. The reason of all this is, because there are several among the Factions, which being Subjects, and dependants upon the Crowns, cannot oblige themselves to their heads, any further, than as the Election of the person be agreeable to the Crowns they depend on; and indeed though there be so much talk of the Factions of Spain, and of France (which is nothing but their Cardinals) they are subject to a head, which they depute over them; yet in policy they do suffer them, to divide themselves here and there, as they think good; it being all one to them if their business be done; and indeed they are serv'd better, by having their Cardinals under the heads of other Factions, than to make Factions of their own; so that the Cardinals of the Crowns ought rather to be call'd Nationists than Factionists: the French having their particular assemblies, to endeavour the advantages of the French Nation, and the Spaniards, to negotiate the interests of Spain. The Faction of Barbarino, in respect of his own number of Cardinals, was the weak∣est of all, and it was held impossible for him to Exclude another, although there were 15 Cardinals of Ʋrban's Creation in the Conclave; yet nevertheless amongst those there were Ʋrsin, Este, and Grimaldi, who were indifferent which way Barbarino steer'd; it was enough for them if they follow'd their instructions from France; there were a∣mongst them Harach and Donghi, likewise both of them Spaniards, and Rosetti for the Great Duke, who were all Creatures of Barbarino, and follow'd him rather to give him counsel, than to receive any from him; every one of them endeavouring the advantages of their particular Princes, without any design at all to favour the interest of Barbarino, who recommended himself to them: So that there were at the absolute dis∣posal of Barbarino, but 7 Votes, with which number he would not have been able to have done any thing, either Pro or Con; and yet he was able, because amongst the o∣ther two Factions there were certain Cardinals who deny'd to concur in the persons pro∣pos'd to them by their heads: to exclude them therefore, they joyn'd with Barbarino's party, who were resolv'd upon their Exclusion likewise. And by is means the Faction of Barbarino became stronger, and able at least to prevail for the Ex∣clusion of any one. And this that is spoken of one of the Factions, is intended of them all: for my part, I esteem little the uniformity of so many Factions, as having nothing but Title, and some little appearance; for in one and the same Faction, there are oftentimes four or five several opinions, and every opinion attended with two or three Cardinals, which is the true reason of the difficultie in Elections; If it were otherwise, and the Factio∣nists follow'd the directions of their Heads, the Pope would be made in a moment, be∣cause
it would be sufficient to accommodate two persons only, which are the Heads; but things are carryed after another manner, there being for the most part in every Con∣clave, as many Factions as Cardinals; a many Heads, as Factions; and as many Popes as Heads; confounding themselves by their conjunctions and divisions, and doing too much, they do nothing at all. And here I will beg leave of the Reader for one moment, to insert an example very worthy in my judgement to be added to this Treatise. It is not two years since, there was a Muster of the horse, in a City where I was then present in the Company of a Ro∣man Abbot, who had the curiosity to see the said Muster. The Captains had never been in the Wars, and perhaps not so much as on Horse-back; the Souldiers were all of them, either Porters, or Shooemakers, or Taylors, or Bargemen, and therefore bet∣ter skill'd in any thing, than fighting; insomuch that I think it impossible to see any thing more pleasant, than the disorders of that Muster. The Captains commanded, as if they were to obey; and the Souldiers obey'd as they were to command: some of them ran, whether they were never call'd; and others re∣fus'd to go to that post to which they were commanded. That Captain call'd two or three Souldiers out of his own Company, and there came five or six out of another. When they were to double their files, there was neither head nor foot to be found; they which were before, instead of standing firm where they were, ran tumbling upon one another to the Rear; and those which were in the Rear, thrust themselves so for∣ward, they left no body near them. The Captains swagger'd, that they were not obey'd by their Souldiers; and the Souldiers curs'd, that their Captains knew not how to com∣mand them. The Abbot look'd upon them with great satisfaction, smiling, and seeming to laugh, though he did not. I who observ'd him, desiring to know what it was, ask'd his opini∣on of their Exercising; to which he answer'd, that it seem'd to him not much unlike to the Conclave of Cardinals: and so returning to his house, he told me, that he was pre∣sent in Innocent the tenth's Conclave, in which Pope Alexander was created, where he had found no better Order in the disposition and management of the Cardinals, than he had seen in the training of those Souldiers. I being curious to know something more particularly, intreated him that he would give me a more particular accompt; but he finding he had said enough already, added no more, but that the Cardinals in the Conclave, observ'd the same Orders the Captains and Souldiers had done in their Muster. And indeed, when afterwards I had occasion to see with mine own eyes their Discipline in the Conclave, as I did in this of Clement, that Muster came into my mind, and I thought a hundred times of what the Abbot had told me, finding by experience the application to be very proper and good. It is not to be imagin'd the way the Cardinals take to accomplish their designs. The Heads of the Factions, are they which prevail the least, and do many times negotiate, what their Creatures will never confirm; and for the most part, the Creatures do ob∣lige their Heads to follow them: one word is enough to make three or four Factions; and one thing mis-understood, does frustrate sometimes the designs of the whole. The Heads do unite to endeavour the union of their Creatures, and the Creatures divide, that they might not see the union of their Heads. Some of them run thither, from whence others run away, and neither can give a reason for what either of them do. Every one pretends to obey them, who have the Government of them; and yet every one obeys, and no body commands. Sometimes 'tis believ'd one man has got the votes of them all, and sometimes all together, cannot get the vote of one man. In short, the Cardi∣nals in the Conclave, are like an Eele in ones hand, that slips out when one thinks to hold it the fastest. And this is the Muster which is made in the Con∣clave. Let us return now to our three Factions in our particular Conclave, and if we have said any thing of the Faction of Barbarino, let us say something particularly of the Faction of Chigi, which consisted of certain Cardinals created by his Unckle. At first this Faction seem'd to be numerous, of 24 Cardinals at least, though his Unckle created but about 30 in all. But in strictness it was not so
numerous as it ought to have been; not only because there was none, either of the Spa∣nish, nor French, who were oblig'd to adhere to what orders they receiv'd from their Crowns, as two of the Venetians were to the Orders of that Commonwealth; but others being unsatisfy'd with the ill conduct of Chigi, turn'd tayl, and forsook him, yet he had enough remaining to serve for an exclusion. The French by themselves, and by the mediation of others, endeavour'd to perswade him to concur in Farnese. The Spaniards (in whom his confidence was greatest) left him to his choice of several persons, suspending, and forbearing (by a conceal'd policy) the nomination of any body, as if they would depend wholly upon him; and all this to gain him to follow their designs. For all this, according as Caraffa advis'd him, he would not declare his intentions, ei∣ther to the French Ambassador, or to the Spanish, although they both press'd it very ear∣nestly in their last visits; but he excus'd himself, by affirming that he desir'd nothing, but what was usually desir'd by the Nephews of other Popes, that one of the Cardinals created by his Unckle might be chosen; declaring himself indifferent as to them, and that he would not shew more affection to one, than to another; but he was not so good as his word, for he afterwards express'd too great propensity to his peculiar friends. And the same song he sung to the greatest part of the Cardinals, protesting he would never have it go from amongst his own creatures. Which Albici understanding, before a sufficient number of the Cardinals, he said, Most Eminent Lords, we endeavour to make a Pope, and the Pope is made to our hands, for Alexander has left it as an Inheritance to his own creatures. Only he gave some hopes to Cardinal Barbarino, that he would concur with him, in case the design he had for some of his particular friends, did not prosper; but all was to no purpose. The third Faction was the Squadrone Volante, which were enough for an exclusion, the most of them creatures of Innocent the 10th. and for the most part unanimous in their designs. In the last Conclave before, there was a flying Squadone of Cardinals, but without ever a head, which Prince Pamphilio observing, desir'd they would unite themselves under some such head, as by his Birth and Prerogative should be worthy of such di∣rection; and to that purpose propos'd Cardinal Medici to them; but the good Car∣dinals of the Squadrone deriding his Councel, made answer, they had need of no more heads; every one of them had both a head, and hands, and feet too, and so they con∣tinued without. But in this Conclave they were of another opinion, and without any solicitation, chose Cardinal Imperiale Head of their Squadron; a person very proper for the imployment, as one that quickly discerns where the malady lyes, and has judgement enough to apply a remedy immediately, and stands firm to his resolutions, when he has reason of his side; yet in the exaltation of Bonelli, he shew'd less cunning than was expected in him. The French were something averse to the erection of this flying Squadron, and the rather, because they saw it manag'd it by a Cardinal who had no great affection for them; but they thought it best to let that pass, which they could not stop; and indeed the very name of the Squadrone Volante, was odious to the Crowns in the last Conclave, but in this much more; because the Cardinals of the Squadron were able to exclude any body, and were agreed amongst themselves, never to concur (upon what instance soever) but in some person that pleas'd them; and as they said, no body should please them, but the most deserving. And to speak truth, this union did not only displease the Crowns, as I have said, but was ungratefull even to those Politicians and Ecclesiasticks, who made any reflection upon it; for although they protested, with their hands upon their hearts, and their eyes turn'd up to Heaven, that they would consent to no body but him that de∣serv'd best; yet they became odious, and suspected, not only to the Competitors, but to others also, by this union, and refusal of the recommendations of the rest; declaring themselves as it were Arbitrators of the Election, it being suffici∣ent for every Cardinal, to satisfie his own Conscience, without publishing
by this outward Conjunction, that they would concur in whom they would have them, only upon pretence that he be deserving, every one being oblig'd to desire and prefer the best, as most worthy, according as he esteems him in his Conscience, and not to declare and prefer one man only by this agreement, and inseparable union of votes, it being visi∣ble by the effects, and experimented dayly, that as men, they must err, seeing they are not Angels; and that the fulfilling of the Bull, de Eligendo Pontifice, consists wholly in every mans giving his own vote to him, who according to his Conscience, and secundum Deum, (as the Bull sayes) he thinks worthy of it; and that without forming of Squa∣drons, or Factions, (yet not without the propensity of affection) they declare alto∣gether to concur in whom they please, though another person be as worthy and deserving. The Crowns quickly found out this scandalous proceeding in the Conclave, so that after the Election of the late Pope Alexander, the first Spanish Ambassador which was sent to Rome, brought not the usual Credentials from his Master, to the Cardinals his Subjects, as being born in the Dominions of the King of Spain, and the reason was, be∣cause they had been of the Squadrone Volante; the Ambassador by word of mouth repre∣sented to the said Cardinals, the displeasure his Catholick Majesty had receiv'd, that they, contrary to their duties, and in contempt of the instances from him, had follow'd that Squadron, yet the Cardinals of his Catholick Majesty forbore not even this time, to make themselves of the Squadron. Every one of these three Factions endeavour'd to gain the other, but with such strange and unimaginable wayes, as were never seen in any Conclave before. Barbarino being weak, by the debility of his Faction, and certain that he could not set up his own interest, by reason of Chigi's resolution to concur in none but his own creatures, or thorough the little confidence he had in the private promises of Imperiale, he began to think of turning the water from the Mill, and finding out a way of bringing discord and confusion amongst the creatures of Chigi; which seem'd not difficult to perform, because those creatures themselves, understood very well that Chigi's intentions were fix'd upon making a Pope after another way than his creatures did intend; amongst which, some negotiated and stood firm for Bonelli, the greatest part for Rospigliosi, and the rest for Farnese, and Chigi on the other side contriving the exaltation of Elci his Kinsman; in the first place, he went about spinning of delays, and protracting, in hopes by that means to hit the mark in time. Insomuch that many times he found himself so imbroyl'd, he knew not which way to turn him, because his creatures were oblig'd to follow him only, in respect that he had declar'd he would be indifferent, and not obtrude any particular of his creatures upon them; but when they found him partial to one man, more than to another, they began to follow him but lamely, and to shift off his interest as much as they could. In the first Scrutiny, which was celebrated on the 3d. day, there did not concur that number of votes which was desired, and which was for certain believ'd could not concur; for besides 36 votes which siguify'd nothing, that is, which nominated nobody, the rest were sufficiently divided, viz. Durazzo had 11, Palotta 17, Barbarino 12, from whence the Factions of Farnese, and Rospigliofi, took courage, and conceiv'd great hopes of compas∣sing their designs, it being ordinary in the Conclaves for them to lose all, who are found to have most likelyhood at the beginning. And this fortify'd the opinion of them, who judg'd the progress of the Conclave very long, founding their fancy, upon the dispatch of a Courier into France, from the French Ambassador, after he had had a long conference with the Ambassador of Spain; inferring from hence the great difficulty of pitching a person of equal satisfaction and merit, the Ministers and Cardinals of Crown, declaring alway publickly, that they would exclude none of the meritorious in general; but when afterwards they began to talk of coming to a strict Scrutiny, then they began to discover their particular propensions to the per∣sons propos'd, every one endeavouring under-hand to favour them, who they themselves believ'd most deserving. It may be said, and said truly, that Rospigliosi enter'd Pope into the Conclave, because al∣most all the pretendants came into the Conclave with an absolute intention to advance every one his own proper interest, and in case they fail'd there, not to desert the person of the said Rospigliosi. Barbarino would have joyn'd with Rospigliosi the first day, had he not been confident
of bringing his own affairs to a good issue; and indeed there were many that perswaded him to it, in respect of the great confidence the Spaniards had in him, which confidence, had its true foundation in the time when the said Barbarino bought certain lands in the Kingdome of Naples for the Prince his Nephew; which Prince, as head of the house of the Barbarini, would have alwayes held his Kindred oblig'd to the affection of the Catho∣lick King. Besides he could not be jealous of the King of France, the dependance of Cardinal Antonio Barbarino being so notorious upon that Crown, where likewise all the Family of the Barbarini was receiv'd, at the time of its persecution by Innocent; yet for all this▪ the Rhetorick of Cardinal Anthonio, nor the subtlety and insinuations of all the friends of Cardinal Francisco, had no power upon the Spirits of the French, who excluded him (but as secretly as was possible) in consideration of the Lands that were bought already in Naples, and for the inclination the said Barbarino had alwayes shewn, and profess'd to the Crown of Spain. The French therefore began publiquely to favour Farnese, which gave the Spaniards some occasion of jealousie, though they had promis'd to concur, because they would have had Farnese rely'd more upon them, than upon the French; insomuch that they endea∣vour'd to exclude him▪ which was easie enough, by reason the Cardinals were generally against him, in respect of their particular interests, so that for eight dayes together there was no discourse, but of the exclusion both of the one, and the other; the Scrutinies serving only to fulfill the Bull, which appoints the same to be made every day, with the same Oath, and in the best form; and so their votes were given to several persons, but in small numbers, expecting still when two thirds should agree, which would have been 42. at the least. Whilst the French were jugling (I know not whether in earnest, or that it might be thought so) for Farnese, Cardinal Imperiale, and Azolino, did what they could to ex∣clude him, though Farnese endeavour'd to take them off by very considerable offers; and Cardinal Este, who was most troubled at the designs of Farnese, found a convenient opportunity to speak to him as he did. At first the Crown of France would not be interested at all, speaking in a way, that seem'd to proceed from its own proper motion, insisting upon the necessity the Church had to have such a person in the Vatican, making him believe with good arguments, that a Pope being to be made for the benefit of the Church, they need go no farther than his particulars. Imperiale, and Azolini, abominated the affectionate Councels of this Prince, de∣claring publickly, that they would upon no account whatever, concur with Farnese; whereupon d'Este was oblig'd to tell them, that the French would have endeavour'd to have assisted him with other votes, upon which Imperiale seem'd not to make so much esteem of them, as he ought to have done, remaining firm in his resolution to the con∣trary, and reiterating his protestations, never to concur in Farnese; whereupon d'Este was oblig'd to reply upon Imperiale, that he had promis'd the King of France to concur in the first Conclave, in any person which should be propos'd by the French Faction, and that having broke his promise, the King of France would shew his resentment as he had opportunity. Some will have it, that they recriminated, and grew very sharp in their expressions to one another; but for all that Imperiale kept on in his way, and persisted in the exclusion of Farnese; and from this rupture, the disorders increas'd. On the 9th. it was publickly talk'd thorough the whole City, that Cardinal Rospig∣liosi would be made Pope without all doubt, and that the next morning he would be pub∣lish'd; and it was so confidently reported, that some who were more easie to believe, than patient to inform themselves, laid great wagers upon it. By many it was look'd upon as noise only, and popular air; by others it was believ'd to be true, supposing the Cardinals were resolv'd in that manner to deposite the Papacy in the hand of that person, who not being likely to live longer than four or five years, in respect of and the number of Pretenders, in probability growing less in the mean time, by the death of the most antient, and the rest growing older, they imagin'd there would be less difficul∣ty in the next Election, and the way would be facilitated to the remaining Preten∣ders.
It is enough that his Election was held so certain, that the Artillery in the Castle of Saint Angelo, were already put in order, and one of his Domesticks receiv'd publick congratulations from several that went to his house. The Governour of the Conclave, who understood well enough which way things went, had sent Souldiers to secure the Goods of that Cardinal in the Convent of the Cruciferous Fryers (whose Protector he was) and they accordingly had adorn'd the Church to that purpose, and invited several persons to the Solemnity. All this proceeded from the garulity of Ʋgo Serughi, Agent for the Congregation de Propaganda Fide, to whom one of the Conclavists gave notice by a Billet, that there were great contrivances for Rospigliosi, and that for certain he would be proclaim'd Pope the next morning, the Conclavist deceiving himself perhaps upon a conference betwixt Cardinal Barbarino, and Chigi, that they might seem to make Rospigliosi Pope; but nei∣ther the one, nor the other, intended it in earnest, resolving upon this at the instigation of Cardinal Azolino, who being a person of great sagacity, seem'd very desirous to have Rospigliosi exalted, because he saw things so well dispos'd for him; so that he thought it best to conciliate the affection of one that could not fail of being Pope: and it succeeded according to his designs. The two Cardinals, Barbarino, and Chigi, committed the whole management of their affairs to Azolino, and he manag'd them as well as was possible; but the same per∣sons who promis'd their votes to Azolino for Rospigliosi in publick, deny'd them per∣haps for Azolino to Rospigliosi in secret. And thus from these indications, and from the imprudence of the Conclavist, he conceiv'd the foremention'd Billet in the form it was sent to Serughi, without expecting the Scrutiny, in which, Rospigliosi by the management of Azolino, had seven voices in the same Scrutiny, and nine in the Access, which serv'd to give the greater courage to the rest of the Pretenders. The policie of Chigi, or rather of Caraffa his Councellor, and Conductor, was not so bad in the beginning, because he had perswaded the Spaniards privately to exclude Farnese; and afterwards in the business of Rospigliosi he prevail'd, that the French oppos'd themselves very briskly; and indeed not∣withstanding the impediment, which the promoters of Farnese had found, it seem'd their minds began to turn towards Rospigliosi, which as soon as Chigi discern'd, he immediately endeavour'd to interrupt their designs; and by the means of his greatest Confidents, without any appearance that the hint was from him, he gave the French to understand, that in true reason of State, they ought to pay them in their own Coyn, and exclude Rospigliosi, as well as they had done Farnese, who was recommended by them; nor were they much averse, especially when they saw the practices of Azolino were odious to Este, by reason of the words which happen'd betwixt them about Farnese some dayes be∣fore. Chigi's design was not without some grounds, to endeavour the exclusion of Farnese, by the Spaniards, and of Rospigliosi, by the French; because by dividing the minds of the Cardinals betwixt Rospigliosi and Farnese, it might fall out, that neither of them both should carry the victory, but that a third person might obtain it, which third person, he was confident would be Bonvisi, recommended with so much affection by him; and he believ'd he should prosper the better, there being nothing discover'd to the contrary, ei∣ther by the Spaniard, or the French, and because he had many more friends in the Squa∣drone Volante, than the other pretenders had. Besides which, the Abbot Bonvisi, nego∣tiated very earnestly abroad with the Ambassadors of the two Crowns, the exaltation of his Unckle; but without any other success than good words from both parties, and promises to favour him, as soon as they saw the time propitious, which then it was not. On the 10th. at night, after the noise was spread abroad of the Election of Rospigliosi, Cardinal Donghi enter'd the Conclave, (though very ill) was receiv'd with the usual forms, and visited by the Spanish Cardinals in particular. His entrance in that hast made many believe, that the Spaniards and friends to Rospigliosi, were to take new measures, and obtain a new Scrutiny: and indeed the Spaniards did declare, and his particular friends, that had not there been more than urgent occasion for his entrance into the Conclave, they would have left him to have injoy'd himself abroad, thereby to have
recover'd his strength the better; so that he being call'd into the Conclave in so much hast, many people conceiv'd good hopes that there was some favourable negotiation on foot for Spain; but the French concluded the Spaniards found themselves weak, when they look'd abroad for supplyes. Ginetti in the mean time, observing matters not a little imbroyl'd betwixt Farnese, and Rospigliosi, and not over-well dispos'd to Barbarino, he began to set up new designs for himself: upon this score he went to Barbarino, and desir'd him to shew some affecti∣on for his interest; Barbarino ask'd him, what assistance he had; Ginetti reply'd, that all his hopes consisted in his Eminence, and in eighty two years of age which he had up∣on his shoulders; but the mischief is, reply'd Barbarino, there are other things requi∣site, for thirty Cardinals would do you more service, than a hundred years: for my part I shall not fail to assist you, as a well deserving creature of mine; but I fear I shall be able to do little for you, having been unable to do any thing for my self. The Flying Squadron will not consent; Chigi is obstinate not to have the election, but out of his own creatures; the Spaniards are ambiguous, but inclin'd to Rospigliosi, because they see him most likely to succeed; the French are for every body, using great civility in their ex∣clusions; several particular persons hate you; the generality is divided here and there; Albici is your profess'd enemy again; Colonna and Lomellino (the great supporters of your interest in the last Conclave) dead; those who excluded you once, will not include you the next time; and in short, other difficulties will not be wanting. However be not discourag'd, 'tis convenient to try your fortune, that it may not be objected, that you were ignorant of what you had to do. But Ginetti who had been discoursing with others, and found them all in the same Song, desisted, declaring that he would not be Pope against Gods will; and that there∣fore he will resolve to sit still, and expect a call, and so his designs dy'd in the Cradle. Although during the whole time of the Conclave, several practices were commenc'd, sometimes for this Pretender, and sometimes for another▪ yet the practices of Rospig∣liosi were never dismiss'd, but held strongly together as if they were tyed with Cord. The Spaniards having plac'd all their designs upon this Cardinal, Monsignour Settina, who was privy to the secrets of the Spaniard, sollicited the promotion of Rospigliosi more than all the rest, by which means he disoblig'd several of the Pretenders: he went up and down prying and observing the motions of the rest, breaking the snares which were laid against this person, and in short, did as much as was possible. Barbarino having at last discover'd the little hopes there were for his exaltation, and seeing as little appearance of doing any thing for his creatures, or any body else better affected to his house than Rospigliosi was, who was an actual Servant to Cardinal Capucci∣no a Brother of Ʋrban the eights, and Beneficed by the said Ʋrban, who sent him Nun∣tio into Spain: he resolv'd to put things to a push, and concur in this person, who had the inclinations of the whole Colledge already, with the concurrence of both Spaniard and Great Duke, who had recommended to the Cardinals his Subjects, the exaltation of this person in the first place. But because the Faction of Chigi was more numerous than the rest, especially had it concurr'd in some person gratefull to the Spaniards, and not unacceptable to the French: Cardinal Barbarino thought fit to go himself in person to Cardinal Chigi, on the 18th. of June being Sunday, and to talk to him at large; he remonstrated the danger in which all the Cardinals were, being shut up in such a place; he urg'd the heat of the weather, the sufferings of the people, in respect of the Gabels, and augmentation of the customs, and no Pastor in being to relieve them; the hatred that multiply'd dayly amongst the people against the house of Chigi, and particularly against Don Mario, who was forc'd to re∣tire, lest during the vacancy of the See, he should receive any new affront from the Ras∣cality of the people; the ill consequences that might fall out for the Church, if by pro∣tracting the Conclave, any new rupture should happen betwixt France and Spain; and lastly; he concluded, by telling him, that though his Eminence should recommend a Pope out of his own creatures, who might be gratefull to the Crowns, yet the Pope would be made immediately; so that there was nothing expected from him, but his frank declara∣tion: otherwise it would be determin'd in another way by those Cardinals who were
united with a firm resolution to go out of the Conclave the next day, with a Pope ready made; and therefore it would be best for him to resolve, unless he had a mind to see a Pope made out of the number of the Creatures of Alexander his Unkle, which thing could not happen nevertheless, if he would remedy it in time. Chigi (who had imploy'd Caraffa to treat in the behalf of other of his Creatures, which he loved better) finding himself surpriz'd by this resolute Proposition of Bar∣barino, was forc'd to answer, as he was bound in civility and good correspondence, and (that he might not declare himself openly to be partial to his Creatures) he profess'd that he had them all in an equal degree of affection and esteem. To this Barbarino re∣ply'd, that all his Faction was resolv'd upon Rospigliosi, without any contradiction in their Votes, as knowing him no less deserving than the best of the Pretenders: To which Chigi return'd, that there were some of his Creatures peremptorily against him, though he himself had a great value for him: But the difficulty consisted not in this, because the lesser part would have follow'd the greater: The business lay in the Squa∣drone volante, who were for his Exclusion. If there be nothing but that wanting, re∣ply'd Barbarino, the Pope is created, for the Squadronists are all unanimously for Rospi∣gliosi. Chigi was convinc'd with that news, and forc'd to say, Let us go then and make Rospigliosi (one of my Creatures) Pope; though 'tis probable 'twas against his will, having a few dayes before discover'd his inclinations to be much more for Elci his Countrey-man, as I have said before: But the Cardinals would scarce have concurr'd in him, both for this, and other respects: But if he fail'd, Chigi intended to make Cardinal Bonvisi Pope for him. In the mean time Azolino (who manag'd Rospigliosi's affairs with the Flying Squa∣dron) came in, and confirm'd what Barbarino had said, assuring, that there would not be one Vote in opposition to Rospigliosi, in the whole Squadrone volante: But the other, viz. Barbarino and Chigi, knowing very well that there were some envious persons, who would endeavour to pervert them, they began to reckon up what Votes they thought safe and secure; but not finding their full number, they began to contrive which way to get the three Votes of the Venetian Cardinals, who are alwayes oblig'd to follow their Head, that is, him who has private instructions from that Republique to concurr with one person, before another. Barbarino and Azolino, interpos'd with Cardinal Otto∣buono, their Head, who not only consented without difficulty, but declar'd, that amongst all that were recommended by the Senate, Rospigliosi was the first: No sooner was this declaration of the Venetians publish'd in favour of Rospigliosi, but every one look'd upon the Pope as created, as knowing there needed no more than those three to secure his Inclusion. The Cardinals of the French Faction, seeing things go on so smoothly, they began immediately to Tack, and to pretend to a concurrence with so extraordinary readiness, that the Spaniards began to be fearfull of his inclination to the French, and thereupon desired more time to consider; but it was no time for that, Barbarino, Chigi, Azolino, and Ottobuono, above them all, shew'd themselves impatient till Rospigliosi was created, and that their designs might not grow cold, or evaporate, (as it often happens, and perhaps would have done then) they hasten'd the Scrutiny about noon, and besides the two thirds which were certain, for his Creation, of sixty four Cardinals then in the Conclave, all concurr'd for him but two only: The Scrutiny being past, and all the Votes in his favour, it was demanded what name he would assume, and he reply'd Cle∣ment the 9th: so that the first adoration being made in the Chappel, he was carry'd to Saint Peters very late that night; an Office that is usually perform'd presently after dinner, but they would not put off the Scrutiny, as I have said, least any difference should happen in the night. The very night he was chosen Pope, he declar'd Cardinal Azolino Secretary of State, an Office of great trust, and which was exercis'd by the said Rospigliosi during the whole time of the last Papacy; and Ottobuono he made his Datary, in meer gratitude as is suppos'd; for Azolino as one of the Squadrone volante, had gain'd the Votes of the said Squadron, and Ottobuono with his two other Venetian Cardinals, joyn'd themselves to their Votes, as necessary to his Creation, that their design which had proceeded so far,
might not miscarry at last; besides Ottobuono having been Auditor di Rota, was the more proper for that Office: he confirm'd Monsignor the Under-Datary likewise, for the better management of the affairs, which will be regulated by two such Eminent persons, both for their experience in the Law, and the integrity of their manners. In like manner at the instance of Cardinal Antonio, the Pope accepted for his Maestro di Camera, Monsignor Altieri, Secretary of the Congregation of Bishops and Regulars, a Noble Roman, very rich, the last of his Family, and 76. years of age; which made some believe, that being promoted to the Cardinalship, and out-living his Holiness, the Barbarini had a design to exalt him to the Papacy. He confirm'd Mon∣signor Borromeo in his Government of Rome, and told him moreover, that for his part he ought to make a Visit to the Lady Dutchess Borromeo his Mother, and that he would shortly conferr a greater Office upon him; whereupon many conceive he will be Maggiordomo, or else Nuntio into Spain. On Tuesday night he order'd the Ambassadors of the Crowns to be call'd to him the next morning; the French Ambassador went to him, and was entertained by him above two hours; it may be said this was his first Audience since he came to Rome, for the continual indisposition of that last Pope, had given him no opportunity. The Am∣bassadors of Spain and Venice went likewise to attend him, when they were recover'd of a certain indisposition that kept them in their beds: In the mean time Cardinal Sforza went in the behalf of the Ambassador of Spain, as the principal Confident of the Spanish Faction; after which he every day gave long Audiences to four Cardinals one after another, according to their Segniority; giving Audience in like manner to divers of the Roman Princes, and Prelates of the Court. On Wednesday he order'd Cardinal Chigi to be call'd to his Audience, Don Mario his Father, and Don Agostino, Nephew to the said Don Mario, which are the three chief of the House of Chigi; and because they came all together, and he treated them long, it was reported, that the Pope had propos'd to them that they should find out some Money, besides what Alexander the 7th. had left in the Castle, to take off the Gabell upon Meal in some part, that is, to the sum of two Julii, which amounts in the whole to eight Julii a Bushell, by the extinguishment of which two Julii, the poor of that State would be something relieved, who were forc'd to pay for the Stone likewise that grownd their Meal, the extinguishment of the said Julii amounting to above 3000 Crowns. This new Pope has five Nephews, the Sons of one of his Brothers, who is 62 years of age, and a Noble man of Pistoia, a City in Tuscany; four of them are there resident at present, and the fifth is Abbot Rospigliosi, who a year since was sent Apostolical Inter-Nuntio to Brussels; to all of them there are Messengers sent expresly, and they are ex∣pected ere long in Rome. His Brother is a most pious man, and very charitable, and his Nephews of good education, and great generosity; but he that is most known in this Court, is the Abbot, who was Cup-bearer to Cardinal Chigi when he was young, and was in Spain with his Unkle when he was Nuntio there, by which means he studyed at Salamanca, and took the degree of a Doctor upon him: And this is the Nephew which will be the Dominus▪ fac totum, for which reason he will be made Cardinal with the first opportunity; and many suppose in the first Conclave, because the Spaniards do press, that the said Nephew may be dispatch'd into France as Cardinal Legate, to propose by way of mediation, some adjustment and accommodation of the pretences of the said King, in Heinault and Brabant, of which the issue will be attended. It is the general opinion of the Court, that this new Pope will do something very gratefull to the people, it being discours'd that he will apply some sudden relief to their grievances; for he has already signify'd by the Prefect of the Annona, to all the Bakers, that they may freely buy their Corn of the Merchants; whereas before it was ingross'd by the Brother of the last Pope, to his great profit and advantage; for he bought all his Corn at five Scudi a Bushell, and sold it afterwards to the Bakers for nine: and that for the extinction of so many Gabels, impos'd by his Predecessor, he was re∣solv'd to reduce the greatest part of the expence of the Pontifical Guards, and
make other great, and frugal reformations, for the ease of the Apostolical Chamber. But being already 67 years old, and not of so perfect a health, as is necessary for the sustaining so great a charge, many are of opinion he cannot live long; by reason of a great swelling he has in his Leg, besides the accidental Apoplexy which he had some months since. So that in that case, if it should so happen, (which God forbid) it would be said of this most excellent Pope, as it has been formerly of several like him, that good things pass away presently, for some iniquity in the people. He has confirm'd Monsignour Nerli, in the Office of Secretary of the Briefs to the Princes, and Monsignour Piccolomini, in his Secretaryship of the Memorials. The Cavalier Cellese of Pistoia, (who during the whole time of the last Papacy, serv'd Don Mario Brother to the late Pope, in the quality of a Gentleman only, and in all that time had no more than a Pension of ninety Scudi) is Unckle-in-Law to the new Pope, as being his Mothers Brother-in-Law; so that Don Mario, must hereafter give him the right hand, and preceedence, which are frequent Metamorphosi's in the Court of Rome.
POLITICK APHORISMS For the Cardinals of the Conclave this year 1667. made by Cardinal Azolini. SO great is the credit and authority that this Maxime of the Lawyers has in so many Ages acquir'd, Experientia est rerum Magistra, that he who will learn of any other Master, exposes himself to a manifest danger of disparaging his judgement in every thing else. From hence it is, that I, (putting together some considerations for the advertisement of such as enter the Conclave, in order to the Election of the Pope) have not thought good to present my own Councels only, but taking the expe∣rience of such occurrences in the Conclaves as have come to my hands, I have taken, as I conceive, the right way not to erre; of which considerations, I shall insert with as much brevity as is possible, the most frequent, the most rational, and the most practis'd. The exceptions which do usually obstruct the making of the Pope in the Conclave, are of two sorts: some relate to the persons, and particulars of the Colledge, with which very few are concern'd; and in this case there can be no general rule given, for, de singula∣ribus non datur Scientia. The others are such, as the generality, or the greatest part of the Colledge, are interested in: and of this sort there are three exceptions, which for the time past have been alwayes sufficient to exclude any body. For this reason, the Head of a Faction ought to have a care of recommending a person lyable to any of the three. The first, and most frequent, is, when the person recommended, has been formerly expos'd to a Scrutiny, and miscarry'd; for they who excluded him, believing constant∣ly the person excluded disoblig'd thereby, will arm themselves against him, with greater vigour than before. For this reason, in the Conclave of Gregory the 13th. Cardinal Marone would not venture again upon the votes of his party, having miscarryed before in the Conclave of Pius the 4th. But the Cardinals Santa Severina, Paleotto, and Marc Antonio Colonna, would not be guided by that rule, though they were excluded in the Conclaves of Gregory the 14th, and Innocent the 10th. yet they adventur'd in others, but alwayes in vain. The second obstruction is, if they be found in too strict a friendship with such Cardi∣nals as govern'd the Pope formerly, and (which is worse) with ill satisfaction; for the Colledge being jealous that they may continue in the same Dominion, will never be brought to choose any of their friends to be Pope. And this was enough to defeat Car∣dinal Serleto (in the Conclave of Sixtus the 5th. though in other respects he was very
well belov'd) because he had too great intimacy with Cardinal Como, who for 19 years had govern'd two Popes, Pius the 4th. and Pius the 5th. with little or no satisfaction: and in the Conclaves of Innocent the 10th. Cardinal Sachetti, for no other reason, but because he was a friend and favourite of the Barbarini, was alwayes excluded by the Spanish Faction. The third exception is, their too much youth, either in their Cardinalship, or years, how eminent soever he be otherwise for his worth, or his parts; because his friends are disgusted, that his short service, or fidelity of a few dayes, should be preferr'd before theirs of a long standing, and experience. And his enemies have a fair field open'd to ex∣asperate his very Confidents against him, so that at last there will not be one in the whole Colledge will scruple to give his negative, having so good a pretence, as that they will not do an injury to so many antient persons, and of so many years deserts, as are in the Conclave. This exception excluded Cardinal Salviati, in the Conclave of Gre∣gory the 14th. Cardinal Farnese, in that of Pius the 5th. Cardinal Ferrara, in that of Marcellus the 2d. and Cardinal Alexandrino experienc'd it effectually in the Conclave of Gregory the 13th. for he having a desire to propose Cardinal Theatino of Piacenza, who was made a Cardinal by Pius the 5th. but a few years before: though he was a per∣son otherwise every way to be respected, yet the objection alone of his being a new Cardinal, was enough to prevail, that there was not one word spoken of him more. And in the same manner, in the Conclave of Sixtus the 5th. Cardinal Castagna was ex∣cluded for being a new Cardinal, and so the favourers of Cardinal Santiquattro were glad to pass him over in silence in the same Conclave, as fearing the same disappoint∣ment. In desperate cases, it is great prudence in the Head of a Party, to pitch upon a quiet and peaceable person, eminent for his Qualities and Virtues, especially Munificence: for these qualifications are they, which of themselves, removing all difficulties, do give the victory to those who carry them. And of this, Cardinal Aldobrandino is an exam∣ple, who though he enter'd into the Conclave of Leo the 11th. with a Squadron of 30 Cardinals, firmly united and declar'd for him, to the no small terrour of the rest; yet he prevail'd not nevertheless, till he fix'd his eyes upon Cardinal di Medici, a person of Meekness, Complaisance, inexpressible Innocence, and singular Munificence, but more particularly towards the Colledge. Let every Cardinal of the Conclave be cautious of discovering his own inclinations to the Popedome, because he shall be in danger to be deceiv'd a thousand wayes by him, that opens his mouth, but keeps his heart to himself; and as his words and his thoughts, shall never be look'd upon as sincere, so he can never acquire his consent. Of this, Car∣dinal Ferrara had experience in the Conclave of Marcellus the 2d. and Cardinal Farnese, in that of Gregory the 13th. and Sixtus the 5th. Let not him that is Head of a Faction, ostentate too much, or tryumph before hand in the confidence of his success, because his extravagant desire of victory, will interrupt and disturb his judgement, and keep him from a true pondering and deliberation of his interest, which is a matter of importance. And this happen'd in the Conclave of Paul the 4th. to them, who out of an ambition to over-power the Imperialists, chose Paul the 4th. Pope, who was their enemy. But as soon as he was chosen, and they began to open their eyes, their desire of victory began to cool; they began to discover the Cloud of evils that hung over their heads, and would with all their hearts have undone it again if they could. Let not that Head of a Faction, who has authority, and the power of exclusion toge∣ther, become too facile, or submit, for fear lest the contrary part should acquire new votes; but let him temporize rather, and attend some other more profitable propositi∣ons. In this point the Imperial Faction was over-seen in the Conclave of Paul the 4th. for though it had both the advantages, of authority, and exclusion; yet by a single apprehension, that the French would gain more to their party, they truckled, and lost the day. He which concurrs with a violent person, against his own Conscience, in hopes that by that obligation he may render him his Friend, and change his nature, is mistaken;
for the benefit is forgotten as soon as received, if he has no more need of him: But his nature will never alter. And this Cardinal Morone found true to his cost, in the Con∣clave of Paul the 4th. for being under some suspicion in the Sacred Office, he imagin'd by using his whole power for the Election of Paul, he would become more propitious to his interests; but it happen'd clean contrary, for such was the zeal of Paul, that he could not be suborned, but gave him his reward in the Castle of St. Angelo, where he kept him prisoner, with very ill usage. It is not a good way, to declare ones self too openly against a person of worth, be∣cause the Conclaves are managed by the Holy Ghost, who considers the deserts, and not by men, whose eyes are fix'd upon their interests only; so that he sometimes which seems at a great distance from the Popedom, is in a moment unexpectedly in the Chair. Thus the Imperial Faction was deceiv'd in the Conclave of Paul the 4th. for believing that fighting against him, as it were with Banners display'd, they should certainly have ruin'd his hopes, of a sudden the wind turn'd, and the Imperials finding themselves in a laborynth, and all the Votes inclining to Paul, they were forc'd to tack about also, and be for him. When any Cardinals affairs do seem to be desperate, 'tis no ill policy, to propose some new Law or Statute to the Colledge, that thereby he may have either the reputation of being zealous, or the hopes of assisting some other person; whereby he may break the chain of former contrivances, or disunite those minds, who do find themselves oppos'd in their designs, by the proposition of that Law. And this was the subtilty of Cardinal Bellaio in the Conclave of Pius the 4th. he observ'd the progress Caraffa made in his designs, and therefore he propos'd that the Colledge would make a new Law, that no body should discover his Vote which he is to give, not so much as to his Friend; by which means several Cardinals were induc'd to forsake Caraffa, and his interest. Let an Elector have a care of engaging himself too far in any thing against his judge∣ment, in complaisance to another person, because sometimes such accidents may fall out, that afterwards he may be necessitated to consent to it, though it be both against his duty, desire, and interest. This happen'd in the Conclave of Pius the 4th. to Cardinal Charles Caraffa, who to shew his fidelity to the King of Spain, pretended to adore Cardinal Paceco, but his engagement by certain accidents went so far before he was aware, that he mist but little of finishing that in earnest, which he began in jest; and he suffer'd for it at last, for the French (with whom he was a Colleague before) grew so diffident on him, that it brought him to ruine, by doing that which he never intended, and would not have consented to, in the Election of Pius the 4th. which was afterwards his death. If the Inclusion be ripe, and secure, it is the best way to bring it immediately to the Test, for the least time of protraction or delay, brings its dangers along with it, espe∣cially if there be any persons on the other side considerable, either for their party, their authority, or experience; because these arming themselves in their despair, and the other languishing in their zeal and industry, by reason of their confidence, time, though it be but short, may give the victory to the former. Cardinal Borromeo's neglecting this ad∣vertisement, in the Conclave of Pius the 5th. precipitated the Election of Cardinal Morone, whose Election being safe at four a clock at night, he would needs put it off till the next morning, rather than incommode Farnese who was then in Bed; but in that little time the tyde turn'd, and he lost all. The same thing happen'd to Cardinal Colonna in the Conclave of Gregory the 14th. for he having by the common opinion, Votes enough and to spare to secure him, at least in the Adoration, so that the Armes and the Keyes were got ready, would needs put it off till next morning; but at midnight Ortus est Claemor, and that in such a manner, that they took away the Chair from him for ever. Nor did it otherwise befall Santa Severina in the Conclave of Clement; he also being secure of the Election from the very first night, but desirous to protract, that he might bring over the rest of the Votes to his side, as Giesvaldo perswaded him, was mistaken in his aim, and lost all himself. It is very convenient for the Heads of a Faction, when they have labour'd a long time,
and contended in vain, to propose about four or five persons, and to reserve a sixth, which he desires more particularly; By this means those who are propos'd are oblig'd, and the World is perswaded, he has no private ends of his own, no obstinacy, no pride; nor need they fear any body else will be chosen, seeing they do mutually and inter∣changably impede one another; and if weary at last, he deserts their interests which he first recommended, and proposes the sixth, which is the person he principally intended, he loses not the other notwithstanding, but gains them by his first proposition. This advertisement was experimentated by the Heads of the Factions in the Conclave of Pius the 5th. and the success answer'd their desires. And here the Head of a Faction ought to make it his study, how he may secretly gain the Votes of his Friends, without being discover'd by the contrary party; which will be easie, if he places his eye upon a person of a good nature, a good life, and a good age, though otherwise he be none of his Confidents: For the Electors; by the first of his qualities, his good nature, do assure themselves they shall receive no harm, and do flatter themselves that they may gain him one day. With the second, they satisfie their Con∣sciences; and with the third, their hopes of seeing a new Conclave, which is a conside∣ration removes most difficulties and oppositions for the contrary; by this means Car∣dinal Borromeo came off very well in the Conclave of Pius the 5th. for when he propos'd Cardinal Morone, a person of a brisk humour, but suspected sometime of Heresie, and esteem'd very revengefull, he could never conceal the Votes he reckon'd upon: He be∣took himself to Sirleto next, and though he also was indued with the same good qualities, he could not keep his Votes to himself, by which means he ran himself upon very dan∣gerous Rocks; but when afterwards he turn'd to Alexandrino, in whom the said virtues did as eminently concur, he perswaded his Colleagues to keep their Votes pri∣vate, till being certain of the Election, all things should succeed prosperously: This was approv'd likewise by Cardinal Alexandrino, the Nephew in the Conclave of Sixtus the 5th. for Montalto, during the whole time of his Cardinalship, not having disco∣ver'd his great and high Spirit, was in every bodies judgement of a quiet nature, of an exemplary life, and of a competent age; so that the designs Alexandrino had for him, he never communicated to the adversaries, till it was too late to op∣pose them. That Head of a Faction which has the reputation and authority of a Party, will do very well, if in his transaction with the Head of the contrary party, (provided he be not a man of extraordinary experience) he proposeth a person so, that his adversary understands it done rather out of kindness, than necessity, and that otherwise he could carry him thorow all difficulties alone; by the first, he mol∣lifies and sweetens the heart of his adversary, and by the other, he frightens and alarms him, especially when he considers his party, and authority: With this stratagem Cardinal Farnese was successful in the Conclave of Gregory the 13th. for having propos'd four persons to Cardinal Alexandrino, and amongst them Buoncompagno, with the aforesaid civility he told him, that for this last, he could have done it without him, but he had rather have his concurrence. This artifice made so kind an impression in Alexandrino, that he was call'd to the Election of Buoncompagno, though he could have done it without him; and it frighted him so much withall, to hear him speak with that resolution, that with∣out more ado, he joyn'd in the practises for Buoncompagno, and immediately his Election follow'd. He which finds himself excluded by his Friends, but upon a rational foundation, let him not persist, or maintain his cause against fortune; let him give place for the present, and without taking any visible offence, keep up his hopes, by thinking suddenly on some other plausible person. By this means he shall evade an accident, which might be prejudicial to him for ever; he shall continue his interest with his friends, oblige them at a more convenient time to satisfie him in the Election of the per∣son he propos'd, and finally acquire the reputation of a prudent man, which in time may assist him, either for his own Election, or at least the Election of another which he plea∣ses to recommend. In this case Cardinal Farnese was marvailously successefull, who
though many times he shew a vehement ardency, and desire of the Popedome: yet when he found himself undeceived by his friends, and that upon good grounds, sometimes for his youth, and sometimes by Cardinal Gramvela, upon sober considerations of the State of the Princes of Italy: he temper'd himself so well, that in five Conclaves afterwards, he made what Popes he pleased, and four of the five were his own creatures. But it fared not so well with Cardinal Ferrara, who having given too clear indications of the com∣motion of his mind, for being excluded in the Conclave of Marcellus the second, could never have satisfaction in any thing after. It is a wonderfull advantage to the Head of a Faction to enter with resolution, and propose whom he pleases, when he sees the adverse Electors in any streight, or anxiety, for fear the Election should go against their desire; because the apprehension of the evil impending, suffers them not to see or consider the mischief that is approaching, though at a distance, and they will embrace any thing that may bring them out of that Labo∣rinth. By this means, Cardinal Farnese came off happily in the Conclave of Paul the 4th. for the Imperial party being in confusion, and out of all hopes of promoting a per∣son of their own Faction, as they had propos'd to themselves, and the practices for Cardinal Puteo (of the French Faction, and Nation) were at a stand: Farnese took the opportunity, and propos'd Cardinal Theatino, who though he was of the French Faction indeed, was an Italian notwithstanding; and so the Imperialists to free them∣selves from a burthen, to which their present confusion subjected them, they cared not to run themselves into greater (though more remote) difficulties, by creating a person solemny excluded by Imperiale, for the austerity and perverseness of his nature. With the same sagacity Cardinal Alexandrino manag'd his affairs in Sixtus his Conclave; for seeing Cardinal Medici in great perturbation, upon the likelyhood of the Election of Cardinal della Torre, who was supported by Farnese; he propos'd Cardinal Montalto, a profess'd and immortal enemy to his Cousin Paola Giordano Ʋrsino; and Medici to free himself from the danger of the first (which was present) thought not of securing himself against the evils of the second, which were future, and so Mon∣talto was chosen. That Cardinal Head, may well be suspected of dissimulation, when at first, and with great importunity, he proposes a person lyable to several exceptions, because to be im∣portunate at an unseasonable time, as those beginnings are, when every mans hopes are on fire, is but to render things difficult which are easie, and expose one to certain ruine; because 'tis to be suppos'd no body will rob himself so suddenly of his hopes, or lay aside his designs for an unplausable person. Under this suspition fell Cardinal Altemps in Sixtus his Conclave, who at the very first, before any body else was thought of, he un∣dertook with great ardour, the promotion of Cardinal Sirleto, who was otherwise an applausable man. Whereupon without any more grounds, it was believ'd, he propos'd him, meerly to inveigh and cajole him. It is of great importance that a Cardinal of any Spirit and magnanimity, uses no pomp nor noise, nor lets any one know it, who can either hurt, or assist him, but rakes them up rather under the ashes of prudence, that they may kindle afterwards in due time with greater vivacity. This is visible by the experience of Cardinal Albano, and Cardinal Montalto; for Albano not knowing how to contain or reserve himself in the time of his Cardinalship, as he might have done, and as Montalto did, this prevail'd with Car∣dinal Alexandrino, who (being frighted by Albano, and cheated by Montalto) for∣sook him, and set this in the Chair. Let not a Cardinal Nephew be too fond, or peremptory, in promoting the Election of any person, unless he has try'd him first in several slippery Offices, and hard to be executed, that thereby he may discover the bottom of his humour and disposition; whereas if he does otherwise, he will be deceiv'd, and receive a penance equal to his re∣pentance. And thus it fared with Cardinal Alexandrino, who having never imploy'd Montalto in any great affair, as he had done Albano; he was in the dark, as to that spi∣rit and vivacity, which afterwards, when there was no need to conceal it, he discover'd in his Papacy. The Heads of the Factions of Princes, will alwayes have the Ministers of Kings about
them, to the end, that having signify'd the mind of their Princes in the Conclave, they may go on readily and soberly, either to the Election or Exclusion; and that they may not restrain themselves to parties, which may offend the whole Community, or savour of too much Dominion in the Conclave. Because the said Community being thereby provok'd to be their Adversaries, they will run themselves upon a manifest precipice. In this point the Spanish Ambassador erred most egregiously in the Conclave of Gregory the 14th. having hinted that his Catholick Majesty would never consent, that the Pontificate should go out of the hands of one of these seven, Colonna, Como, Paleotto, Santa Seve∣rina, Madruccio, Santiquattro, and Cremona; he chang'd the minds of the whole Con∣clave so, to see themselves depriv'd of their own inclinations, that for two months to∣gether, that this Election lasted, those persons named by the Ambassador, were the on∣ly persons excluded; and upon this, the practices and designs of the whole Colledge were inverted. He shews much ambition, and but little prudence, who being once or twice excluded by a powerful Faction, ventures at it again, in the same Conclave; because he ought to be confident, no body will dare to appear for him, who has been excluded before, much less give their vote for him the third time, if he was excluded the second; as knowing well, Scribit in Marmore laesus. To this Cardinal Colonna, and Cardinal Paleotto, may speak; who doing the same by turns, in order to their Election in the Conclave of Gre∣gory the 14th. they alwayes miscarry'd, and at last came to so absolute ruine, they could never get up again. It is an excellent way to gain upon the Head of a Faction, to make him the Author of the Election, (which is particularly intended) when the Factions are grown weary, or mistaken in their power. In the Conclave of Marcellus the second, the truth of this experiment was found; for the party which favour'd Santa Croce (but without any success) resolving to make the Cardinal di Trento their Head, though otherwise he was very averse to Santa Croce; yet being overcome with the courtesie, he gave them the victory, and concluded the Election forthwith. With the same artifice Cardinal Alexan∣drino overcame the resolution of Cardinal di S. Sista in the Conclave of Sixtus, and pre∣vail'd with him for the Election of Montalto, by making him the Author of the design. For want of this advertisement, Cardinal Borromeo lost his designs for the Election of Sirleto, which he look'd upon as sure, and all because he would not do that honour to Cardinal Sforza, in the Conclave of Pius the 5th. The confusion which multitude of business carries along with it, especially if they be of different natures, and equal authority, is a great impediment to the good success of an Election; because for the first they cannot easily unite in the same opinions, and for the second, they are not us'd to yeild to one another; every one watching diligently over his own authory, that nothing may pass to its prejudice. This was visible in the Conclave of Marcellus the second; it deferr'd the Election a long time, and ruin'd the Faction of Cardinal Ferrara at last. That which the favourers of Marcellus the second used to ascertain his Election, was counted great sagacity and cunning. The best of his Confidents met privately, and with paper in hand, reckon'd up as many gainable persons, as made up their number com∣pleat, that done, they chose them of greatest authority, and most affection to Marcel∣lus, and sent them about one by one, to work themselves, and insinuate into such as they could best trust, by representing the reasonableness of their hopes; and having gained them, they suffer'd them not out of their sight; but having calculated the Votes de novo, all together, they came immediately to an adoration, without further delay. An Artifice executed with so much dexterity, that it produc'd its effect. He is very much out of the way, who to gain the head of a contrary Faction (which has neither the inclusive faculty, nor so much as hopes of it) declares himself too much in his favour: because he extinguishes thereby his friends hopes of recovering him, who has so deeply ingaged himself to a person of authority; by which means, he shall be left in the power of the adverse Faction, without any fruit of his design. Thus it happen'd to the Cardinal of Mantoua, in the Conclave of Marcellus the 2d. or he being of the Imperial Faction, declar'd himself too freely in favour of Cardinal Ferrara, who
was Head of the French, hoping thereby that he would imploy all his practises for him; but he was mistaken, for he had not enough of the inclusive power. The Heads do observe, never to let those who are likely to stagger, go out of their sight, least they should be debauch'd by their adversaries: They send therefore only such about to negotiate their designs, as do appear most constant and secure. This way Car∣dinal Farnese took in the Conclave of Paul the 4th. keeping the whole body of the French in his eye, within the Chappel, for Cardinal Theatino, whilst the most solid and grave part of them went abroad, and made voices for him. It is necessary to be well advis'd, and not to suffer ones self to be sweetned or cajoul'd by them who desire his Votes, (not so much that they hope to obtain the Papacy, but only in point of reputation with the World) for sometimes they run insensibly upon Rocks, which they never thought of before. Upon this Rock they were in great dan∣ger of running, in the Conclave of Pius the 4th. for Cardinal della Torre having gain'd 32. Votes for Cardinal della Queva, privately in the Scrutiny, (had not the juggle been discover'd a little before) he had made him certainly Pope: By the same way, and in the same Conclave, Cardinal Pisano mist but little of being chosen, Cornaro having secur'd many Votes to him amongst the Factions. If it be true which Aristotle affirms, that Magistratus virum ostendit, he which ambitions the Papacy, and knows himself to be of an ill nature, in respect of his pride, or severity, or any other ill quality, let him whilst he is Cardinal be sure to avoid all Offices, in which he cannot assure himself but he shall discover the imperfections afore∣said; because there is no body but argues with himself in this manner. He which cannot govern his own passions, in small Offices, neither for hopes of the Papacy, nor for fear of his Enemies, how shall he govern them when he is Pope, and nothing left for him either to hope or to fear. Cardinal Savelli in the Conclave of Sixtus the 5th. having discover'd his natural infirmities in his Vicarship of Rome, and when he was Chief Inquisitor, the whole Wood of his other good qualities were not sufficient to ballance them. And Car∣dinal Morone was another instance of this; for having discover'd himself (when he rul'd the Pontificate of Pius the 4th.) to be of a vindicative humour, especially against the Carafeschi, that one thing was enough to intimidate the whole Conclave of Pius the 5th. and to bury a person of great parts in oblivion, who had otherwise doubtless been in the Apostolical Chair. Cardinal Cosenza had the same success, in the Conclave of Gregory the 14th. being excluded, because in his Office of Datary, in the time of Sixtus the 5th. he discover'd himself inclinable to severity. The Heads of Factions, are to imploy all their diligence, to find out the natural con∣ditions and interests of the several Cardinals, that they may know how to choose every man for his turn: The inconstant are to be kept in an opinion, that the Pope is as good as made; that they are to come immediately to the Election, least by leaving them op∣portunity of advising with others, they may change their minds. So Cardinal Alexan∣drino dealt with Cardinal di S. Sisto, a various and unconstant man; he advis'd him to concurr in the Election of Montalto, and make himself the Author of it, when it came to the Vote, and the Scrutiny was made, perswading him the Election was sure; at which S. Sisto being amaz'd, and having no time to make any diversion, he submitted, and the design took effect. If at any time a Faction be obstinate, and perverse, in recommending and bringing to the Scrutiny a person you are diffident of; to bring them to reason, it will be conve∣nient in your Scrutiny to propose▪ (by way of counterpoise) one of its greatest adver∣saries, that so fear may prevail, where affection could not. Of this stratagem Cardinal Montalto made use, in the Conclave of Gregory the 14th. for the Spaniards being ob∣stinate in their Votes for Paleotti, he propos'd in opposition to them, the Cardinal of Verona, to whom they had an implacable aversion; and he press'd it so home, that for fear it should succeed, they turn'd their thoughts upon Santa Severina, and left Paleotto in the lurch: By the same art the Spaniards circumvented Montalto, that he gave over all thoughts of Cardinal Colonna, as was supposed, because as it were with Banners dis∣play'd they seem'd to run to the adoration of San Severina, who was before excluded by Montalto.
'Tis a good Rule for the Heads of Factions, to reserve some one which they like best close in their minds, and not so much as to mention him in the times of controversie and dispute, to the end that (when an opportunity serves, and the Factions are tyred with contention, and have but small hopes) he may then be proposed on a sudden, and the Head bending all his Votes upon him, let him go briskly and couragiously to the Adora∣tion: For the adversary being wearied with the tediousness of contending, and finding himself surprized, and the Enemy pressing on with so much resolution, loses both his power and his prudence together: And this was evident by Montalto in the Conclave of Gregory the 14th. who in two months fierce combat with the Spaniards, made not the least discovery of Cardinal Cremona, till that the designs of both parties being despe∣rate, on a sudden he proposed him, and getting together his Votes, he pass'd immediately to the Adoration, and created him Pope. It is no easie matter to break an obstinate conspiracy for the Election of a person, especially if the Party be considerable; unless their practises be destroy'd, by the Exclu∣ders proposing a person of their own adverse Faction, which for the most part has been successful, as oft as it has been tryed: So it happen'd in the Conclave of Clement the 8th. the Spanish party for two months together, gave their Votes constantly in fa∣vour of San Severina, nor was their constancy ever shaken or disturb'd, till Cardinal Aldobrandino (who was a Spaniard) was propos'd by the Excluders, who promising the Head of that Faction (which was Avila) to choose any one Pope that he should name, without communicating first with his followers; they were disoblig'd in that manner, they were all ready to run from his Colours: But to pacifie them, Aldobrandino was glad to come to an absolute rupture with Avila. If the Head of the Including Faction, offers the Head of the Excluding Party, to assist him at any time, in the Election of one of the Excludents, let him alwayes be suspicious; for his design is rather to separate, and divide the Squadron of Excluders, than to do him any good in good earnest. This Cardinal Montalto found to be true in the Con∣clave of Leo the 11th. when Aldobrandino, to separate the Excludents, who had strictly engag'd themselves with Montalto, propos'd to him to choose one of his party; but as he knew very well how to open his eyes, and discover Aldobrandino's designs, so he knew well enough how to shut his ears, and evade them. Let a Cardinal in the Conclave, avoid all occasions of Rupture, as much as he can; for if once he be declar'd an Enemy, immediately the Spirit of revenge enters into his heart, which may perhaps be instrumental to the detriment of his Enemy, but shall never be of advantage to himself: And this also Aldobrandino found true, in the Conclave of Leo the 11th. for coming to words, and a manifest breach with Avila, he presently fix'd his thoughts upon a person he had otherwise never remembred, which was Cardinal Meaici; one he had no kindness for at all, but he chose him to be reveng'd of Avila. The like Aphorisms may be seen likewise for the Court, seeing that in such cases the pens of the most curious are at work, to discover their subtilties, for the benefit of the Publique; however their pains have not met with so great an applause: whereas these Aphorisms of Azolino were commended as soon as they were seen, and judg'd very pro∣per for the instruction of the Cardinals during the vacancy of the See, especially such as have not been in any Conclave before: Experience in such things, exceeds all manner of Learning: Yet to speak freely, I am not displeas'd with the opinion of a Friend of mine, who being well vers'd in the interests of the Court, discourses liberally in company, and will oftentimes have his own judgement prevail, before any bodies else. He affirms, that neither Experience, nor Learning, are considerable in the Conclaves, and maintains it with more arguments than this Paper will contain. Be it as it will, it is not known which meets with more rubs in the Conclave, the Experienc'd, or the Learned Cardinals. They which by study, and revolving of History, manage the affairs of the New Pope, will not stoop to persons of the greatest Experience, because by actual practice they have gain'd some air of reputation in the precedent Conclaves. In like manner those who have been Experienc'd, do pretend to command those who are thought Learned, for ha∣ving read in some Books, or heard discourses of some Conclave or other.
But I will not condemn either Experience, or Learning; Experience is good in the Conclaves, and Learning is better; but Prudence is more necessary than both. A little Experience is enough for a prudent Cardinal, whereas all the Experience in the World is in vain, if they know not how to use it with discretion. In several Conclaves there have been several inexperienc'd Cardinals, (I might say ignorant of the mystery of Election of Popes) yet they have prosper'd very well, and by their prudence prevail'd with those, who doubted not to have gain'd them in a short time. Experience interrupts that many times, which Prudence contrives; whereas Prudence conjoyns that, which Experience hath broken. In this last Conclave several effects of this nature were seen, but not so many as in the two former; in which the most Expe∣rienc'd lost their Chard of Navigation, because they had not the judgement to make use of it with discretion. FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by John Starkey, at the Miter betwixt the Middle-Temple-Gate, and Temple-Bar in Fleet-street. Folio's. THE World Surveyed; or the famous Voyages and Travels of Vincent le Blanc of Marseilles, into the East and West-Indies, Persia, Pegu, Fez, Morocco, Guinny, and through all Africa, and the principal Provinces of Europe. Price bound 10 s. A Practical and Polemical Commentary, or Exposition, upon the 3d. and 4th. Chap∣ters of the latter Epistle of St. Paul to Timothy; by Thomas Hall, B. D. Price bound 10 s. A General Collection of Discourses of the Virtuosi of France, upon Questions of all sorts of Philosophy, and other Natural Knowledge, made in the Assembly of the Beaux Esprits at Paris, by the most Ingenious persons of that Nation. Englished by G. Havers. In two Volumes. Price bound 30 s. A Treatise of the Sybils, giving an account of the Names and Number of them, of their Qualities, the Form and Matter of their Verses, and of their Books; written in French by David Blundell. Englished by J. Davies. Price bound 7 s. Bentivolio and Ʋrania, a Religious Romance, in Six Books; written by Nathaniel Ingelo, D. D. The second Edition. To which is added, the Interpretation of the hard Names Imprinted in the Margin, throughout the Book. Price bound 12 s. I Ragguagli di Parnasso, or Advertisements from Parnassus; in two Centuries: With the Politick Touch-Stone; written originally in Italian, by Trajano Bocalini, and Englished by the Earl of Monmouth. The second Edition corrected. Price bound 8 s. An Abridgement of divers Cases and Resolutions of the Common Law, Alphabetically digested under several Titles, by Henry Rolls, Serjeant at Law; published by the Lord Chief Baron Hales, and approved by all the Judges. Price bound 40 s. The Reports of Sir George Croke Knight; in three Volumes, in English: Allowed of by all the Judges. The second Edition, carefully corrected by the Original. Price bound 45 s. The Second Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England; containing the Exposition of Magna Charta, and many antient and other Statutes: Written by the Lord Chief Justice Coke. The third Edition; with an Alphabetical Table added. Price bound 14 s. The Third Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning High Treason, and other Pleas of the Crown, and Criminal Causes. The fourth Edition; written by the Lord Chief Justice Coke. Price bound 6 s. The Fourth Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning the Jurisdiction of Courts: Written by the Lord Chief Justice Coke. The fourth Edition; with an Al∣phabetical Table not heretofore printed. Price bound 9 s. Brief Animadversions on, Amendments of, and Additional Explanatory Records to, the Fourth Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning the Jurisdiction of Courts. By William Prynne Esq; Price bound 12 s. Action upon the Case for Slander; or a Methodical Collection of thousands of Cases in the Law, of what words are Actionable, and what not; by William Sheppard Esq; Price bound 6 s. Brevia Judicialia, or an Exact Collection of approved Forms of all sorts of Judicial Writs in the Common-Bench; together with their Retorns. By Rich Brownlow. Price bound 10 s. Thesaurus Brevium, or a Collection of approved Forms of Original and Judicial Writs in the Kings Bench; with their special Directions. By J. C. Price bound 6 s.
Quarto's. The History of Gavel-kind, with the Etymology thereof, containing a Vindication of the Laws of England; together with a short History of William the Conqueror. By Sylas Taylor. Price bound 3 s. Andronicus Comnenius, a Tragedy. By John Wilson. Price stitch'd 1 s. Heraclius Emperor of the East, a Tragedy. By Lodowick Carlel Esq; Price stitch'd 1 s. A brief Account of Mr. Valentine Greatrakes, the famous Stroker, and divers of the strange Cures by him lately performed. Written by himself to the Honourable Robert Boyl, Price stitch'd 1 s. Octavo's. The History of Algiers, and its Slavery; with an account of that City, and many re∣markable particularities of Africk: written by Sieur d'Aranda, sometime a Slave there. Englished by J. Davies. Price bound 3 s. La Picara, or the Triumphs of Female Subtilty; originally a Spanish Relation, en∣riched with Three pleasant Novels. Englished by J. Davies. Price bound 3 s. An Historical and Geographical Description of the great Countrey, and River of the Amazones in America; with an exact Map thereof. Translated out of French. Price bound 1 s. 6 d. The Shepherds Paradise, a Pastoral. By Walter Mountague Esq; Price bound 1 s. 6 d. Aminta, the famous Italian Pastoral. Translated into English. Price bound 1 s. 6 d. The Works of the famous Mr. Francis Rabelais, treating of the Lives of Gargantua, and his Son Pantagruel; to which is newly added the Life of the Author. Translated out of French into English, by Sir Thomas Ʋrchard Knight. Price bound 5 s. An Exact Abridgement in English, of the Cases reported by Sir Francis Moor Knight; with the Resolution of the Points of Law therein by the Judges: By W. Hughes. Price bound 2 s. 6 d. Plowden's Queries, or a Moot-Book of choice Cases in the Common Law, Englished, Methodized, and Enlarged; by H. B. Price bound 2 s. 6 d. An Exact Abridgement of all the Statutes in Force and Use, made in the 16th. 17th. and 18th. of King Charles the First, and in the 12th. 13th. 14th. 15th. and 16th. of King Charles the Second: By William Hughes Esq; Price bound 2 s. 6 d. Tho. Hall, Apologia pro Ministerio Evangelico. Lat. Price bound 2 s. —Translation of the Second Book of Ovid's Metamorph. Price bound 1 s. His Treatise against the Millenaries. Price bound 1 s. Medicina Instaurata, or a brief Account of the true Grounds and Principles of the Art of Physick; with the Insufficiency of the Vulgar Way of preparing Medicines, and the Excellency of such as are made by Chymical Operation: By Edward Bolnest, Med. Lond. Price bound 1 s. Twelves. The present State of the Princes and Republicks of Italy; written originally in English by J. Gailhard, Gent. Price bound 1 s. The present State of the Republick of Venice; with a Relation of the present War in Candia: By John Gailhard, Gent. Price bound 1 s. 6 d. A Guide for Constables, Church-wardens, Overseers of the Poor, Surveyors of the High-wayes, Treasurers of the County-stock, Masters of the House of Correction, Bay∣liffs of Mannors, Toll takers in Fairs, &c. shewing the extent and power of the several Offices; Collected by George Meriton. Price bound 1 s. 6 d.
