L1518 R36340 15666640 104313
A LETTER From the Dutch. of Portsmouth TO Madam GWYN, On HER Landing in FRANCE. TO tell you I arriv'd safe at Callis wou'd be too much trouble to you, that I had an ill Passage, or was Shipwrack'd by the way, wou'd give you occasion of too much Joy. That you may not miscarry between these two Extreams, nor break your, heart with Excess of either, I am willing to give you the most moderate Account of my Voyage, that the shortness of time, and tediousness of the Journey can afford: The Wands fair, the Sea smooth, and the Ship sound, (not every Plank three Inches assunder, as you wish'd at parting) I skip'd away as smoothly as you cou'd expect, in a Golden Chariot, that hopt into it out of a Wheel-barrow. All the Marriners were my Votaries, they look'd upon me as the Star by which they guided, and the Sea-Nymphs paid me Venerati∣on; for Neptune, whom they most obey, is but Charle's Vice-Admiral, and you may imagine what Influence I had upon him; he proffer'd me vast Treasure of Indian Gems, Gold and Pearl, if I wou'd interceed to make him Admiral; I took his Jewels, but for the rest (Pardonne Moy Madam) I have a Prince of my own, and for all Grafton is the Elder Tar∣pollin, I hope to see young Richmond Master of the Sea-Horse, as well as I and; he offer'd me many Civilities, and wou'd have come in for a snack with his Brother-Monarch, alleadging, I was Venus the Goddess, that sprung from the Sea, and for the better Peopleing of his Dominions, wou'd have got upon me a Generation of Maremaids; I told him, I was no Sea-Rat, Otter or Eele, though I wriggled through the Mud to the Throne, as well as your Self. Nor was I like a Frog or Vermine, Born in a Ditch, and Destin'd to Die there, as your Noble Predecessor: And there∣fore I did you the Justice, to recommend him to your Lady ship, to whom, for your Extraction, he might have a juster Title; so that in a short time, you may expect a Visit from his Excellency, as well as from the Morocco, or (in case he do not think it worth his time) a Deputation of a Dutch Cargo, with a Ship's Crew of Hemmings, who love to lie sleep∣ing in Brandy and Sippets, a Constitution able to allay the fury of such
gross Stomachs. There are several Ladies at Court of the same Conti∣nency, to whom I cou'd recommend a Sea-Horse, Whale or Porpoise, or the Pump, Bolsprit, or Main-mast of our Ship, to serve instead of the Standard, or a Regiment of Swits from the King of France his Guards? But as the Ladies of England have the Honour to sit at the Head of the Board, I know they have Wit enough to Carve for themselves. They sel∣dom set a good Bit pass their own Chaps, and let Twenty Dishes be presented at a Course, I know their Appetites will serve them to taste of all, and after all that, in the Evening will take a Collation with the Cook, or Butler, or a Snack with the Coachman at Night, rather than go Sup∣periess to Bed. Yet these lie under no Circumstance of Lust or Intempe∣rance, because their Husbands keep a frugal Table, though the Sawcy Page, or Liquorish Lacky, has often a finger in the Dish, before his Lord∣ship hath wiped his Whiskers. But these are safe under the Cloak of a Husband, whilst you and I lie under the Censure of every Cobler and Tinker, that will take upon him to Order and Regulate affairs of State, even to the Bed-Chamber. Well! of all sorts of Whores, the Miss is the most Deplorable, Naked and Expos'd to the Lash of every Parish-Beadle, whilst Matrimonial Concupiscence passes invisible under that Vizard. The fawning Cuckold will vindicate his Wives Honour, to save his own Re∣putation, and is always a pushing in his own Defence, and well he may, for his Horns are generally the largest of all the Beasts in the Forrest. In truth, take my Advice, Marry and take up in time, before you be cast off, for you will find at my return, the Ebb will be so low, that the next Retrenchment must be upon the Whores. What though it be some honest Tapster, or strong-water-man, 'twill serve to keep up your Spirits with the Dregs of Pots and Quarterns, when Age draws upon you; or strike up with some lusty Jocky at Nwmarket. You are of so true a Breed, while he has you by the Bit, he cannot want a Runner; besides, you may make a hand of it, and bring in Ten to One of the Lay, by going Booty, while you are in Riding-Case, no matter who Mounts the Saddle. The best Gennet, when she is past Service, is thrown to the Dogs. It may be your Fate, since Wrinckles, Age and Ugliness, the Tyrants of Loves Empire, have already Usurpt the Throne of Beauty, and have a care you fall not a Fee to the Grooms of the Stable, when you are no longer fit for the Royal Game. This (Madam) if you mind in time, is the last and best Advice can be given from Your Frined PORTSMOUTH. London, Printed for J. S. 1682.
