l421 9558649 43623
Lanii Triumphantes, OR THE BUTCHERS PRIZE BEING A description of the famous Battel, be∣tween Achilles a Butcher of Greece, and Hector a VVeaver of Troy, occasion'd by the Rape of a daughty Damosill y-clep'd Hellen the bright. —cARpere vel noli nostra, vetede tua. Mart. Licensed. February 2. 1664/5. LONDON, Printed by J. B. for William Crook, at the Throe Bibles on Fleet-bridge. 1665.
Hector & Achilles. THere once was sown Contention, The like was known By no man. 'Tween Greekish rout, And Trojans stout, And all about A Woman. For there's a day, When Trojans play, Work laid away, Which rare is; This brought great joy, To th' Town of Troy, But most to th' Boy, call'd Paris. He had design, With fellows nine, Two pence to joyn A piece—a.
They hire a boat, (Each doffes his Coat) And bravely row't, To Greece—a. No hast is made, For time they had Enough, as said Before is. Now here they are, l' th' nick as 'twere, While Greeks prepare For Morris. And if one should, Such sport behold For ever, 'twould Not weary one. So blith a Lass, Did never pass Through Greece, as was Maid Marrion. As frog leap'd quick, Over a Dike, When she had like T' have fell in. As Bag-pipes sound, On dusty ground, So tramples round Smug Hellen. This did so fire, The doughty Squire, H'ad no desire To leese her. Rounding in ear, He speaks her fair, Yet would this gear Not please her.
This stung to th' Gall, Now to't hee'll fall, Hee'll ne'r stand shall I shall I. Quoth he I'll prove If you can move Or else by-Jove I'll maul ye. With her they fly, 'Tis vain to cry, For presently They're gone all. For joy they roar'd, Now she's aboard, And this the word, Our own all. There's not a Greek. Had power to speak, Th' are vex'd to break Of a Game. But they're afraid It will be said, That they are made A May-game. With Club and Stick, With Sword and Pike, The Greeks run thick To sea-side. To Vessells they Themselves convay, Which vacant lay, There beside. They hoise up Sail, Their Oars they trail, Revenged they'll— —Be, sans doubt.
To Trojan shore Now wafted o're, They'll knock (they swore) Their brains out. Their Clubs they fit, In fist they spit, The next they'll hit That they see; While Trojans wink, For you must think, When they're in drink, They're lazy. Heart was at heell, 'Till Trojans feell, That Greeks do deal So badly; Their Clubs they crack, They hold them tack, They bruise and thwack As madly. Bumps rise in head, Both parties bleed, 'Kerchers they need, To dry 'em. This ruefull sight, Did not delight The Trojan, hight Old Priam. He had more care, Then all men there. (It is, I swear, No fable.) In Trojan Land, H'ad great command, Church-warden, and Constable.
In midst he stood, And to the Croud These words, aloud, Then he sent. Pray make an end Thus to contend, Both foe, and friend, Here present. For 'twill be sung, By future tongue, Our lives were bung 'Oth' tenter. And if't be so, Nought else will do, There's only two Shall venture. Small bloud be spilt; For they shall tilt, At Basket, Hilt, And Cudgel. Who best doth play, Their's be the day; Spectators pray— —Ye judge well. They like this thing, They make a Ring. First Trojans bring Out their man. A precious Wight, Of mickle might, And t' all mens sight, A rare man. On's Lip did grow, Mustachio, No man did know Such ever.
A jovial Lad, Wild, blith, and mad, And was by trade A Weaver. He arm'd doth come, With staff of Broom, Yo'ld swear him some— —Protector. O're spot of ground, Thrice stalk'd he round, And three times frown'd, Brave Hector. He struts not long, When from among, The Greekish throng, All staring. There did appear, Great Hectors Peer, A Warrier— —As daring; Who earst hath stood, Knee-deep in bloud, 'Mong all the Brood None such are. H'ath oft rub'd out, A dreadful bout, Ne're was so stout A Butcher. But not to fast, 'Fors Battle past His title last, To tell is; He is well known All o're the Town, By name of boon Achilles.
Horn-pipes they blow, Spectators know, The Champions now Will fly on. With open mouth, Th' encounter both As Tyger doth With Lyon. Alike they fight, 'Till for meer spight, A Blow did light On Hector. Feeling the weight, 'Tis desperate, Trojan did streight Conjecture. He would not cry, (Though tear's in eye) He might thereby Loose credit. But, truth be said, A Curse is laid Upon his head That did it. Quoth Hector, stay, I will not play, Because you lay On so hard. Saith Greek, resign, A Rope be thine, For Hellen's mine Poor Coward. Trojan would choak, E're he'd have spoke, Lest th' other stroak Should happen;
Last brought such pain, That he was feign, On staff to lean with Cap on. Thus have you heard How Trojans jear'd, While all men fear'd Th' o'recomer. If you would veiw, What did ensue, I'll send you to Old Homer. FINIS.
