l920 12931597 95690
THE ANSVVER OF THE Right Honourable THE EARL of DANBY TO A LATE PAMPHLET, Entituled, An EXAMINATION of the IMPARTIAL STATE of the Case of the Earl of Danby. LONDON, Printed by E. R. to be sold by Randal Taylor near Stationers Hall, 1680.
THE Earl of Danby's ANSWER, &c. I Have lately seen a Pamphlet called An Examination of the Impartial State of the Case of the Earl of Danby; and pretended to be an An∣swer to that State; but instead of being so, I find it (as I believe was the whole intent of the Author) to be only a scurrilous Libel against the Earl of Danby, every Page of it having something of that Nature in it. I cannot learn certainly who is the Author, although he says he has been very conversant in my Affairs, and pretends to be furnisht with more particular knowledge of them than other Men; but I believe, that is but a pretence for the more specious wounding of me, because it is too Knavish a part for any body who was a Servant or Officer under me to do, for his own sake, had the subject matter of it been true; but I find it to be so generally false, that it is impossible for any that rela∣ted to the Exchequer or Treasury to be so ignorant of the matters of Fact; besides, to have told so many untruths knowingly, and under Colour to do his King and Country service, is an Action too black to believe of any Man; although I must confess, I know not how far such a Man may go, as abandons all the Rules of Honour and Generosity, in speaking of one under Restraint, things that he knows ought not to be said of any Gentleman. He is so sensible of this fault himself, that he thought it needed an Apology, but is able to make no better an one for it, than by another un∣truth; which is, that he says it is charged upon every body by the Author of the State of my Case, that Malice may have too great a share in the Prosecution of me: Whereas the Expression in that Book, is in the begin∣ning of the Book, and speaks only of the Cause which makes some men suspect whether malice may not have too great a share, &c. So ill has that Reason supported him against the want of Generosity; which otherwise he confesses himself he might justly be censured for. Though he hath shewed himself a very mean Enemy, yet he has been so favourable to me through his whole Book, that most of his Reasons and Inferences have been suitable to this beginning, and I intend not to trouble my self with repeating or answering them, nor with his frequent Contradictions of himself, but shall barely inform the truth of those matters of Fact, which the Author has falsly related; having no design but to Vindicate my self from all Aspersions, of having done any thing knowingly to the prejudice either of my King or Country. The Examiner has pursued no Method, and therefore I must be excu∣sed to take the matters of Fact confusedly, and to Answer them in the same order as they stand in his Paper.
In the first place: Page the 3; he charges me with having applied two thousand seven hundred seven pounds five shillings and eleven pence, to my own use; and to have been short so much in my Account of the Navy, which is very false, for the Money was remaining in my Hands, and al∣ways owned by me to be so; but it is true, that his Majesty, at my leaving the place of Treasurer of the Navy, was pleased to re∣mit me that Sum on the Ballance of my Account; and I hope his Ma∣jesty is best Judge whether my Service in that Station deserved such a re∣ward. The next matter of Fact mentioned, as to Money, is the 18 Months Tax. (For I shall take notice of his Suggestions upon that and other things, when the Facts are cleared.) This was payable in six Quarters, viz. third of June, 73. third of September, 73. third of December, 73. third of March, 73. third of June, 74. third of September, 74. And I entred to the Treasury the 19th of June, 73. so that I received all that came in of that Tax, saving what was paid between the 3d, and 19th of June, 73. Insomuch that the Examiner in that particular is so near speaking true, that the whole six Quarters were paid in my time; but besides the first three Quarters, which the Examiner confesses were Assigned by my Lord Clifford, there was also twenty one thousand, one hundred sixty three pound, six shillings and eight pence, charged by his Lordship on the fourth Quarter of that Tax; and if the Examiner were as knowing as he pretends to be in the Exchequer, he must know that the last three Quarters of that Tax brought clear into the Exchequer, only the Sum of five hundred sixty five thousand, four hundred ninety eight pounds, thirteen shillings and ten pence half penny: after all Charges deducted: out of which Sum is likewise to be taken the afore∣said Sum of twenty one thousand one hundred sixty three pound, six shil∣lings and eight pence. When he comes to what the King lost in his Customs by the Corn-Act, and the Act for prohibiting French Commodities; he answers that, by calling them slight particulars, although one of them was above sixty thousand pound a year, and the other estimated to me by the Commissioners of the Customes at one hundred and fifty thousand pound a year; and herein he Arraigns his own skill, as much as he undervallues the Kings loss, by saying, Page the 6th, that none can guess what those Acts might lessen from the Customs: Whereas the Computations are duly made there∣of every year by the Comptroller of the Customs; by whose Certificates the Corn Debenters amounted in my time to more than sixty thousand pound a year, for the years 76 and 77. and what the loss by the Prohi∣bition hath amounted to, could not appear in my time: At last, he ends that Paragraph with an Argument to confute the Author of my Case, by which he has done me much more kindness than that Author did; for he says, it will appear the Customs never yielded so much as in my days; by which he acknowledges a better Management of that Revenue in my time, than before, and let who the Examiner pleases have the Honour of it, since his Majesty has had the Profit. His 7th Page is so full of falsehood and ignorance, that I know not of which there is most; for he charges me with hindring Money from coming in to the Exchequer which was lent on the fifth part of the Excise, and diverting it to other uses, which is notoriously false; and he says Mr. BARTIE, or a Private Letter was the Voucher for the Commissioners of Excise placing and having allowed to their Account many Sums of Money which were
paid by my Private Direction: Which is not only untrue, but utterly impossi∣ble; there being nothing less than a Tallie or Privy-Seal which can be such a Voucher. The next Charge this Examiner endeavours to lay against me, is a∣bout the Poll Bill, and that because some of the East-land Merchants were not paid for some Goods which were contracted for by the Comissioners of the Navy, beyond the Sum that Act amounted to. It is in this, as in most of the Particulars throughout his Book, both the Examiners misfortune and mine, that he knows so little of the matters he meddles with; for if he had known better, he would have given both me and himself far less trouble: For as an Exchequer man, he must have known, that the whole Bill brought in but two hundred fifty six thousand two hundred twenty three pound, two shillings and four pence, to the Kings use; of which he Charges me with the receipt but of two hundred fifty two thousand nine hundred pound in my time, and it was all Issued ac∣cording to the Direction of the said Act, to the Navy, Ordnance, and Forces: which himself in the last foregoing Page has said could not be other∣wise; so that he might have answered himself, why no care could be taken by me to reserve mony for them out of that Act; and before my going out I had procured the Kings Warrant for making them Assign∣ments upon the Revenue for their remaining Debt, but was removed be∣fore the said Assignment could be perfected; and had the Examiner ei∣ther been privy to the proceedings of the House of Commons, or that he would but have perused the Act it self, he would have known, that the Parliament gave Credit by that Act for three hundred thousand pound in Money, and an indefinite Credit for Goods and Stores beyond the said three hundred thousand pound; so as had the Act held out but to the Money-Credit given by it, the East-land Merchants had been long since paid the greatest part of their Debt: and therefore the Reader will see, how unjustly I deserve the Reflection made upon me in that parti∣cular. In the same Page he does against his will acknowledge the Improvements of the Kings Revenues in my time; only he has no mind to admit me a∣ny share in the doing it, which, as I have said before, I am contented with, the Kings Service having been performed; and For the Case of Mr. Bret, &c. it has been so lately Re-examined, that it has sufficiently justi∣fied it self; and I do further aver, that his Majesty did by that Contract with Mr. Dashwood and Partners, get neer fifty thousand pound a year increase to his Revenue of Excise, more than ever any did offer by a cer∣tain Farm, or than ever was made before of that Branch of the Re∣venue. For the Improvements in Ireland, he pretends to know little of them, because he fears it might be to my advantage; for otherwise he seems through his whole Book to pretend to such a general knowledge, as could be ignorant of nothing in this World. In the 9th Page, he tells you most truly, that you are not always to ap∣peal to the Weekly Certificates for proofs. In which I agree with him; for I have had out of the Exchequer some of those Certificates, which have not been true, and that to the mistake of ten or twelve thousand pound in one Week; but in the same Page he takes great pains to shew, that I could not know what interest I paid, though I might know what I agreed for; which is very ridiculous, for there was no allowance made for in∣terest of Mony, but upon an account of the particular sums lent, the
times of lending, and days of Repayment stated and adjusted by one of the Kings Auditors upon Oath, examined by the Chancellour of the Exchequer, allowed and sign'd by the Lord Treasurer and Chancel∣lour of the Exchequer; and consequently what Interest was paid, must needs be known both to my self, the Chancellour of the Exchequer, and the Auditor, before whom the said Account is stated; and whereas the Ex∣aminer asserts, that nothing will be found in the Weekly Certificates of the payment of any such Interest at all; it is so much the contrary, that in many of the Weekly Certificates it will appear, that such Interest is therein accounted; and I dare be confident, there will not appear above eight per Cent. unless it be for some inconsiderable Sum or Time. In the next Paragraph, Pages 9 and 10, he comes to what he calls the Foundation of all his Work, and says he will furnish the Author of my Case with a Computation more particular than perhaps he desires, and will pull off the Vail; which if he had done, he would have Corrected the Au∣thor of that Case, by setting down a true Computation; as I would have done myself, if the said Author had consulted me before his Book had been Printed: But there are divers things I would have altered in that Book, had I been the Author of it, although I know not one mat∣ter of Fact that is untrue in the whole Book, (except the said Computati∣on, which was to my disadvantage) nor has this Examiner made appear that there is; and if I had been so friendless, as he supposes me, that no body would have writ that Book for me, I would at least have been my own Friend so much, as to have set down the Sums in it to my own advantage where they had been true, and so ought this Examiner to have done, if he had been honest. He laies hold of a mistake of the Author of that State (for I cannot call it an untruth, because it is a Sum less than the true one, and to the prejudice of him whose Case he Designs truly to represent) It is a Compu∣tation the Author of the State makes by a Certificate of the Pells from Easter 73, to March 79, amounting to eight Millions, two hundred se∣venty six thousand seven hundred sixty seven pounds; besides Interest to the Goldsmiths, and other particulars, which makes it very uncer∣tain; and besides that, it commences from a time three Months before my entrance to the Treasury, and is liable to the Examiner's Cavil, unless by his knowledge he would either have rectified it, or his Printer's mi∣stake, who I rather believe has told the untruth on my side; for he has made it Eight millions, sixty two hundred seventy six thousand, seven hundred sixty seven pounds; which makes fourteen Millions two hundred seventy six thousand seven hundred sixty seven pounds: But I suppose he means the first Sum of eight Millions, &c. That he may the better dis∣guise what he there indeavours to have believed, which is, that the Reve∣nue in five years and three quarters, viz. From Midsommer 73, to Lady-Day 79, amounted to the above Sum of eight Millions two hundred se∣venty six thousand seven hundred sixty seven pound; whereas he cannot possibly be so ignorant, as not to know, that what has arisen from the Revenue alone in that time, has not been near that Sum; and by Sir Ro∣bert Howard's State thereof, for the year 75, (which is hereunto annexed) he tells you it amounted that year but to six hundred fifty six thousand one hundred seventy two pound, clear to the Kings use. The Sum also which the Author of the State calls Eight Millions two hundred seventy six thousand seven hundred sixty seven pounds (ac∣counting from Easter 73, to Lady-day 79,) ought to be ten millions eight
hundred sixty seven thousand one hundred twenty six pound, (betwixt the 23d of June 73 and Lady-day 79.) He knows likewise amongst the supplies which this Examiner tells you were given by Parliament, viz.   Li. The 18 Months Tax amounting to — 1238750 The Tax for building the Thirty Ships — 0584978 On the fifth Part of the Excise — 0200000 The Poll Act — 0252900 The first Act for Disbanding the Army, and other uses — 0619388 In all 2896016 That the two hundred thousand pound, mentioned on the 5th Part of the Excise, is accounted double, being part of the six hundred and nineteen thousand three hundred eighty eight pounds, (so grosly wil∣ful or ignorant are the mistakes in his Calculations) and one hundred fifty two thousand seven hundred fifty seven pounds, part of the said six hundred and nineteen thousand three hundred eighty eight pounds, is not within the foresaid sum of ten millions eight hundred sixty seven thousand one hundred twenty six pounds; because so much of the said six hundred and nineteen thousand three hundred eighty eight pound, was not come into the Exchequer in my time. His next Head is about secret Service, where he talks of a compound of mistakes, but shews not one but in himself; for to make proof of what he says, he affirms that my Pension of eight thousand pound per Ann as Lord Treasurer, was never included in secret Service; whereas it was never paid otherwise until Michaelmas, 1676. and by a Warrant dated the 12th of July, 1676. which I procured to expresse the particular Service, nor in all my Lord Southampton and Lord Clifford's time (and I think the Lords Commissioners) was it ever otherwise than by secret Service; so that (to use his own phrase in that Paragraph) it will be seen to whom this instance is most unlucky. Indeed he semes offended that the Exchequer does not know all the uses to which Money is applyed, under the Head of Secret Service; which is an Imposition that the Examiner (who ever he be) would be loth to have put upon himself in his own Expences, how regular soever those may be. For the sum of Secret Service delivered in Parliament, I do not know when he means that delivery, unless it were at the time of my Impeach∣ment, when by the Articles of that impeachment, I was charg'd with having laid out the sum of two hundred thirty one thousand six hundred and two pound, for Secret Service, in two years; which must then be meant from Christmas 76. to the time of my said Charge, which was the 23d of December 78. But as that would have appeared to have been a very wrong Computation which was then given to the House of Com∣mons, so it will appear by Sir Robert Howard's Certificate, that the Ex∣aminer is as much mistaken in his Computation of two hundred fifty two thousand four hundred sixty seven pound, for Secret Service, in the space of two years and three months, there being no such sum in that time; but I find two hundred fifty two thousand four hundred sixty seven pounds
to be the just sum accounted under the Head of Secret Service in three compleat years, viz. from Lady-day 76. to Lady-day 79. which amounts but to eighty four thousand one hundred fifty five pound thirteen shil∣lings and four pence a year, and is a sum I should not have thought a man, expressing so much Service and Duty to his Majesty, would have won∣dered at, though it had all been laid out in the space of three years without giving him or any body else an account of it; but had there been an opportunity for that account, I had shewed, and am at all times ready to shew and prove, with his Majesties leave, that fifty seven thousand se∣ven hundred sixty three pounds at least of that sum, hath been disburst for publick uses; and then the remainder of this pretended grievance has been at most but one hundred ninety four thousand seven hundred and four pound in three whole years; which has been but at the rate of sixty four thousand nine hundred and one pound six shillings and eight pence a year. After all these Computations and Proofs pretended to by the Exami∣ner, he confesses Page the 13th, That no demonstrative Argument is to be framed from the Particulars he has mentioned, but will therefore betake him to Generals for the sure Proof of all: which I believe is the first time of such an Undertaking, and shews sufficiently how falsly this Examiner pretends to the knowledge of Exchequer Accounts. When he comes to this plain Account of Generals, he says, he has a Co∣py of a Paper dated the 10th of June 73. under Sir Philip Floyd's hand, which would not pass for a Proof in this Case, if it were true; but that I might know the truth of it, I writ to Sir Philip Floyd, and had this following answer from him; by which it appears both how much Sir Philip has been abused by the said printed Paper, and how different a State was made up by Sir Robert Howard my then Secretary, the 21st of June, 73, which was but two days after my having the Staff. A Copy of Sir Philip Floyds Letter to the Earl of Danby the 18th of March, 1679/80. My Lord, I Have received the Honour of your Lordships Letter, of the 15th Instant, and in answer to it, I do hereby assure your Lordship, that I have at no time given any State of the Revenue to any Person, but to such as from time to time have been my Superiours in the Treasury; and as for this thing in par∣ticular which is printed in a Phamphlet under the Title of An Examination of the Impartial State of the Case of the Earl of Danby, and called a Copy of the Condition of the Revenue as it was left by the late Lord Treasurer Clif∣ford, and said to be procured under my hand, I do declare to your Lord∣ship that my name is abused in it; and to convince your Lordship that such a Copy could never come from me, give me leave to say, that I have Examined such Papers as I have by me concerning the Revenue, when your Lordship re∣ceived the Staff, and I find it to be false almost in every particular: As for Instance, I find the Customs were left charg'd with —245905 l. 19 s. 3 d. besides the weekly charge for Tangier, Ʋpon the Excise I find —201148 l. 13 s. 8 d. Ʋpon the Hearth-Money —22318 l. 11 s. 0 d. The Law-Bill left quite useless, and which is far different from the Examiners printed
State. And then for the three last quarters of the Tax, they were not left clear neither, as the Examiner is pleased to say; For, the first quarter of those three I find to have been charg'd with 21163 l. 6 s. 8 d. before your Lordships time, and of the whole of those three quarters there came only five hundred sixty five thousand odd hundred pounds into the Exchequer. I could enlarge upon the errors and falshood of this Pamphlet concerning the Revenue in many other particulars; but having as I humbly conceive, fully answered your Lordships Commands, in assuring you, and shewing to your Lordship, that no such Copy as the Examiner hath Printed could come from me; I will give your Lordship no further trouble with any remarks of my own upon it; but take leave only to remember your Lordship of a Paper which I have seen in your Lordships hands of better Authority than any thing that I can say: Which is a State of the Revenue presented to your Lordship, by Sir Ro∣bert Howard, the 21st of June, 1673. which was two days after you enter∣ed upon your Office, wherein having stated the Income of the Ordinary Reve∣nue and the Expences for that year by way of Debtor and Creditor, he finds the Expence would exceed the Income by the Sum of 1163400 l. and there is no doubt but Sir Robert Howard, who was furnish'd with all the means of making a true Calculation did take care to do so: And that in my humble opi∣nion (my Lord) will be of considerable use to your Lordship, to shew the mistakes of this Examiner. I beg your Lordships pardon for this long trouble; and am, My Lord, Your Lordships most obedient, and most Humble Servant, Philloyd, Having perused the said State of the Revenue mentioned in Sir Philip Floyd's Letter, which was given me by Sir Robert Howard, the 21st of June 73. and remains in my Custody, I find it to agree exactly with Sir Philip's Letter, both in the Calculation of the expence of the Year, 1673. to ex∣ceed the Income of that year, by the Sum of one million one hundred sixty three thousand four hundred pound, and in the Sums which were left Charg'd upon the three great Branches of the Revenue by my Lord Clifford; nor could any Copy of the said printed Paper come from his Lordship, because there is not one half of it true: Besides this Examiner is not only ignorant of things in the Treasury, but he does not know the Officers of it at that time, for he mentions a Letter from Mr. Mounteney, dated the 10th of November 73, and says it was directed to Sir Robert Howard (then Secretary to the Treasury) whereas Mr. Bartie was then my Secretary, and not Sir Robert Howard. The Examiner closes his report concerning the Treasury, Pages 14 and 15, wherein he pretends to shew: First, That the Revenue was left charged with less than three hundred thousand pound (advance Money excepted) at the time of my Lord Cliffords leaving his Place. Secondly, that there was nine hundred forty two thousand five hundred pound then left in Money. And Thirdly, that the said Revenue was computed to be left charged with one million, four hundred eighty five thousand five hundred and seventy pound, sixteen shillings and four pence, at Lady-Day, 1672. I suppose he means
1679. when I was removed from the Treasury: Although I could no more know he means that time by the Computations he has made, than I could by that year of our Lord which he has Printed. The first and second of these are proved from that Copy before menti∣oned, pretended to be from Sir Phillip Floyd, to which Sir Philip's answer has been seen, and consequently the truth of his sure proof: But that it may be truly known how the three great Branches alone were left charg'd by my Lord Clifford's own Computation, it is therein set down, that,   li. s. d. The Customs were then charg'd with — 245905 19 03 The Excise — 201148 13 08 The Hearth-Money — 022318 11 00 In all 469373 03 11 besides that the smaller Branches were left useless for the said year: And in the same Computation (which I have in my Custody) it is estimated that for the said year of 1673 there could not be expected for the service of that year from the aforesaid three great Branches, any more than seven hundred forty six thousand six hundred twenty nine pounds, and the Establish∣ment of the constant yearly expence (besides the great Sums owing at that time to the Fleet and Army, then in being for the said year) amount∣ed to above one million three hundred thousand pound per ann. And here I must have leave to observe, that had it not been for that Chargeable War against the Dutch, it must have been strange that any considerable Charge should have remained on the Revenue in the beginning of the year 73. which was so soon after a total Post-poning of the Kings Debts, and when the Credit was so broken, that through the whole year of 72 I believe there was not twenty thousand pound borrowed on the Credit of the Revenue. From the same Copy of what he calls Sir Philip Floyd's Paper, and his sure proof of all, is made his next Calculation; that there was nine hundred forty two thousand five hundred pound left in Money: viz.   li. By the last 3 Quarters of the Tax — 600000 From the Advance of the Excise — 150000 From the French Money — 112500 Upon the 3 Quarters of the Subsidy — 080000 In all 942500 As to the first of these sums, (as I have said already) the said last three Quarters brought in clear to his Majesties use, but about five hundred sixty five thousand four hundred ninety eight pound; which is about the sum of one hundred eighty eight thousand four hundred ninety nine pound, for each Quarter one with another; and the first of those Quar∣ters was charg'd with twenty one thousand one hundred sixty three pounds, and was not payable till the third of March following; which was full three Quarters of a year (wanting but sixteen days) before I could expect the first Quarter; which would then be clear but one hun∣dred
sixty seven thousand three hundred thirty six pound; and yet this Examiner speaks with confidence the whole six hundred thousand pound to be left in Money. The three last Sums, viz. the Advance, the French money, and Subsidy, amounting to three hundred forty two thousand five hundred pound, he says, will be ready in October and November, for payment of the Fleet and Tards: Whereas the greatest part of Advance Mo∣ney goes always in Repayment of the former Advances, in Case of new Farmers, and is always continued by old Farmers; but no new Money advanced, unless there be an increase of Advance-money, as at that time was made of about thirty thousand pound, which Sum could only be accounted applicable to the present service. For the French Money, I do not know what he means, unless it be a Sum of eighty five thousand pound which I find placed to the Treasurer of the Navy's Account, betwixt June 73 and December 74. And for the eighty thousand pound upon the three quarters of the Sub∣sidy, it is a Sum in the Clouds for any thing I know of it, having been all expended before my time, or if any thing did come in afterwards of that Tax, it must be some inconsiderable Arrears. Thus has his Sure proof made out in Generals, what he confesses he could not Demonstrate by Particulars: And I must further observe, that although the last three quarters of the eighteen Months Tax were not assigned by my Lord Clifford; yet much more than that Sum was then become due to the Fleet and Army then in being: And it is well known, and was owned in the House of Commons by the then Speaker, that within the space of fifteen Months from the time of my entrance to the Treasury, I had paid above one Million five hundred thousand pound to the Navy and Army alone; which was three Months before the last of the eighteen Months Tax was payable into the Exchequer; besides the inconsiderableness of the Sum then come in by that Tax, and of the thirty thousand pound Increase of Advance upon the Excise, and of the eighty five thousand pound (if that be it he means by French-money) to so great a disbursement as was made to the Navy, and Army only, in the said space of 15 months. For his third and last general proof, viz. What Charge was left upon the Revenue at Lady-Day, 1679. he says, Page the 15th. That to be as clear in this, as he was in the other, he has obtained likewise a Copy of the then State of the Revenue as it was presented to the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury: And which he says, is as followeth.   li. s. d. Remains unpaid of Tallies charg'd on the Customes — 435106 01 00 Of Tallies charg'd on the Excise — 550464 15 04 To repay the Advance — 250000 00 00 The charge on the Hearth-Duty by Tallies and the Advance Money — 250000 00 00 Total 1485570 16 04 I have indeed been informed that a State of the Revenue was present∣ed to the Lords Commissioners about that time, but I know nothing of it, nor was any thing of that kind ever required at my hands; but if any body have given them such an one as is printed by the Examiner, it
has been a very malicious and willful mistake to charge the Revenue to be under such a Debt, because there were such Tallies upon it, at the time of my leaving the Treasury, unless he would at the same time have shewed the uses of those Tallies: As first, how much of them was for Ser∣vice forwards, and beyond Lady-Day 1679. Secondly, what was to be reckoned in Re-payment of some of the said Tallies, which is to a very considerable Sum: And, Thirdly, how much the Advance-money alone on the Excise and Hearth Duty amounted to; which is not to be reckon∣ed as Anticipation, but as Security for the Rent of those great Branches of the Revenue, and which must be always done if his Majesty were in the most plentiful Condition of his Exchequer: And it may be observed, that the Examiner himself does not Charge the one hundred and fifty thousand pounds advance on the Excise, as any part of the three hundred thousand pounds, which he says was the Charge left by my Lord Clifford; for he tells you the whole Charge upon the Excise was then but one hundred and ten thousand pound. The said Advances, &c. therefore being deducted, there will be taken from the Examiner's Charge of 1485570 l. these sums following, viz.   li. For the Advance on the Excise — 270000 For Advance on the Hearth-Duty — 150000 To be discharg'd by Orders to the Commissioners of Excise on the first Act for disbanding the Ar∣my, &c. — 101000 More by Tallies on the Surplus of the Excise for 30000 l. and 99000 l. being no charge upon the Rent, unless the Surplus fail, which is not likely — 129000 More by Tallies which were to pay the Forces from Lady-day 79. forwards to the first of July, which was 97 days beyond my time; viz. by 29000 l. or thereabouts on the Excise, and a∣bout 30588 l. on the Customs — 059588 More by Tallies on the Customs made use of to carry on the Service of the Navy and Ordnance beyond the said Lady-day, 1679. — 035000 More by Tallies struck for Pentions upon the two last Quarters of the Excise, viz. Christmas 78. and Lady-day 79. for payment of which, Money was left in the hands of the Commissioners of Ex∣cise about — 033000 More by Tallies upon the Customs restored for Tyn, which was deposited in Mr. Kent's hands — 015000 More by Tallies on the Customs, accounted by the Examiner to be unpaid to Mr. Montague, which were paid in my time — 002342 Total — 794930 And then the Charge which ought truly to be said remaining upon the three great Branches (as an anticipation of the Revenue) at Lady-day 1679, stands thus upon each Branch, as near as I am able to com∣pute: viz.
  li. s. d. By Tallies on the Customs — 352176 0 0 By Tallies on the Excise — 238464 0 0 By Tallies on the Hearth-Duty — 100000 0 0 Total— 690640 0 0 The said three Branches of the Revenue were left charg'd (as hath been already said) by the Lord Clifford; as follows.   li. s. d. The Customs — 245905 0 0 The Excise — 201148 0 0 The Hearth-Duty — 022318 0 0 Total— 469371 0 0 So as the Charge upon the Customs is increas'd in 5 years and 3 quarters, viz. from Mid∣sommer 73, to Lady-day 79, by the sum of 106271 0 0 And upon the Excise in the said time — 037316 0 0 And upon the Hearth-Duty in the said time — 077682 0 0 In all — 221269 0 0 As by this it appears that the Anticipations upon the Revenue in five years and three quarters are increased but — 221269 l. so I must ob∣serve, that there was — 140000 l. paid to the Goldsmiths for two years Interest of their Debt, by virtue of a Grant under the Great Seal, dated the 23d of July, 1674, and — 178473 l. more to them and others by several Grants of Perpetual Interest betwixt Christmas 1676, and Lady-day, 1679, which together amounts to the sum of — 318473 l. and is truly a payment of so much of the Kings Debt, although it has not been called an Anticipation of the Revenue since the stop of the Exche∣quer. The said — 318473 l. having therefore discharged so much of the Kings Debt in my time, although what are called the present An∣ticipations be increased by the sum of — 221269 l. yet the Kings Debt is really less than it was at my entrance to the Treasury the 19th of June 73. by the sum of — 97204 l. Notwithstanding that no Aid was given by Parliament in the foresaid time of five years and three quarters, but what was appropriated to par∣ticular uses by the Parliament; and notwithstanding the Charge of the War with Algiers, and the Rebellion in Virginia, which were both great stops to Trade and very great Expences to his Majesty. The Exami∣ner indeed undervalues those Expences, as he does every thing to which he can give no better answers than he has done to that in pag. 6. wherein he says, That the Rebellion in Virginia ceased quickly, and while both that Rebellion and the War with Algiers hapned, if there had been a considerable Fleet for Summer and Winter Guards kept out besides, it had been a matter of some consideration. So that where he cannot possibly deny the Facts, he en∣deavours to blemish them by something else: But in this instance that will not serve his turn, the Summer and Winter Guards having been as
great as the need was then for them, and the Merchants will be the best Judges how their Trade was then secured, as well as how that War was supported against the Algerines. With this state of the Revenue at Lady-day 79. viz. that the Debt then upon it amounted to one million four hundred eighty five thou∣sand five hundred seventy pound sixteen shillings and four pence, the Examiner ends his Computations concerning the Treasury; the truth of which will be best decided by the Records themselves: But before he closes that part of his Book, he thinks fit to leave his Civil Remarks to the Reader about me, and threatens me with Ballads, which by his stile it looks as if he could perform much better than matters of Account. Having gone through the matters of Fact mentioned in this first part of the Examiners Paper, I should take notice of some of his suggestions before I proceed to the other part of it; but those being only Observa∣tions of his own, who has dealt so unfaithfully in things which are vi∣sible upon Record, I think it will not be necessary to say any thing to them; only I will inform the Reader, that whereas this Examiner says, that the Office of Treasurer of the Navy depends upon the Lord Treasurer or Commissioners of the Treasury, for money to pay: yet those Supplies I re∣ceived whilst I was Treasurer of the Navy were two parts of three in Orders and Assignments, and left upon me to borrow Money as I could upon them; insomuch that most of my time and care was then employ∣ed in that work; although I made it far more easie afterwards to the pre∣sent Treasurer of the Navy, while I remained Lord Treasurer. I must likewise desire the Reader to observe, that although this Exa∣miner insinuates, pag. 3. that it would puzzle the Author of the State to name any persons who were of opinion that the Kings condition was in great straits for money in the first six Months after my being Treasurer; yet that is not only true, but is testified to be so, by that state of the Revenue drawn up by Sir Robert Howard, the 21st. of June 73, which is men∣tioned in Sir Philip Floyd's Letter; for he thereby makes appear (as hath been said already) that the Expence of that year (which in the Establish∣ments is always accounted to commence in January) does exceed the In∣come of the said year by the sum of one million one hundred sixty three thousand four hundred pounds. Now besides that State of Sir Robert Howard's (my then Secretary), I am confident the King and his Royal Highness will both remember the straits of the Treasury to be then such, and the difficulty so great to get money for paying off the Fleet at the end of the War, that it was doubt∣ed whether some Ships must not have been sent out of the River to Sea again, only for want of Money to pay them; and although means was used to discharge the Seamen of that Fleet without Tickets, yet most of the Money was borrowed which was raised for that purpose, and not without great hardship, as the credit of the Exchequer stood at that time. I know his Majesty will also remember, that in March 1675 a state of his Revenue was delivered to himself from Sir Robert Howard, which state is remaining in my custody (a Copy whereof is hereunto annexed) wherein Sir Robert sets forth to his Majesty, that his Revenue was then in so ill a condition, that it could afford him clear but six hundred fifty six thousand one hundred seventy two pound that year; insomuch that it was thereupon proposed by him to help his Majesty to eight thousand pound a Week in aid of his Revenue for his subsistance, and upon a con∣dition to have all the three great Branches put into the hands of such
Undertakers as should be named to his Majesty. In so strait a conditi∣on was the Exchequer understood to be so many years ago, by those who certainly ought to know the Condition of it much better than the Exami∣ner; and therefore it puzzles no body but himself, to name persons who were of that opinion. A Copy of the Paper delivered to his Majesty from Sir Robert Howard, the 5th of March, 1675.   li. s. d. ob. The Sum that seems the foundation and measure from whence the Suspentions are made, is — 1351968 00 00   The Sum remaining after the Su∣spention made, is, — 1175315 00 06   The Sum suspended, is, — 0176653 00 06   The last years expences amounted to — 1841931 18 02   Out of which the Navy had — 0599320 04 11 ½ Spent the last year besides what the Na∣vy had — 1242611 13 02 ½ The Sum of Expence after the Suspenti∣ons made for a following year, is — 1175315 01 06   The Income for the following Year to discharge the Expence of 1175315 l. 1 s. 6 d. may arise from these Branches.   li. Charge li. Customs — 600000   100000 The rest of the Ex∣cise is charged.Excise by the moi∣ty of Pentions — 050000     First Fruits & 10ths 016000     Law-Duty — 015000     Small Branches — 020000   010000 Hearth-Duty — 150000   082828 Toto 851000 Toto 194828 The clear Income remaining, is — 0656172 00 00 The Income short of the proportioned Expence, by — 0519143 01 06 He proceeds, page 16, to Affairs of State, in answer to which I shall trouble my self no farther, than to shew his false Quotations of my Letter of the 25th of March, 1678. and of the Book called The State of my Case (as to so much therein as concerns that Letter) leaving the malicious Inferences and Observations through this Part as well as the rest of his Pamphlet, to such as are more ingenuous, and more knowing in Foreign Business, than I perceive the Examiner is; of which this one Instance may suffice, Of his Belief that the French Interest was promoted by the Mar∣riage
of the Lady Mary to the Prince of Orange. Besides his frequent applying of things to me which are not only un∣true, but not so applyed by the Author of that State, he takes the liberty to affirm, that some things are in my Letter of the 25th of March, which are not in it, and that they are said to be so by the said Author of the State, although there be not such a word in his Book; and he makes one of the said false assertions a principal foundation not only of accusing me, but of aspersing the King to the greatest degree imaginable, whilst he would be thought to shew him as much Duty as I think he has done Con∣tempt, which is a Crime he truly censures that no guilt but Treason can exceed. The said Assertion upon which he builds so many false Inferences, is in Page the 25th, where he says, 'Tis fit to observe in that Letter (meaning the foresaid Letter of the 25th of March) that the King was sufficiently in∣formed that the French desired Peace upon the Terms sent by the Secretary; whereas it is most plain in that Letter, that the Kings Information (which was by Mr. Godolphin) was, that the Confederates desired Peace up∣on the Terms sent by the Secretary: And in the same Letter it is said, to prevent the Kings sending into Holland again (before he knows the mind of France) I am commanded by his Majesty, &c. and, but that the Examiner hath no more regard for Sense, than he has for Truth, it must have been as apparent Nonsense to him, as it is to all other Men, to have sent in∣to France to know what he pretends was known concerning that King already. In the 26th Page he says again, Sure the Author of the State forgets that but a little before he says, this Lord (meaning me) assures him that they were sufficiently informed the French desired Peace upon those Propositions: And again, Page the 27th, That sure he cannot mean the Proposals that he says were received from the Confederates, for those he was informed were desired by the French. Now from so many Repetitions of things, of which there is not one word, neither in the Letter, nor State of the Case, and that both those have been so long printed, that every Man has had the opportunity of seeing this Falshood, I doubt not but it will easily be concluded, what belief ought to be given to any thing he has said, which may be either doubtful in the Proof, or obscure in the meaning, to those who are not particularly knowing to the Matters this Examiner has taken upon him to meddle with. From these sure Assertions, he does just as he did from his sure Proofs in reckoning, draw divers as good Conclusions; and lest he should omit any occasion of shewing that great Duty and Respect he professes to his Ma∣jesty, he takes care in Page 26. to make a particular exception against the Author of the State, for having justified the Kings honour in the 11th Page of that Stated Case, by making appear that the King could have no design of getting the French Money for the purposes suggested a∣gainst the Earl of Danby; for the Examiner, in the same Page 26, has laboured extreamly to have that Argument of the Author's of the State to be taken for a very weak and false one, which vindicates the King so fully from so foul an Aspersion. He then proceeds to that part of the Letter which says, That in Case the Conditions of the Peace shall be accepted, the King expects to have six millions of Livers yearly for three years, &c. but says, that before he enters upon that Paragraph, he must separate the King from wrong or dishonour, and Explains that separation, Pag. the 29th, with
having separated the King from the Concern of that matter. I confess he had need to say so, because he says in the next, page 30. That it was a project to let a Lease of Parliaments for three yeers; but whether he has done what he pretended for the Kings Honour, I must leave the Reader to Judge; when, if I durst have said in my Letter, that the King expects six millions, &c. without the Kings order for saying so; yet certainly it could not have been in my power alone, to have Leased out Parliaments, and as he says presently after to have renewed those Leases; so that how it is possible to Render a King less, or how this imputation can be design∣ed against any body but the King himself, (although he would pretend some cover by doing it through my sides) I cannot imagine, nor is it pos∣sible to be understood otherwise. I confess he seems to mittigate this Crime a little, by the only modest expression he has shewed through his whole Book, which is in a Para∣graph, page 24. and which he would fain have proved by a Syllogism, but finding the first part of it would not hold good, he says very modest∣ly thus. If this be a good Consequence, that to accept French Money, is to enslave the Nation; I hope it follows, the Sum of six millions of Livers, &c. was for the same purpose; but himself acknowledges the consequence not to be good; for he did not think the one hundred and twelve thousand five hundred pounds, which he says was left in French money, was for that purpose; nor have we found many great Sums which former Kings have received from that Nation to have been so applyed or intended; and he cannot deny but his Majesty might have had great Sums from them if he pleased, which he has refused, and refused only because he would con∣fent to no disadvantagious Terms of Peace for the Confederates; nor at the last did his Majesty ever consent to those Terms upon which the present Peace was made, but on the contrary, the lowest terms his Ma∣jesty did ever agree to propose to the French King were to have had di∣vers more Towns restored by him, both to the Emperour and Spain, than are restored by the said Peace; and demanded an intire Restitution of the Duke of Lorrain to that Dukedom, as may be seen by those very Propo∣sals, which were then sent to Mr. Montague by Secretary Coventry, and without which his Majesty would not hearken to any offers of their Mo∣ney, nor (as is said in the said Letter) would he suffer it to be mentioned by his Ambassador; nay so much has his Majesty been injured in this matter, that he needed not have wanted that Money which he so totally rejected, if he would but have given his consent to the terms upon which the Peace was at last concluded at Nimiguen. He follows that Charge of Leasing Parliaments, within two or three Pa∣ragraphs, with laying Contradictions to the Kings Charge, but would impose that also upon the Author of the State, saying, sure though he has been very bold with the King, yet he would not make him own Contradictions at the same time; and I do not find the said Author to have said one word like it, though this Examiner hath done so with great freedom. There is an Explanation in Print of my said Letter of the 25th of March to Mr. Montague, together with two of his Letters, which will shew the cause why the Money-part was kept secret from the Secreta∣ries, &c. Mr. Montague having both undertaken to get the King Money, and having prayed the King in a Letter to himself, that it might be kept secret from all men but me, who never sought that trust at his hands.
I will therefore leave the rest of the Letter to that Printed Explana∣tion, and shall only observe two things more about it, which are the close of the Examiner's Discourse upon that subject, pag. 32. One is the blame he lays upon me for affirming in a Speech in the House of Lords, that I could produce the Kings hand for the Letters made use of against me; to which I shall only answer, I had the Kings leave to do so, as well as his Authority for what I writ. The other is an Expression of the Examiners, in the same Page, in an∣swer to a Clause of the Author's of the State upon the said Letter; viz. Sure there are few Masters that would expect obedience from their Servants in unlawful things, and the Servants could less expect protection unless their Masters were above the Law. The great Master of the Nation can give no more protection, nor require more obedience, than the Laws of God and Man allow. Now what does this imply (being said upon this occasion) less than charging the King with Commanding an unlawful thing, if he did Com∣mand the writing of the said Letter, (which his Majesty himself has own∣ed publickly;) and me for obeying his Majesties Commands in what the Examiner calls unlawful? To this I must answer, That I durst not take upon me so easily as this Examiner does, to judge whether that were unlawful, which the King thinks to be lawful; although it had been in a more doubtful matter: But when the subject matter is about Peace and War, the Examiner him∣self acknowledges, pag. 31. that there is no question but the King may treat of Peace even in War declared; and yet in pag. 32. would insinuate that a Letter of that nature, and by the Kings Command, and before War declared, should be understood to be about an unlawful matter; for other∣wise by the Examiner's own Doctrine the King's Commands on that sub∣ject were legal, and my obedience no Crime, but did deserve Protection. When he has done with the Affairs of State, he is pleased to agree the Accusations about Sir Edmundbury Godfrey to be Libells against me, and that to draw arguments of guilt from relying upon the Kings Pardon, would rather shew a desire to find a Crime than prove it: But for the King's part, how valid or good his Pardon is, his continued duty and respect to his Majesty makes him forbear to speak his opinion; and I perceive also he takes it to be of such weight if he should, that he fears it might too much Anticipate a Parliaments Judgment, and upon the whole, he concludes (and I agree with him in that) that if he has made appear to be true, what he has said against me, my Pardon was certainly my best defence; but be∣ing so apparently contrary to truth, not only concerning me, but the King himself; I am sure he needs a Pardon much more than he deserves one, as I believe he is sensible, because he takes the safest course of all, which is to disguise himself, as well as he has done Truth: And if the Examiner was any of my Prosecuters, he cannot deny but that malice has had too great a share at least in his part of my Prosecution. DANBY. FINIS.
