M2205 R12584 12202420 56129
MIRABILIS ANNuS SECuNDuS; Or, The SECOND YEAR Of PRODIGIES. BEING A true and impartial Collection of many strange SIGNES and APPARITIONS, which have this last Year been seen in the Heavens, and in the Earth, and in the Waters. Together with many remarkable Accidents and Judgements be∣falling divers persons, according to the most exact Information that could be procured from the best Hands, and now Publish∣ed as a Warning to all Men speedily to Repent, and to prepare to meet the Lord, who gives us these Signs of his Coming. Mat. 16.3. —Can ye not discern the Signes of the Times? Psal. 119.27. Make me to understand the way of thy Precepts, so shall I talk of thy Wondrous Works. Zeph. 3.5. The just Lord is in the midst thereof, he will not do ini∣quity, every Morning doth he bring his Judgement to Light; he faileth not: but the unjust knoweth no shame. Quum Deus puniturus est Gentem vel Orbem, Prodigiis id prius solet significare. Herodatus. Omnia narrat mirabillia Dei qui credens visibilibus, ad intelligenda invisibilia transitum facit, Aug. in Psal. 9. Printed in the Year, 1662.
THE PREFACE. AMongst all the Symptomes of an approaching Misery and De∣struction to any People, none is more significant and fatal, than a general slighting and neglecting of the great Signs which God openly sheweth, and the wonderful things, which (as on a publick Theater) he is pleased to act in the sight of all men. As they are the plainest and most obvious to sence, so they are com∣monly the last Sermons which God intends to preach to a Nation or Kingdom, before he inflicts his Punishments upon them, if they repent not. The Preaching of the Word is his Barnabas, whom he first sends as his Ambassador, with gentleness and sweetness to treat with us, yea, to beseech us as in Christ's stead, to be reconciled unto God. But when he is rejected, then doth he commissionate some strange and Pro∣digious Providences, as his Boanerges, to thunder-out his peremptory and irrevokable Purpose, in case of incorrigibleness, speedily to proceed to Judgment.Exod. 5.1. Moses his first Sermon to Pharaoh was a gentle word from the Lord; Let my People go, that they may serve me. But that being slighted, Moses opens his second Commission, and shews Signs and Wonders in the Land of Egypt, which to the life did preach Pha∣raoh's death, if his heart was yet so hardened that none of those things can make impressions upon him. The World shall certainly find, that if neither the Word nor Works of God do prevail with them, his Judg∣ments shall inevitably prevail against them to overthrow them. If the shaking of the Rod over us doth us no good, be assured that the Hand which shakes it over us, will immediately strike us with it. It is the Observation of famous Dr. Jackson, in a Treatise of his, called The Signs of the Times:Pag. 26 being the Sum of some few Sermons prea∣ched before the King, &c. That the destruction threatned by our Saviour against Galilee and Jerusalem, though at that time it was truly evitable, yet it became less evitable every day than other for almost forty years, by their continual perseverance in special sins; and their progression in sin without repentance, was occasioned by the neglect of the Signs of the Time, or the fore-warnings which God had given them for their good. No publick Plagues or Calamities, whether fore-signified by Signs, or punctually foretold by God's Pro∣phets, or by his Son the Prince of Prophets, become inevitable, un∣less it be by contempt or neglect of fore-warnings given. And in another place of the same Treatise he sayes,Pag. 36 That the Church and
People of the Jews had many signs of the miserable ruine and desola∣tion of their Country, which they might have observed, and which if they had observed in such measure and manner, as many Heathens did the like, they might have been acquitted a tanto, though not a toto. But their ruine and destruction after it became in a manner necessary; it was not necessarily decreed to be so inevitable, as by their own stubborness they made it to be in the issue. Thus far the Doctor. And O how applicable are his words to us in England at this day? whom God hath for so many years together warned by his Word, and in these two last years hath given us more warnings by Signs and Prodigies, than (so far as we have heard or read) the whole World hath had since the dayes of Jesus Christ his being on the Earth to this very day. What remains then, but that if after all this we harden our hearts, as the Jews and Galileans did, our Saviour should exempt us, as he did them, from his special Protection; and leave us open, as he did them, to the ordinary process of God's just and righteous Judge∣ments.Joh. 4.48. If Christ did so much blame those, that would not believe ex∣cept they saw signs and wonders, how much more think we will he rebuke those who will not believe nor repent though they see Signs and Wonders? So that we may say, Oh happy People indeed, in the midst of whom God works Wonders to forewarn them; but Oh most unhappy People, who will not take warning when he works Wonders amongst them. We have no cause in the least to take up any complaint against God whatever his proceedings hereafter should be against us: For, as Josephus in his seventh Book of the Wars of the Jews, cap. 12. observes upon the appearance of those strange Signs before the Destruction of Jerusalem. That God hath a care of Mankind, and doth every way foreshew betime what is most expedient for them: but they through madness do voluntarily perish in their wickedness. The Jews (says he further in the close of the same chap.) interpreted some of the Signs as they pleased, and at others they laughed, till by the ruine of their Country, and their own woful overthrow, their iniquity appeared. So, if we seriously reflect upon the present hu∣mour and temper of the generality of the People in England at this day, how little credit and regard is given by them to the Signs of the Time (though so many in number, and most of them so strange and re∣markable) we have sufficient ground to expect,Prov. 1.27. that our fear is com∣ing as Desolation, and our Destruction as a Whirlwind. Can there be a greater affront offered to the Mighty JEHOVAH, than to contemn and laugh at that which he doth on purpose that it might be
considered?Psal. 111.4. He makes (sayes the Psalmist) his wonderful Works to be remembred. That is the Design of God in what he doth, he hath made all his Works to that end that they should be considered and at∣tended to by us. How bold and daring then are those men who regard not the Works of the Lord, nor consider the Operation of his hands? and thereby provoke him to destroy them, and not build them up, as the Psalmist expresses it, Psal. 28.5. The Heathens themselves will rise up in the Judgment against the men of this Generation.Vid. Plin. lib. 2. c. 58. Voetius de Signis, 3. pag. 920. For when∣soever any Prodigies or strange Apparitions hapned amongst them, they were still very sensible of them, as is manifest from all their Histories. Yea, according to Voetius his observation upon the happening of any particular Prodigy, they still applyed themselves to their particular Sa∣crifices for avoiding the evil of that Prodigy. Yea, some of the chiefest amongst them have been so affected with things of this nature, that they have been a means to bring them to the knowledge and worship of the true God: as appears by that famous Instance of Dionysius Areo∣pagita the eminent Philosopher, who was converted to the Christian Faith by a Prodigie, as himself tells us in that excellent Epistle of his to Polycarpus. How strangely also did they work upon Nebuchadnezzar? insomuch that he infers from them no less than the Eternity of God's Kingdom, saying, How great are his Signs,Dan. 4.3. and how mighty are his Wonders? his Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and his Domini∣on is from Generation to Generation. So likewise Darius makes the same Inference from the same Premi∣ses: for, speaking of God, as one that works Signs and Wonders in Heaven and in Earth, concludes, That he is the living God,Dan. 6.26. and sted∣fast for ever, and his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed, and his Dominion shall be to the end. But the wickedness of this Age is such, that the great Works of the Almighty are not only disregarded and neglected, but even scorned and villified by the greatest part of men, who see and hear of them every day. Yea, the more visibly God doth from Heaven testifie against the Prophane, Superstitious, Aposta∣tizing, and Persecuting Spirit of this day, the greater progress is made in the filling up of the measure of these several Abominations. So that by this progressive motion in Sin and Wickedness, without any sense or remorse at all, in the midst of so many Prodigies, they proclaim them∣selves to be the most monstrous Prodigies of all. Yea, it is to be wished, that the People of God themselves could be excused in this matter, who we fear have great cause to be humbled and to lye very low, in regard of their neglect also of the Signs of the Time, and not im∣proving
them to a competency of fitness to meet the Lord in the way of his Judgments, and to an encouragement of their Faith concerning the sudden appearance of the great God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ, whose second coming these are the certain Harbengers and immediate fore-runners of. Our Scope therefore in publishing some of the strange Apparitions and Prodigious Events which have happened this last year, is nothing else but to alarm both Saints and Sinners, to awaken both the wise and the foolish Virgins, that none may be surprized with his coming, nor continue in a course of Sin and Rebellion against God, without fair warnings of approaching Judgments, as the natural and direct conse∣quences of such enormities. And this we do upon that supposition which God himself makes in relation to the Israelites,Exod. 4.8. If they will not (sayes the Lord) hearken to the voice of the first Sign, they will believe the voice of the latter Sign. Above a Century of them was published the last year, but against them these two great Exceptions were taken. First, That they were all false. And, secondly, that several seditious Parallels were annexed to many of them, to give their meaning and interpretation. Now (though there be no obligation upon us to vindicate what was then performed by others) yet for Truths sake we shall briefly speak to both these Exceptions. As to the first, we shall only say this short word, That of the truth of many of them, the generality of the whole Kingdom are upon clear and publick evidence convinced: As the several Parelia's, the Bla∣zing-Stars, the strange fiery Meteors, the dreadful storms of Thun∣der, Lightning, Hail, Whirlwinds and Rain, with many others: all which happened in divers places, and whereof many hundreds were Witnesses in several parts of the Nation; As also the strange double Tides at London and Hull, the drying up of the River Derwent, and several, if not the major part of the Accidents and Judgments, were then, and have been often since confirmed by publick Testimony. Most of the rest, according to the best enquiry that we could since make, do upon fair and sufficient Proof appear to be in substance very certain, though there may be a fayler in setting down some circumstances which do relate to some of them: Some few of them, at least in some circum∣stances, we acknowledge are very doubtful; As the 53. (under the head of Prodigies in the Heavens) is doubtful in respect of many cir∣cumstances, as they are there set down, though in the substance the Narrative is very true. So also the 11th (under the head of Prodigies
on the Earth) in respect of the last part of it (which is a story of two Children, &c.) was (so far as we are able to inform our selves) re∣ceived upon very slender proof, and the truth of it doth not at all ap∣pear. And so in the 4th (under the head of Accidents and Judge∣ments) there is a mistake of Leicestershire for Warwickshire. Like∣wise in the 9th (under the same head) there is much wrong done to the young Gentlewoman therein mentioned, who (as we have heard from very good hands) was not so great a Reviler of Religious people, nor so eminently struck by the hand of the Lord, as that story relates. Also the 18th (under the same head) is not true in that particular about the Apothecary's venting after his death so great a quantity of blood, and in that manner as is there said, though the rest of the story is undoubtedly true. That also concerning the Gentleness of the But∣cher's Dog in the 21. (under the same head) is mistaken: for the Dog was wont to do mis of the like nature formerly: the rest of the Relation holds true. The last thing which we have any doubt of the truth of, is the 24th (under the same head) wherein, as we are in∣formed, there are these two mistakes: the one, that the person there∣in mentioned was subject formerly to that noysom disease which that Relation doth not own; and the other, that he was not then dead as is there reported. Besides these seven particulars, we know not any one of all the rest that the Impartial Reader hath any just cause to sus∣pect, or that stands in need of the least emendation. And indeed that which should encourage every one to give the more credit to the whole Narrative, is, That now after a years time, and some months over, the falshood of any one particular hath not been publickly detected, though the whole was condemned as fictitious and scandalous, and the discovery of the Imposture of it undertaken by those who would have had no mercy on it, if they could have got it fairly under their whip; but they altogether fayling in their enterprize, and proving meer Bragadocia's in all their boasts and threats, the Book stands now in the Judgment of all indifferent and unbyassed men rectus in Curia, and may doubtless in a second Edition, with the blind of some few lean Animadversions, come forth under the Protection of a mercinary Im∣primatur. The other Exception was, That so many Parallels were inserted, which in the ears of many did trumpet out nothing less than Sedition and Rebellion. To which we shall only say, That if any such thing were intended or designed by them, we cannot but openly testifie our Abhorrency of such Practices. The publishing of the Works of God
ought not by any means to be made use of as a project to further and promote that which is so plainly repugnant to the Word of God. And we do ingenuously confess (though the Authors design might be never so innocent) yet that Collection of Parallels might well have been spared, in regard there was at least an appearance of ground for all those Imputations which were cast upon the Book and the Author also for their sakes. We have therefore purposely avoided that Rock, and have given only a plain and naked account of the several remarkable passages of Providence which (by the best information that those parts where the things themselves were transacted would afford) we have come to the knowledge of. And herein, we call the Searcher of all hearts to witness, that we have been faithful and impartial. And truly, we can appeal to the all-knowing God, that our design is not to stir up any to Sedition, but seasonable Repentance; not to Treason against man, but Loyalty and Subjection to JESUS CHRIST the King of kings and Lord of lords. And if in this respect, by our care and diligence in putting together and publishing this Collection, we can be serviceable to our Master, and the souls of men, we have our end, and a sufficient Compensation for all our pains and travel in this Work. Which we pray the Lord may be accompanied with his special blessing; and in this day wherein our best Preachers are driven into corners, and there is like to be so great a famine of the Word, every one of these particular Works of the Lord may be a lively quickning Sermon to the whole Nation, and that they may prove an effectual Warning to all, to break off their Sins by a timely Gospel-Repentance, lest the Lord, as he threatens by his Prophet, become a Lion unto Ephraim,Hos. 5.14. and a young Lion to the house of Judah, and tear, and devour, and there be none to rescue.
Several Prodigies and Apparitions seen, with strange and terrifying Noises often heard in the Hea∣vens, from the Month of April, 1661, to the Month of June, 1662. I. Three Stars descending from a duskie Cloud, were joyned together by a contiguous flame, and then turned into the form of the blade of a broad Sword. IN or about the month of April, 1661. at Chard in Somersetshire, by several persons of credit, was seen in the Heavens Eastward, over London High-way, about six or seven of the clock in the evening, a narrow long dusky Cloud, which after the Spectators had for a while beheld, seemed to open, and there descended from it, a great bright Star, which seemed unto them much bigger than the palm of any man's hand: Immediately a second Star also fell from the same Cloud, and seemed by its motion as if it would have forced down before it the first Star: and immediately a third Star followed, somewhat less than the second, upon which it seemed to press with great violence, as the other did before. These three Stars, before their disappearing, were joyned at some distance each from other by a contiguous flame, which was exceeding bright; but at length the whole Appearance did form it self into the fashion of the blade of a very broad Sword, which immediately fell directly toward the Earth with great violence and speed, and so was seen no more. II. The form of the Tower and City of London all on fire, seen in the Air; together with the forms of Lions over the City, and a Field of Blood in the West part of it. Upon the 17th of April, 1661, being the Wednesday in Easter-week, a credible person living in the Bowling-Alley near Westminster-Abbey, coming with his daughter, aged about seventeen years, from Kentish-town towards London, in the evening, near the Pinders of Wakefield, met with two other persons returning from London, who
desired him to look behind him, which when he had done he saw in the Air the appearance of the Tower of London, and presently after the whole City it self; and while he beheld it with great astonishment about the space of a quarter of an hour, there appeared very dreadful Flames of Fire between the houses in the Street, and suddenly the City seemed to be all on a light fire; and on the Top of one of the Gates they conceived they saw the appearance of a Dead man's Head upon a Pole. Over the City were the shapes of several Lions, and about the West part of it appeared a Field of Blood. After they had be∣held this about half an hour, the foresaid person and his daughter be∣ing much amazed and terrified at these strange and dreadful Represen∣tations, went forwards towards London, and at their going away, the Fire seemed to break forth brighter and brighter. This whole Rela∣tion was received immediately from the persons own mouth, by one who is a Contributer to this Collection. III. The form of a Town well fortified, seen in the Air. A person of much Honour, a Knight, and a Recusant, A Colonel in the late King's Army, dwelling in the West of England, did upon the 23d of April, 1661, being the Coronation-day, see in the Air the perfect form and likeness of a Town, with a seeming very regular Fortification round about it, together with many Houses and Towers within it. There was none with him when he saw it but his Servant, and they both have spoken of it, and do avouch the truth of every particular as it is here related. IV. The form of a compleat Ship, seen in the Air. On the 23d. of April, 1661, a person of credit riding on a high Hill between Faychurch and Lime in Dorsetshire, about two of the clock in the afternoon, looking up into the Sky, saw a very great black Cloud, which he guessed to be over Portland; which Cloud he saw suddenly formed into the likeness of a compleat Ship, with Masts and Sails, Bowsprit, Stern, and every thing else answerable. The Stern, he sayes, was high built. He discerned also in the Ship, the likeness of the upper parts of Men; and at the Head of the Ship he saw many Men with Pikes on their shoulders, as perfectly (according to his own Re∣lation) as ever he saw them painted. He stood still and looked p
the whole with very great astonishment for the space of about half a quarter of an hour, during which time it rained, and thundred, and lightened exceedingly. This Relation comes from the persons own mouth, who affirms it with much confidence, and is one to whom much credit may be given. V. The form of two Lions, the one lying on his back, the other standing over him, seen in the Heavens. About the beginning of June 1661, a Merchant of Totness in the County of Devon, walking in his Garden in the evening, saw in the Sky towards the Southwest, the full proportion and likeness of a Lion, lying as it were upon his back; and immediately another great Lion appeared, standing over the first. The Gentleman much affected with this strange Apparition, ran immediately into his house to call forth his Wife to see the same with him; but before they could both reco∣ver the Garden again, the Lions were vanished, only the Tail of one of them did appear very plainly, and was seen by both of them, till at last it vanished: After which there immediately appeared to both their views, the perfect form of a little Lion, standing in the room of the o∣ther two, which continued a short space, and then vanished also. These are sober and discreet persons, and will attest the truth of this Relation unto any that make enquiry after it. VI. The form of Men and Horses engaging against one another in the Heavens. Upon the 12th of June 1661, about eight of the clock at night, near Dertford in Kent, three honest sober persons saw in the East three Clouds, two of which were of a blood-red colour; the other (to use their own dialect) was somewhat blacker, and like to stail-blood. Af∣ter a while they observed them to change into the form of Men and Horses in a warlike posture, the Men sometimes appeared on horse∣back, and sometimes on foot, dividing themselves into several parties; and then with a very violent and swift motion engaged against each other: after which their shape was totally lost, and there appeared two Men on horseback, the one coming from the right, the other from te left-hand party: the one of them presently disappeared, the other  seemed from the waste upward to be very tall of stature, at whose
left-hand appeared the perfect form of a Gallows) continued for a short space after, and then vanished. This is verified by the Specta∣tors themselves, who do constantly affirm it to all that have enquired of them concerning it. VII. A bright Pillar of Fire reaching down from the Heavens to the Earth. At Kingsmire in Sussex, not far from Lewes, two persons of very good credit, did on the 13th of June 1661, in the night, when there was a very dreadful storm of Thunder and Lightning, see a bright Pillar of Fire reaching down from the Heavens to the Earth, which after a short time of continuance, vanished. VIII. Fire flying in the Air like pieces of red-hot Iron. The same night also, near the fore-mentioned place, were seen by very many honest and credible persons, Fire flying to and fro in the Air, like pieces of red hot Iron, or burning Firebrands: the Spectators being many, and of them some of note and eminency, do constantly affirm the truth of this Relation. IX. The forms of several Pinacles of Cathedrals and shafts of Steeples, seen in the Air. Upon the 14th of June 1661, two credible persons, inhabitants of Market-street in the County of Hertford, having occasions to ride abroad very early that morning, near Caddington Common, not long before the Sun arose, did plainly see in the Air (as they relate) the forms of several Pinacles of Cathedrals, and shafts of Steeples, which moved very swiftly; and from them proceeded many strange shapes and colours, hard to be described or distinguished: At last there ap∣peared the form of a Man on horseback, which continued till they had a perfect view of it; After all followed a most dreadful Thunder, Lightning and Rain. Of the truth of this we have assurance from the Spectators themselves. X. Three Suns seen at Reading. By Letters from very credible persons in Reading, it is certified and confirmed by sufficient Testimony, That upon Friday, being the 14th
day of June 1661, between eight and nine of the clock in the fore∣noon, there appeared Three Suns in the Heavens, standing not far from each other in a direct line: At the first there seemed to be a thin Mist before them, but within the space of a quarter of an hour the Mist va∣nished, and the Sky was very clear, especially in that part where the Suns were, and then all the Three Suns shone exceeding bright for the space of about half a quarter of an hour; after which time, that Sun which stood toward the West first vanished, and then that which was Eastward, by which it appeared to the Spectators that the middlemost was the true Sun. XI. The Heavens all on Fire. At Lewes in Sussex, June 15. 1661. about three of the clock in the morning, divers persons observing a more than ordinary light, being then in their beds, presently arose; and looking out, they perceived the whole visible Hemisphere on every side, to be as it were on Fire, the colour whereof seemed to be more inclining to a blood-red than the ordinary flame colour. At the same time also, at a Town called Bawcomb, about twelve or fourteen miles from Lewes, a person of quality, being in bed, per∣ceived so great a light in his Chamber, that he verily thought his Barns and out-houses had been on fire; but when he arose and looked forth, he saw, as he conceived, the Heavens on Fire, in the same dread∣full manner as is before expressed. This is attested by eye-witnesses in both places, and a thing frequently and commonly spoken of in those parts. XII. Strange Balls of Fire flying from the Sun with great swiftness. An Inhabitant of Easberry in the County of Berks, a person both of quality and credit, walking with his Wife and Children in his Gar∣den, about six or seven of the clock at night (June 29. 1661.) per∣ceived on a sudden the Sun to be much obscured, as many times it is in a winter fog; from hence he with his Wife and Children were the more intent and earnest in looking upon it; and plainly saw, to their apprehension, a very great and incredible number of Balls of divers colours, some black, some blue, some reddish, in the form and bigness of Cannon Bullets; others of them were like great blocks and pieces of Timber; and some in form of Crosses: all which flew from the
Sun with great swiftness toward the East, though the wind was all the while at the North. During this time they could not discern that the Sun had made any progress in his course, but as it were in a burning flame turning round a small Cloud faster in its motion, than any wheel that ever they had observed. The truth of this is attested by the per∣sons themselves from whom comes the Information. XIII. A rushing Noise, like the marching of a body of Horse, heard in the Air. About the latter end of June, 1661, a grave godly Minister, then living at Hackney near London, while he was in the evening retired in a Room in his House, heard a great Rushing Noise, like the marching of a great Body of Horse, and coming forth into another Room, where his servant was, he enquired of her whether she did not hear the same Noise? upon her replying that she did hear it (and being extreamly affrighted at it, supposing Thieves had been about to break into the House) he desired to go forth into his Garden to satisfie him∣self further about it, from which his servant did most earnestly dis∣swade him; but he persisted in his resolution, and when he came with∣out his doors, he heard the same Noise for a good space of time, and perceived it was in the Air, but could discern nothing. This is re∣lated by the Minister himself, who is too wise and sober to be deluded by his fancy, and too honest and conscientious to abuse the Publisher with a false and untrue Information. XIV. The Sun setting with Streams of Blood, and the Moon shining without reflecting any shadow. In the Western parts of Somersetshire, upon the 29th of June 1661, the Sun was seen, by divers very credible persons, to set with streams of Blood; and the same night, there not being a Cloud to be seen in the Sky, the Moon shined without reflecting the least shadow, either of house, or tree, or hedge, or man, &c. Several persons took no∣tice of it, and were much astonished at it, from some of whom comes this Relation. XV. The form of three several Castles, seen in the Air. A Gentleman of very good credit and reputation, going from
London into Essex, about the beginning of July 1661, did plainly see in the Heavens, Southward, Northward, and Eastward, the forms of three several Castles. That which was in the South, he conceived was very like to the Castle of Windsor; and near unto it he saw the form of the Triumphant Arch in Cornhill. XVI. A Fiery Meteor in the form of a Bell falling down, and exceed∣ingly enlightning the Earth by its fall. By Letters from a credible and knowing person, dwelling at Ips∣wich, we are informed, That he being in company with a Gentleman of that Town (who had been formerly a Captain in the Kings Army, and lately one of the Life-Guard) did hear him relate the following story. Viz. That about the latter end of July 1661, himself and another, who was an Atturney's son in Norfolk, came down from London together, and travelling about ten of the clock at night, be∣tween Ilford and Rumford in Essex, they saw a Fiery Light, as broad as a Juggs mouth, come forth from between two Stars, which flashed into several streams of Fire, sparkling like our Rockets when they fly in the Air. It hovered a while about the two Stars beforementioned, but a little after grew bigger and very fiery, in the fashion of a Bell, as big as a great Candlestick, often flashing forth very great and ter∣rible flames of fire; and at last it fell down (as they apprehended) right before them: and though it was very dark before, yet by the fall of it, was for the present so light that they could discern the small pibble stones on the ground. Both their horses were so affrighted that they stood still and would not go forward; the Captain, after the fright was somewhat over, felt on his horses main, and when he came to his Inn, searched him with a Candle, supposing his hair had been singed, in regard the Fire fell so near them. The Travellers were both of them so exceedingly affrighted, that though before they had resolved to go that night to Chelmsford, yet now they took up at the next con∣venient place for lodging, which was Rumford, fifteen miles short of their intended Stage. The Captain affirms, that he hath formerly rid many hundred nights, and been frequently in the night time on the Guards in the time of the late Wars, yet he never saw the like dread∣ful sight before. XVII. Three Suns seen together in the Heavens. Upon the 29th of August 1661, a sober godly Minister, walking in
his Orchyard at Ipswich about ten of the clock in the morning, plainly saw in the Firmament Three Suns together, the one of them was some∣what bigger than the other two, which also had a great circle round about it, of the colour of a Rainbow: the two other Suns were on each side of this. A Contributer to this Collection received the In∣formation from the Ministers own mouth. XVIII. The Noise of the beating of a Drum, and of clattering of Ar∣mour, and the groans as of Dying-men, heard in the Air. About the beginning of September, 1661, upon a Monday or Tuesday, about two of the clock in the morning, at Stoak under Ham∣den in Somersetshire, four persons went forth together to cut Beans in the Field; and as they begun to enter upon their work, they heard first a very great Noise as if it had been the crack of a great Tree when it breaks and falls: They heard it again the second time, whereby they were so terrified, that they left off their cutting of Beans imme∣diately. After this, they heard the noise of the beating of a Drum; and one of the company being a Drummer, (and now in the King's Army) could distinguish the several beatings, who affirms there was first a Call beaten, and after that a Battail, which continued a good space of time, and in the midst of it a great Skreeking, and a harsh con∣fused noise like the clattering of Armour, and the groaning of Dying-men: This whole Scene was repeated four several times successively. They heard the Noise, sometimes as near them, sometimes as farther off, till the day brake, and then all ceased: only immediately after it, they heard a more than ordinary roaring and bellowing of the Cattel that were in the Pastures adjacent. These persons were so exceeding∣ly affrighted at what they heard, that they were sometimes resolved to run away for fear; but being four of them together, they animated one another, and stayed it out. They have been often examined and threatned about this thing, but they all joyntly attest the truth of the whole Relation, which is so notoriously known in those parts, that he that will take the pains to enquire after it, will receive ample satisfacti∣on in the premises. XIX. The form of a Lion sedent, and of a fair Castle, seen in the Heavens. About the eight of September 1661, several persons in the Western parts, did observe the Clouds to fly very swift and low, and at the end
of one of the Clouds, there was plainly seen the perfect form of a Lion sedent, who sa upon his hinder parts as a Dog is wont to do; and at the other end of the same Cloud, there was the compleat like∣ness of a very fair Castle, with Battlements and Towers. This is at∣tested by the Spectators themselves. XX. The form of three Pulpits, and men in them with black caps on their heads; and Armed men forcing them out, &c. seen in the Air. In the fore-mentioned month of September, some persons of known discretion and credit in the East part of Sussex, saw an Apparition of Clouds in the Air of various colours, some black, some white, &c. which were carried in the Air with a swift motion by a great wind. After the passing away of the Clouds towards the East, there appeared the likeness of three Pulpits, each Pulpit having a Canopy or sounding board with Pinacles over it; and in every of them he saw the form of a Man with a black Cap on his head: presently after there appeared a great company of Armed men close by them, and the Pulpit doors flew open, and the Armed men forced them out of the Pulpits, and one of them fell down as on the Earth; they were by these Armed men dragged from the Pulpits, and so all vanished. A while after there appeared two Carts, having wheels, and an Horse in each Cart, and at the end of each of them was tied a Rope, made fast to two Men, girded about the middle; and to the Spectators apprehensions they were drawn with their feet and toes, as if upon the ground, along the edge of a Cloud; and about that time it thundered and lightened, which made them with fear to depart immediately, and so they saw no more. XXI. The form of a great Cathedral, with Boats waiting upon it, seen in the Air. Much about the same time, in the same County of Sussex, near Greenstid, there was seen in the Air by several honest and credible persons, the form of a most magnificent and stately Cathedral, having three Boats, as it were, waiting upon it. It appeared some little time before the Sun arose, and continued plain and visible till the Sun was about an hour high. The Sky was very clear all the while, and they could not see any Clouds, but those which represented these things. The Information of both these particulars, comes from the Specta∣tors themselves.
XXII. A great body of Fire seen in the Heavens, and falling down, the Earth was exceedingly enlightened thereby. About Michaelmas last, 1661, several persons going a Journey together, and travelling near the borders of Wales, one morning very early, about three or four of the clock, on a sudden they saw a very great body of Fire fall down from the Heaven to the Earth, upon a Field near the Road wherein they were travelling, at which they were exceedingly amazed and terrified: They had not passed much fur∣ther, but they met with several persons that travelled on foot, who de∣clared to them that they saw the same dreadful appearance of Fire, and seemed to be much troubled and affrighted at it. XXIII. Two Suns seen together in the Heavens. A very honest and credible person, an inhabitant of  in Staffordshire, on the 14th of October, was riding between eight and nine of the clock in the morning between Draycote and Thilderson in the said County, and saw plainly two Suns in the Heavens, which con∣tinued as he conceived both alike for brightness about the space of three quarters of an hour: then one of them, viz. that which stood Easterly from the other, began to alter, and very much to change its colour, till it became of the colour of the Rainbow, and continuing so for a little space of time, at length it vanished away. The person himself who was the Spectator, did immediately assure us of the truth of the whole Relation. XXIV. The form of two Men, the one of them on horseback, and of a beau∣tiful Lady, appearing successively in an open Cloud. At or near the City of Bristol, about the same month of October, several persons (to the number of about fifteen or sixteen) having been at a Wedding, did after Dinner walk abroad by the River side called Seavern, some of them walked upon the bank close by the River, others of them at a greater distance, but they all, as they have since reported, saw a Cloud rise up out of the Water, much resembling the Kites with which the Boyes are wont to recreate themselves in the fields: It rose higher and higher, till (as they conceived) it became a
direct Cloud in its proper region; and as they stood looking up and gazing upon it, they plainly saw the Cloud open, and therein beheld (as they all apprehended) the form and proportion of a tall black Man, with a thin meager countenance, who seemed to move to and fro very swiftly, and then suddenly vanished; And after this the Cloud closed again, and within a very little while they saw it open the second time, and then there appeared a Man on horseback, who moved to and fro with very great swiftness for a very short space of time, and soon dis∣appeared: upon which, the Cloud immediately (as before) was shut up, but presently opening again the third time, there appeared the form of a very comely and beautiful Lady, who after she had for a while moved backwards and forwards (as the other two had done before) vanished also, and then the whole Cloud dispersed. None of the Spectators are in the least suspected to have any inclination to Fana∣ticism (as upon enquiry will be found to be true) therefore we doubt not but upon that account the Relation will gain credit amongst those, who otherwise are too slow of heart to believe these things. XXV. Three Suns seen together in the Heavens. Upon October 25. 1661, several persons, about seven in number, coming from Ashbritton to Exeter Market, as they came upon Hal∣don, a place six miles from Exeter, it being the time of the Sun rising, they saw the natural Sun arise gradually as it useth to do, but it was much redder than ordinary. As soon as the Sun appeared a little above the Horizon, they saw another Sun arising gradually also, as the former did, on the South side of it; which, when it had also gotten up above the Horizon, did shine with equal brightness (to their apprehension) with the former: Immediately after this they saw a third Sun ap∣pearing above the other two, not so big, or bright, but as visible as either of them. They all three continued a good space of time as it were in a Triangle: the persons coming near the City and going down a great Hill, lost the sight of them. Several others, who followed these seven men before-mentioned to the Market, saw the same thing, and have reported it to persons of eminency and great integrity in Exon; from whom we have received the foregoing Account: and we do not in the least doubt but any unprejudiced ingenuous person, upon his en∣quity, will find all that we have here inserted true, to a circumstance.
XXVI. A Blazing-Star seen in the Heavens at Canterbury. At the City of Canterbury, was seen (Octob. 31. 1661.) by eight credible persons together, about eleven of the clock at night, in the South-east, a very great Star, and of a red colour; under it appeared a very dark and black Cloud; there went from it upwards a stream of Fire, like (to use their own expressions) a Whisk wherewith clothes are wont to be brushed; after a while they saw it shoot Easterly (to their apprehension) about ten rod in length, and then turned into a fiery flame, as if an house had been set on fire; sometimes it flamed in two or three several flames, sometimes but in one, and in the space of about half an hour it was totally extinguished. It is credibly reported that the like Star was seen by others the night following, but of that our Intelligence is not so certain as of the former, of the truth where∣of we have received good satisfaction from persons of undoubted cre∣dit and reputation. XXVII. A Comet seen at Lambeth. About the month of November, 1661, several persons Inhabitants of Lambeth, betwixt eleven and twelve of the clock at night, did see in the Sky a very great Comet, which did blaze exceedingly for a good space of time, to the great terror and affrightment of the Beholders, who have often attested the truth of it to some that are Friends to this Collection. XXVIII. Dreadful Thunder and Lightning, happening at several times in the Winter season. There hath happened several times this last Winter the most dread∣full Thunder and Lightning that ever was known at that time of the year: particularly upon the 26th of November last, the whole day and some part of the night ensuing it did Thunder and Lighten after a most dreadfull and terrible manner: which the Inhabitants of the Bishoprick of Durham were very sensible of, and affected with. A Barn of the late High-Constables in that County, near to Kirby Castle, was burnt down to the ground by the Lightning. The like happened on the 18th of February (the day of the great
Storm, whereof we shall speak hereafter) in a most dreadful manner, insomuch, that some who were up, and walked in the Streets of London that morning about five of the clock, were exceedingly affrighted with it, fearing, as divers of them have affirmed, that they should have been burnt and consumed as they passed along the Streets. The like again happened on the 28th of February about five of the clock in the evening, and divers times before in the same month, and in several months this Winter, which the people have taken great notice of; such things rarely falling out at that season of the year. XXIX. A fiery Meteor seen in the Heavens, and falling down to the Earth in the form of a Horses head. About the third of December, 1661, at nine of the clock in the evening, there appeared suddenly in the Heavens at Abbots Langley in the County of Hertford a very great Light, which some of the Spectators at first thought had been the Moon; but recollecting themselves that the Moon was then entring the last quarter, it was im∣possible it should shine at that time of the night. After they had a while viewed it with fear and astonishment, they saw it fall down to the ground in the form of an Horses head (as they apprehended) and immediately the Sky became as dark as it was before. This is at∣tested by the Eye-witnesses, and upon enquiry thereof any sober man will receive satisfaction in the premises. XXX. A Blazing-Star with a tail like an Arrow, seen in Wales. Upon the 20th of December 1661. several persons (about seven in number) coming from Bishops-Castle Market in Wales, towards Mountgomery, did plainly see in the Heavens a great Blazing-Star, sometimes of a red, sometimes it was of a light colour, with a tail like an Arrow, blazing also. It continued perpendicular over them from Bishops-Moate till they came to a Common, called in the Welch lan∣guage Kefenzy-Cord; which, by the computation of persons acquainted in those parts, is about three miles. This Sight was so dreadful, that one of the company (being a woman) for very fear fell from her horse, but (through the goodness of God) we do not hear that she sustained any dammage by her fall. This thing is so publickly known
and spoken of in that County, that it is there generally received as a truth without the least hesitation. XXXI. The Apparition of a Man with a Bow in his hand, and a forked Arrow in it; and of another Man with a Sword in his hand, waving it over his head; with a Boat full of People in a praying posture. A person of credit being in Stationers Garden on the 25th of De∣cember, 1661, did see in the Sky the Apparition of a Man, in whose hand was a Bow drawn, with a forked Arrow in it; which after a short time disappearing, he saw the form of another Man with a Sword in his hand, waving it over his head: and after this he beheld a Boat full of People lifting up and down their heads as if they had been in a Praying posture. XXXII. The form of a Sword coming forth out of a Cloud, and hanging with the point downwards, sometimes over the Sea, and sometimes over the Land. In the latter end of December 1661, a Ship of Pool in Dorsetshire, went from the Isle of Weight toward Pool, and as they passed the Shingles, the Master saw a Cloud rising, which though but little at the first, yet encreasing more and more, made him very much to fear that they should be overtaken with a very great storm, and accordingly the Master and the Seamen prepared both themselves and their Ship for it. And before they had sailed much further, the Cloud encreased exceedingly, and out of it they plainly discerned to come forth a long Sword, with the hilt upward and the point downward, and at the point there were streams of fire as bright as the Sun, which darted into the Sea, and raised so great a Tempest in that part of the Sea over which it hung, that they could apparently see the waves beat with great violence one against another, and the Sea to run Tower high, as they called it; insomuch, that they all conceived, that a Ship of the greatest burden could not have lived, but would have been swallowed up in it. But the Master lay with his Ship by the Lee, and so felt none of the Storm, only saw it at some distance from them. But soon after the Storm ceased, for the Sword removed and hung over the Shore about Christ-Church, and what effects it had there we have received no information. This whole story the Master and Seamen, with some
Passengers in the Ship, especially one who was a Sea-Captain by Com∣mission from the late King in opposition to the Parliament-Party, do constantly affirm and testifie the truth of it. XXXIII. The Sun appearing and shining many hours before the time of Day-break. An Inhabitant of Abbots Langley in Hertfordshire, by trade a Carpenter, going abroad some hours before day, on the 6th of January 1661, it being exceeding dark, on a sudden he saw in the East, the appearance of some Light, and immediately after (as he conceived) the Sun arose: but after a very short time there was no appearance at all of it, and it was as dark as before till the usual time of the day-break. The party affirms the truth of this to all that speak with him about it, from some of whom this Information comes. XXXIV. Two Rainbows seen about the Moon, between seven and eight of the clock at night. On the 22d of January, 1661, an eminent Citizen of London and a very honest sober person, coming along Cannon-street between seven and eight of the clock at night, did see two perfect Rainbows about the Moon, which at that time did shine exceeding bright. This Gent. calling at a Friends house upon occasion of business, related to him and some others present what he had seen. Some of them affirmed, that being then abroad, they observed the same thing at the same time. This Relation we received immediately from the Citizen's own mouth, who is a person of more worth and honesty than to abuse us with a fiction. XXXV. A Rainbow seen in the Night. The next night after, (being Jan. 23. 1661) six credible persons being abroad together near Eggerton in Kent, about seven of the clock in the evening, when the Sky was very bright and clear, saw a perfect Rainbow in the Heavens, of the usual form and colours. Of the truth hereof, we have received satisfaction from unquestionable hands.
XXXVI. Fiery Meteors seen in the Heavens. Near Axmouth in Devonshire, there was seen by several persons (about the 29 of January 1661, at nine of the clock at night) a very great body of Fire in the Heavens, which gave a very great light, and was so terrible to the Beholders, that many of them thought the Day of Judgment had been come. XXXVII. A great Blazing-Star seen at Bednal-Green. Upon the 30th of the same month of Ianuary, an honest discreet person an Inhabitant of Bednal-Green, between seven and eight of the clock at night, saw a very great Blazing-Star towards the South-east, which did shine exceeding bright for a little space of time, and then disappeared. The Relation comes from the Gentlemans own mouth, who is a person every way meriting credit to be given to him in what he affirms as truth. XXXVIII. A great Blazing-Star seen at Mersham-Hatch in Kent. At Mersham-Hatch in Kent, twelve miles from Canterbury, was seen by very credible persons on the fore-mentioned day (the 30th of Ianuary 1661) a great Blazing-Star, about a quarter of a yard long, which did exceedingly enlighten the Air, and much terrifie the Be∣holders, who do avouch the truth of the Relation to all that make enquiry after it. XXXIX. A Blazing-Star seen near Pye-Corner. There was seen on the 11th of February 1661, at or near Pye-Corner, between nine and ten of the clock at night, another great Blazing-Star toward the West. This is affirmed by the Spectators themselves. XL. A Blazing-Star, with a Bow and Arrow, and Dart coming out of it, seen near Lanceston in Cornwal. Upon the 16th of February 1661, being the Lord's day, and two dayes before the great Wind, there was seen over St. Stephens near Lanceston in Cornwal, a great Blazing-Star, with a Bow, and an Ar∣row, and a Dart coming out of it. This was seen by above Twenty credible persons, inhabitants of the said place, who do confirm the truth of the Relation to all that make enquiry after it.
XLI. Two Moons seen in the Heavens together. Much about the same time, in an evening, were seen over Lanceston in Cornwal, Two Moons, by some persons of considerable quality and credit in that place, who have testified the truth of it. XLII. The form of a Man on a white Horse, appearing in the Air. At a Town called Arle, in or near the County of Gloucester, the People were so terrified at the great Storm, which happened on the 18th of Febr. 1661. (whereof more hereafter) that many of them for fear of prejudice that might come to their Cattel by the fall of their Barns, Stables, &c. carryed them forth into a Meadow near ad∣jacent to the Town; where they beheld in the Clouds the likeness of a Man upon a white Horse, and descending down into the Meadow, he rode up and down with wonderful swiftness, to the great terror of the Spectators, who for fear fled out of the Meadow, and looking back beheld the Man and Horse ascend again and were quickly car∣ried out of their sight. We doubt not of the truth of this Relation, having received it from honest credible persons, near adjoyning in their habitation to the Town before-mentioned, who do assure us of the truth hereof from some of the Spectators themselves. XLIII. A strange and dreadful noise heard in the Clouds. By an honest and credible person, an Inhabitant of Brixworth in Northamptonshire, we are certified, that a little before the Wind began to rise on the 18th of February, he heard a very strange and dreadful Roaring in the Clouds, which awakened him out of his sleep: he also gives us further assurance, that two of his Servants being up be∣times that morning, it was so calm, that they carried out and brought in through his yard a Candle lighted in their hands; but they heard a most dreadful Noise, like the schreeking of Women and Children, wherewith they were so terrified, that immediately they ran into the House; and presently after, that violent Storm began, whereof we shall give an exact account under the next head.
XLIV. A fiery Meteor in the form of a Dart, seen in the Heavens. A person of much honesty and credit affirms, that on the 25th of February, about half an hour past four in the afternoon, he plainly saw in Henfield Park in the County of Sussex, a strange fiery Meteor, about a yard in length; the head of it was somewhat sharp like a Dart, and the tayl of it a little jagged. It was not as he judged above three times the height of the Trees in the Park, and moved with a very swift motion from the Southwest to the Northeast. He viewed it till the tall Oaks intercepted his sight of it. A Contributer to this Collection received this Information immediately from the Gentle∣man's own mouth who saw it. XLV. A strange Comet seen in Kent. On the second of March last, 1661, about eight of the clock at night, was seen at Creyford in Kent, by several persons of known dis∣cretion and integrity, a prodigious Comet, of about half so big as the Moon when she is at the full, and of a like colour as that Planet is at her rising, viz. as red as blood. It was at first by some of the Spe∣ctators apprehended to be the Moon, but that was impossible, seing the Moon was then within eight dayes of her change: Venus also ap∣peared at the same time in another part of the Heavens. This Comet did several times dart forth six streams, three on each side, of a very considerable length; it moved with a pretty swift motion in the view of the Spectators, till it descended under the Horizon. That which renders this Comet the more prodigious, is, that none of those persons could ever discern it since that night, though they have diligently and frequently watched for it, which is contrary to the common observa∣tion of Comets, which have usually continued a considerable space of time. This whole Relation is attested by a Gentleman of quality, one of the Spectators, from whom immediately we received it. XLVI. A strange Star seen at Canterbury. On the 20th of March, 1661, about nine of the clock at night, was seen at Canterbury a strange fiery Apparition like a Star, but as big
as twenty ordinary Stars; there seemed to be under it an open door, and fire within it like an hot burning coal: there were streams of a fiery colour which went from the Star, about three or four foot in length. It descended from the South-east, and came over the body of the Cathedral. The Spectators beheld it about the space of half an hour, till the high Tower (called Bell-Harry Steeple) took it out of their sight. This whole Relation comes immediately from several credible persons who were Eye-witnesses. XLVII. Strange fiery Meteors seen in Southwark. Upon the 7th of April, 1662, between two and three of the clock in the morning, after a very great storm of Rain, the Sky being exceed∣ing dark, there appeared in Southwark on a sudden an extraordinary shining Light, which was so great, that some of the Inhabitants there did rise out of their beds, and looking out towards the South-east, saw a plain appearance of Fire, which was as it were heaps or balls of Fire at some distance one above the other, the lower end whereof was above the tops of the houses. It did so enlighten the Rooms as if a Candle or Torch had been burning therein: it continued so for above a quarter of an hour, and then it began to darken at the lower end first, and so higher and higher till it totally disappeared, and then the darkness was as great as it was before. This Relation was received from an Eye-witness. XLVIII. Fiery Meteors flying swiftly, and making a strange noise in the Air. Between nine and ten of the clock at night on the ninth of April, 1662, was seen by several persons near Horsey-Downs, an appearance of Fire in the Sky, the fore-part whereof seemed round, like the Moon when she is at the full; the body of it to their sight, seemed as big as a large Sign-post, about four or five yards in length, with many small points or streams of fire-issuing from it. The motion of it was ex∣ceeding swift, from the West towards the North, and as it went it made a noise much like the noise of a Cannon-Bullet when it flyes through the Air. It neither broke in pieces, nor fell down, so far as the Spectators were able to discern, but on a sudden disappeared as if it had gone into the Clouds again.
XLIX. A Body of Fire seen in the Air near Horsey-Downs. Upon the tenth of April 1662, between eight and nine of the clock in the evening, an appearance of a Body of Fire in the Air, very much in all particulars resembling the fore-mentioned, was seen by divers other credible persons near the same place. It took its course from the North towards the East, and gave a report like a small Peece of Ord∣nance at its disappearing. Both these particulars are verified by the Spectators themselves, from some of whom this Information comes. L. The form of a Lion seen in the Heavens. Upon the 23d of April 1662, between seven and eight of the clock at night, several persons being in West-Smithfield, saw in the South-east a very bright Cloud, wherein appeared the perfect form and shape of a little Lion; the tayl was bushy like the tayl of a Fox or Squirrel, the colour was of a fiery flame, and round about the bright Cloud was a very large black Cloud. The Lion had many motions to and fro, and his tayl trisked very often; out of his mouth came smoak of a yel∣lowish colour, which about a yard distance from his mouth gathered together like the crown of a Hat, and then suddenly turned into a flash of Fire like Lightning: thus it did several times, and continued about a quarter of an hour, and then vanished. There were at least twenty persons in one company who were the Spectators, and from some of them we received this Information. LI. A dreadful Noise like the report of great Guns, with the beating of Drums, heard in the Air. On the first of May 1662, being a very clear and calm day, about two or three miles from Norwoolsham in the County of Norfolk, seve∣ral sober and honest men did plainly hear a very dreadful noise in the Air, like the report of great Guns, the noise was as great as if Two Thousand Musquets had been all fired together: They heard also very perfectly at the same time several Drums beat for a good space of time together, to the great affrightment of all that were present, who were many very credible persons, and from several of them this Infor∣mation was received.
LII. Three Moons seen all together in the Heavens. Upon the eighth day of May, 1662, about eleven of the clock at night, in Petty-France near Moor-Fields, were seen by divers credible persons, three Moons; one of them was a full Moon (though then it was but the very next day after the change) and a half Moon on each side thereof; and in one of the half Moons did appear the perfect re∣semblance of a black Man. All which continued for the space of about half an hour, and then the Moons disappeared, and the Sky became exceeding bright and clear, and no Moon at all to be seen. This was seen by many honest and sober People Inhabitants in Petty-France, and from divers of them this Information comes. LIII. A Pillar of Fire turned first into a Blazing-Star, and then into three Moons. On the tenth of May 1662, in the evening, a very honest, discreet, credible person, seeing something extraordinary appearing in the Hea∣vens, immediately called forth divers of his Neighbours, who with him (to the number of thirty or forty) beheld a great Pillar of Fire rouling up and down in the Sky, which afterwards turned into a Bla∣zing-Star, and then into three Moons, and at last it changed into the likeness of a Sythe or Bow: at length after much rouling to and fro in the Heavens, it fell down (as they conceived) about the May-pole in the Strand. This Information was received from some of the per∣sons themselves who were the Spectators. LIV. Two great Stars seen in the Heavens, and in one of them the likeness of two Legs of a Man. At a Parish called St. Stephens near Salt-Ash in the County of Cornwal, on the 11th of May 1662. four dayes before the Queen landed, about a quarter of an hour within night, was seen by divers credible persons a very great Star, which seemed to be foursquare, and from it streamed forth, or hung out, the likeness of two Legs of a Man, with compleat Feet, of a bloody or a deep fiery red colour; then ap∣peared a black square thing, about two or three inches broad (as the Spectators conceived) which interposed between the Star and the
bloody Legs, yet so as that both were still very clearly discerned. This continued till there appeared another great Star, of the like bright∣ness, but not altogether so large as the former; this Star was in a con∣tinual motion to and fro, and seemed to contend with the fore-men∣tioned black thing, and the Legs, till both of them did totally disap∣pear, and at length it prevailed against the other great Star also, and got into the place of it; and after that it immediately vanished, and the Moon appeared according to its course, being then about four dayes old. This is confirmed as a certain truth by some of the Spectators themselves. LV. Four Suns seen together in the Heavens. On the 18th of May 1662, being Whitsunday, about four miles from Sittingbourn towards Feversham in the County of Kent, three very credible persons took special notice that the Sun a little before its setting did appear somewhat bigger and redder than ordinary, and while they beheld it, there presently appeared two Suns, the lower of which (according to their apprehensions) was not by one third part so big as the upper; they stood about half a foot asunder from each other: and after they had for a little space of time taken notice of this, with great admiration, there appeared a third Sun between the other two, which was longer and not so round as they were; it presently divided it self into two Suns, which were both somewhat long, and of an oval figure. They beheld these four Suns, standing almost in a square, for about half a quarter of an hours time, and all the while they shone exceeding bright; afterwards three of them by degrees dis∣appeared, and they saw the true Sun set according to its usual course. This is attested by the persons themselves, Eye-witnesses, from whom immediately this Account was received. LVI: The form of a Lion, a Ʋnicorn, and a Bear, together with an Ar∣my of Horse and Foot; as also a House all on fire, and the form of another house covered over with Gold, seen in the Heavens. Upon the 29th of May, 1662, several persons of credit at Bamfield Heath not far from Reading in the County of Berks, did see in the Heavens the perfect forms of a Lion, a Unicorn, and a Bear, all which did soon vanish, and then appeared a party of Horse and Foot; and
not far from them there seemed to be the form of an House all on fire; and when that was consumed, there appeared in the room thereof the form of a very glorious Fabrick, which seemed to them to be covered over with Gold, and for some good space of time they beheld the Horse and Foot to be as a Guard round about the House: but after∣wards the Horse seemed to march one way, and the Foot another, and so all presently vanished. The truth of this is confirmed by several of the Spectators, and is publickly known, believed, and spoken of by the People in those parts. LVII. The form of a Lion and a Dragon, two great Giants, and several Naked Men with their heels upwards; together with divers Castles, Cities, Towns and Villages; as also Blood and Fire; seen in the Heavens. By Letters from several persons on Shipboard in the Downs, we are assured, that on the sixth of June 1662, about two or three of the clock in the morning there appeared in the Heavens a Lion to the East, and a Dragon to the West, who moved towards each other and met with very great force, encountring each other: Then not far from them was seen the form of two great Giants, and two or three Naked Men, lying with their heels upwards. In another part of the Heavens there was seen the form of Castles, Cities, Towns, and Villages; and in another place Blood and Fire. All these things were seen by most of the Seamen who were then in the Downs. And as we have been credibly informed, a Captain or Commander in one of the Ships there did immediately go on shore, and took Post, and came to the King to give his Majesty an account of it. LVIII. Two Suns seen together in the Heavens, and in each of them the appearance of a Man on horseback, together with two great Armies. On Thursday June 19. 1662, in the evening, between Upper-Comp∣ton and Trent in the County of Somerset, the Sky being much clouded and dark, so that it was thought the Sun was set, on a sudden the Sun began to break forth, but before it came to its brightness it appeared very fiery and bloody, and the reflexion of it upon a Town called King-weston (not far from the Towns before-mentioned) was such, that the Spectators thought it had been on fire: After this it shone
very clear and bright, and in it was seen a Man on horseback very perfectly: in a short space after there appeared another Sun, about two yards distance (as was conceived) from the first Sun on the North side of it, then immediately appeared very plainly a Man on horse∣back in this other Sun; also both these Men on horseback for some small space of time stood and faced each other: after that, on the West side of the real Sun, was seen a great Army fixed, but because of the multiplicity of them, it could not be easily discerned whether they were Horse or Foot: But there was plainly seen another Army both of Horse and Foot coming out of the North, and marching very near the Nor∣thern Sun, and then they made a halt for a very short space of time, and then moved again, and marched very swiftly into the Northern Sun, upon which the Man on horseback in the first Sun, checked his horse, and moved backward to the West, and to the head of the Western Army, which remained fixed. Immediately after this, both Suns joyned together in one, and the Northern Army advanced to∣wards the North-west point, and that, with the other Army also, was seen no more; and immediately the Sun set, and upon its going down was very bloody and fiery; and the Fields on both sides for about the space of four or five miles appeared as if they had been full of Fire and Blood, to the great astonishment of the Spectators. This is testi∣fied by an Eye-witness. LIX. The form of a Coffin, together with two Armies encountring each other, seen in the Heavens. At a place called Luggon in the West of Cornwal near to the house of one Mr. Basset (a Gentleman of great account, who was then with his Wife at London, where not long after they both died) on the 22. of June 1661, about six men were very early in the morning cutting Furses, and beholding the Sun as it arose, they apprehended it to be much redder and bigger than ordinary, at which they were somewhat astonished, and all of them leaving their work which they were about, fixed their eyes upon it, and after a while they saw near unto it the form of a Coffin, which (as they affirm) was as clear and plain to their sight as if it had been on the Earth. After this they saw the Sun (as they conceived) divided into three parts, each of which seemed to be very sharp at both ends; there was a pretty space in the middest be∣tween the parts wherein they clearly beheld the form of a Man riding on a Horse, with Saddle and Bridle, shaking the Bridle. And after
this they beheld a very great number of People, which were form∣ed into two Bodies, and did for some space of time encounter each with other; but suddenly a cloud enterposed between them and the Sun, and the whole disappeared. This the Spectators have de∣clared to divers, and do offer to confirm the truth of it by their Oathes. This Information we received too late to put it in its right place; but looking upon it as considerable, and having abundant satisfaction of the truth of it, rather than to omit the publishing of it, we beg the Readers Prudence, though it be here disorderly in∣serted. LX. The form of a flying Horse, seen in the Air. At a Town called Lavenham in Suffolk, was seen by a little Youth on the 13th of July 1662, being the Lord's day, between five and six of the Clock in the evening, the form of a flying Horse in the Air; and being much startled at it, immediately acquainted his Father with it, who when he saw it, called forth several of his Neighbours, who (to the number of about Twenty together) be∣held it till it disappeared. This is attested by several of the Eye-witnesses, and is generally received as a Truth in that Town, ma∣ny of the Spectators being men of very good credit and reputation. LXI. Two Suns seen in Ireland. Intelligence hath come from very credible persons in Ireland, that very lately at Westmeath in that Kingdom, were seen two Suns together. Some Letters do affirm, that the Bishop of that place himself did see them, and doth testifie the truth of this Relation. But we refer the Reader to his further enquiry for better satis∣faction. LXII. The appearance of an Arm, and Sword striking the Moon, and a Vail like folding Doors clapping together upon her, seen in the Heavens. Also upon the same 13th of July 1662. about 11 of the Clock at Night, there was discovered over the Moon, in Thames-Street, an
Arm and a Sword, and the Arm seemed to move the Sword, and with it to strike the Moon eight several times successively. The Sword being of a more thick and dusky Colour, did seem much to darken the Moon when it struck it; and then the Arm and Sword vanishing, there seemed as it were a Vail, meeting from both sides like folding doores, to clap together upon the Moon; which vail seemed to be of a sad red or blood colour. This is attested by an Eye-witness. LXIII. Three Moones seen together in the Heavens. About the 14th of July 1662. near Chard, in the County of De∣von, at ten of the Clock in the night, were seen three Moones to∣gether in the Heavens; the Truth whereof is attested by many of the Spectators. LXIV. Very sweet and melodious Musick heard, and the Form of several Armies of Men, Youths and Children, seen marching with great swiftness in the Air. On the same 14th of July 1662, eight or nine persons, Inhabi∣tants of North-Willingham, in the County of Lincoln, being at work together in the Field, near Market Rason, about two hours before the setting of the Sun, did on a suddain hear a most melodious sound of Musick, at which they were much amazed; and looking up into the Air (from whence they conceived the sound came) they plainly saw a yellowish Cloud, let down very low, which to their apprehensions seemed to be toward, if not directly over the City of Lincoln, about twelve Miles distant from them. In this Cloud they saw a great company of Men marching towards them in a Mi∣litary posture, like an Army in Rank and File; under their Feet seemed to be a very black mist, which moved with very great swift∣ness; they came very near to the Spectators, passing by them in very good order, and so went quickly out of their sight. After these there immediately followed, in the very same manner, a great company of Youths; and after them, in the same manner, a great company of Children; the Musick all this while sounding louder and louder till at length the whole disappeared. This is a thing publickly known in those parts of the Country, and no doubt at all made of it, being unanimously and constantly attested by all the Spectators.
Several PRODIGIES and strange APPARITIONS, seen on the Earth; together, with many dreadful and violent STORMS, which have happened from the Month of April, 1661. to the Month of June, 1662. I. A Ball of Fire coming down a Chimney, did much prejudice to the House, and to a Body that lay dead in it. ABout the 22d of April 1661, at a Town called Street, near Lewes in Sussex, there died one Mr. Dubble, a man while he lived, of a most debauched conversation, and a noted Enemy to Religion and all the zealous Professors of it. Not long after he was dead, as his Widow and Children were sitting toge∣ther in a low Parlour, there came down the Chimney (in a great and dreadful storm of Thunder and Lightning) a Ball of Fire, to their great terrour and affrightment: It burned the Wainscot very much, and at last made its way through the Ceeling into an upper Room, where the Corps was laid out, and did some injury to it; and going through se∣veral Rooms, and doing much prejudice to the House, it went out at the top of the House. The Gentlewoman and the whole Family were very much terrified at it, and upon this occasion the Funeral was sud∣denly solemnized, some dayes sooner than otherwise was intended: And some of the Neighbourhood do confidently report, that the Coffin which was carried to be buried was very light, and there was a great jealousie that the Corps was carried away in that dreadful storm be∣fore mentioned: But whether that be true or no, is very uncertain; and therefore it is left to the Reader to make further enquiy after it. The foregoing Relation is testified by some of Mr. Dubbles Family and near Relations, and is a thing notoriously known amongst the Neigh∣bourhood in all those parts of the Country. II. A Man on horseback combating with a Boy; and another Man on horseback, and a Woman endeavouring to get up behind him, seen in an imaginary Tree. Upon the 14th of June 1661, a person of good credit and discre∣tion, going from Redburn to Flamsteed in the County of Hertford,
a very great storm did arise, and entring into a Common Field, saw (to his thinking) a very great Tree, standing in the hedge of the said Field, at which he was much amazed, because he very well knew that there was no such Tree growing there before: He had not long viewed this Tree, but presently there appeared in it the likeness of a Gentleman on horseback in a warlike posture, combating with a little Boy in the said imaginary Tree: And passing on a little further, there appeared in the Hedge another Tree, wherein was a Gentleman on horseback, and with him a Gentlewoman attempting three or four times to get up be∣hind him; but the horse seemed very unruly▪ yet at last she got up, and immediately all vanished. The Spectator was so exgly affrighted at what he saw, that it was three or four dayes after be∣fore he could recover himself: His acquaintance taking notice, both by his countenance, and melancholy postures, that something trouble him, enquired the cause, and after much entreaty, he gave them an account of the foregoing Relation; which a chief Contributer to this Collection hearing of, went to the person and received the whole from his own mouth. III. The appearance of a Man, white on the one side, and red on the other, crying out three times, Murder, Murder, Murder. In the same month, and much about the same time mentioned in the foregoing particular, several persons in a Corn-field between Mar∣ket-street and Dunstable in the County of Hertford, have at several times seen the appearance of a Man, who on one side was white, and on the other of a blood-red colour; and still, as it came near them, it cryed out three times, Murder, Murder, Murder. One man, having heard of this Spectrum, resolved to wait for it, and if it came, to speak to it. And about two of the clock in the afternoon (which was the usual time of its appearance) it came: but the person was so affrighted, that he was not able to speak to it, but heard it cry as before, Mur∣der, Murder, &c. and so it vanished. This is attested by credible persons eye-witnesses. IV. A great Storm of Hail, which killed several persons. About the month of July 1661, in Margrets Parish, seven miles wide of Hereford, there happened a most violent Storm of Hail, the stones which fell were as big as half-peny loves, by which the Steeple
was beaten down, and thereby several persons killed, and many Cattel were also slain by the storm. This was signified by an Inhabitant of that Town to a Friend of his in London, some of whose Relations (as he writes) lost their lives by the fall of the Steeple. This Letter some of the Contributers to this work have seen, and taken a Copy of it: yet, because an honest Citizen who was lately at Hereford, did not there hear the confirmation of this story, we remit the Reader to a further enquiry after the truth of it, and to believe it as he can receive satisfaction, by an authentick confirmation of it. V. A strange Monster brought forth by a Woman, at West-Greensteed in Sussex. About the 26th of August 1661, a Woman, an Inhabitant of West-Greensteed in the County of Sussex, of a very ill fame in respect of her conversation, being at a Jovial Meeting at one Heaths, the Parson of the place (one also of a very scandalous life, and who lately came in the room of Mr. Tredcroft an able godly Minister, but turned out for Non-conformity) began to be very ill, and did often say, that she thought the Devil was in her belly: her husband also would fre∣quently say or swear, That if his Wife was with Child, it was by the Devil. The Woman being in great pain at the said Heath's house, went presently home and sent for the Midwife, and not long after was delivered of a strange monstrous birth, which by some persons of cre∣dit, who were present at her labour, is thus described: The head of it was like the head of a Colt, the ears were long, and behind them little stumps of horns; the eyes were exceeding great, and stood some∣what higher than the usual place: It had a main which reached from the head to the back; the arms and hands were like the fore-legs and feet of a Colt: from the middle downwards it was like a Man-child, but only hairy, and the legs and feet were like the hinde-legs and feet of a Colt. The Midwife was so affrighted at this birth that she fell ill immediately, and was not recovered in some weeks after; And having since been enquired of about it by some of her honest Neighbours, she professeth, that she was so extreamly affrighted at the sight of it, that she is not able to give a perfect account of what she was instrumental to bring into the world; Only she saith, that it had a head like a Colt, and ears like a Sheep, and two stumps of horns upon its head, and two great staring eyes which stood behind the head: It was mouthed and nosed like a Colt, and from the waste downwards like other Children.
Thus much the Midwife hath affirmed to be true; the defect of whose Relation is supplyed by persons of known integrity, who were present when this Monster was brought into the world, of whom we have received the afore-mentioned Information. And indeed, the notority of the thing is such, that it is universally received as truth by all in that part of the Country. VI. A great Storm of Hail, the stones were three inches about. Upon the second of October 1661, towards the evening, there hap∣pened at Andover, in the County of Southampton, and the Towns near it, a very terrible Storm of Hail; some of the stones were measured, and were three Inches about. A Citizen of quality who lay at An∣dover that night, saw and measured the Hail-stones, and doth testifie the truth of this Relation. VII. A Woman delivered of a monstrous Birth. An Inhabitant of the Town of Woodbridge in Suffolk, was on the 23d of October 1661, in the afternoon delivered of a monstrous Birth, a true Description whereof from a person of discretion, an eye-witness, take as followeth. It had four legs, and four arms and hands, two backs, and but one head, which was somewhat bigger than the or∣dinary proportion of a Childs: It had a very sweet and lovely visage; the neck was very great; the two bodies were joyned together from the navel upwards, and from the navel downwards two female bo∣dies divided, with the perfect appearance of every part, not so much as a nail of any of the fingers or toes wanting. This Description we received immediately from an eye-witness. VIII. A Gentlman assaulted by two Ravens, and afterwards fell sick, and the Bell of its own accord tolled three hours together, till the breath was out of his Body, and then ceased. About the time before-mentioned, one Mr. Martin of Devonshire, son to Sir Nicholas Martin deceased, walking in his Grounds, was on a sudden most furiously assaulted by two Ravens, who endeavoured to have picked out his eyes. He defended himself as well as he could till he came to an heap of stones, and then took up a stone and flung
at the Ravens; immediately he felt a very great pain in the arm which he threw the stone with. He made what haste he could into his house, and grew worse and worse, so that within two or three dayes he was forced to send for the Doctor; and as his servant was going for him, two Ravens set upon him also; but he defended himself against them, and so far as we are informed, received no dammage by them. When the Doctor came the Gentleman was past recovery, and before he died, the Bell in the Steeple tolled three hours together of its own ac∣cord: but assoon as the breath went out of his Body, the Bell ceased tolling. This was received from a near Relation of the said Mr. Mar∣tin, and is most certainly true. IX. A Mag-pye disturbing an Episcopal Parson while he was preaching, and the Bishop also while he was dismissing the Congregation with the Blessing. About the month of September 1661, when the late Bishop of Chester, Dr. Walton, had conveened the Clergy of his Diocess at Chester, to express their affections to the King upon the Act of Bene∣volence, one Rauson, Parson of Tatnal, was appointed to preach; a person noted for his zeal to Superstition and Will-worship; and al∣most half his Sermon-time a Mag-pye sate upon the sounding-board over his head, and did often disturb the Parson, and cause much laugh∣ter in the Congregation by her chattering tone, which she frequently repeated during that time: And when the Sermon was finished, the Bishop being present (according to the mode) addressed himself to dis∣miss the Congregation with the Blessing: which the Mag-pye per∣ceiving, removed presently from the Pulpit, and sate directly over the Bishops Canopy, and, as before, did interrupt the Bishop himself while he was officiating in the close of their devotion. This is a thing no∣toriously known and attested by several discreet persons, and no Pha∣naticks, eye-witnesses. X. The appearance of an old Church seen in a Wood, by a man as he was making Faggots. On or near the 25th of November 1661, an honest poor Labour∣ing-man, was fagotting of Wood in Bexly-Wood in the County of Kent, about ten miles distant from London: And as he was working, there appeared very near to him the form of an old Churchovergrown,
with Ivy; at which sight, being very much surprized, and distrusting the evidence of his eyes, he felt on it, and tryed with his Bill whether it was real stone or no, and to his thinking it was. And besides, he saith, that as he made his Faggots, they did brush against the Walls of it: and for further satisfaction he attempted to go into it, but then he could not discover either Door or Window though before he thought he saw both. It continued about the space of four or five hours, and then of a sudden disappeared, not leaving the least sign thereof behind it. He affirms further, that it was very like a Church, called Stone-Church, about five miles distant from the place where he saw this appearance; which was, as we are credibly informed, one of those Churches which were fired by Lightning, a little before the beginning of our late Civil Wars. This whole Relation was taken from the man's own mouth by a person of quality, who went over to him for satisfaction in the particulars, which he received according to the Account which hath already been given; and is notoriously known by all the Neighbourhood in those parts. XI. Young Quinces in the beginning of December. At the beginning of the month of December 1661, in a Minister's Orchard not far from Uxbridge, there was a Quince-tree full of little young Quinces newly knotted. This is attested by another godly Minister, who being there on some occasions, was an eye-witness hereof, and from whose mouth immediately this Information comes. XII. Young Pears growing on a Pear-tree in the month of December. Also in the same month of Decemb. 1661. there were Pears grow∣ing on a Pear-tree belonging to the Earl of Manchester, at Kmbolton Castle in the County of Huntingdon. Two of them were sent up to the said Eal, the one was about the bigness of the top of ones thumb, the other somewhat less. It is reported by good hands, that the King himself had the sight of them. The Information was received from a person of credit and discretion, who was an eye-witness.
XIII. Young Apples growing on an Apple-tree in the month of Decemb. An Inhabitant of Kingstrope in Northamptonshire near the Town of Northampton, had growing upon an Apple-tree in his Orchard in the same month of December, 1661, divers young Apples, which, though not very big, were very discernable by the Spectators. The Tree on which they grew was a young Tree, and grew up from a Kernel, and did never bring forth any fruit to perfection. It did bear some few Apples the Summer before, at the usual time of bearing, but they were little worth. In the same Orchard also about twenty years since, a Tree did bear fruit twice in the same year, as this hath done this year. All these last mentioned particulars were spoken by the owner of the Orchard unto some honest credible persons, who also saw the Apples, and have attested the truth of the whole Relation under their hand-writing. XIV. A young Raven hatched in the month of December. In the same month of December likewise, at the fore-mentioned Town of Kingstrope, or not far from it, in the said County of North∣hampton, a Raven did hatch and bring forth a young one, which af∣ter it was fledge, was taken, and is now kept tame by a person who lives not far from the place before-mentioned: and a Citizen of Lon∣don, a man of credit, having occasions to travel that way about the month of January last, saw the Raven; and from him this Informa∣tion comes. XV. Young Rooks in the month of December. Much about the same time, an Inhabitant in Staynes in the County of Middlesex, and a person of credit, not in the least suspected for a Phanatick, did upon some occasions travel to St. Albans in the Coun∣ty of Hertford, and in his Journey about Mims he saw a Rook feed∣ing her young ones, which were newly fledge. This he hath since re∣ported to divers persons, from some of whom this Relation was re∣ceived.
XVI. An Owl disturbing the Cathedral Musick at Chester. About the eighth of December 1661, in the Cathedral at Chester, there appeared an Owl, and a little before the Organs began to play she set up her Noat, and likewise all the while they played she held a Part with them, and so continued for some time after the Musick had done. This is a thing so publickly known in that City, there being so many present who were witnesses to it, that we suppose the Vergers themselves will not have the face to deny it. XVII. The Army of Horse seen in Wales. Several persons of good credit Inhabitants of Weston, a mile distant from Mountgomery in Wales, being sworn and examined before the Right Honourable Edward Lord Herbert Baron of Cherbury and Castle-Island; and Francis Fits-Herbert Esq; Barrister at Law, and Capital Bayliff of the Borough of Mountgomery; and Rob. Griffeths Esq; Justices of the Peace for the said County of Mountgomery, do relate and depose as followeth: That upon the 20th of December, 1661, (being the day of the Parliament's Adjournment) about Sun∣set, they, the said Inhabitants of Weston, did discover a great number of Horsemen, about four hundred paces distant from them, in a mar∣tial order marching two on breast, in the Road leading from Gwerney∣gow in the said County, towards Mountgomery Leugure upon the said Common. And that they, observing how long they marched in their view, concluded, that the said Horsemen, though in their marching they made no stand at all, were at least half an hour in passing by, before the Rear of them attained to the place where they first saw the Front: So that though there was some difference amongst the Specta∣tors in their conjectures about the number, some judging them to be near a Thousand Horse, yet all agree thus far, that upon their view they appeared to be Five hundred at the least. The Deponents be∣ing much amazed at so sudden an appearance of such a great number of Souldiers (as they conceived them to be) concluded they were an Army of Roundheads or Phanaticks going to relieve the Prisoners at Mountgomery (there being at that time several Gentlemen and Mini∣sters of that County under restraint in a Martial Prison in the said
Town) Therefore they instantly dispatcht away one of their number to Mountgomery, to acquaint John Mason the Keeper of the said Prison, with the approach of this Party of Horse, that he might secure his Prisoners from a Rescue; and as he was going he lost sight of the Horsemen (they being by that time marched into a Valley out of his sight) But he recovering an Hill, which he was to pass over, and cal∣ling forth some Neighbours (they all having the advantage of a fair prospect) had again a full view of them, and then could easily distin∣guish their Horses to be of several colours, as White, Gray, Black, Bay, &c. They also discovered that they marched in three several Bodies, and betwixt every Body two Horse-Colours flying. The aforesaid Messenger, with some others of the Spectators, made what haste they could after them, and endeavoured to overtake the Rear of them; but they seemed still to be at the same distance from them, and could never get nearer to them than about the space of one hun∣dred yards. And further the said Deponents do affirm, That there was a man thatching all that day upon an House, which in the sight of the Depo∣nents the Horsemen did march close by; who being demanded by them, whether he saw that great Company of Souldiers which passed by the house? replyed, that he saw none. It is also most certain, that there were no tracks of the Horses either that night, or the next morning visible to any of those, who went purposely to view the Wayes: Whereupon, they conclude it to be a wonderful Apparition; and it is indeed a matter of great admiration and astonishment to the whole Country, it being so publickly known to be a most real and certain truth. It is also credibly reported by very Honourable persons, that the King and Council have had a true Information of the particular Depo∣sitions from the Lord Herbert, and are satisfied in the truth of them. XVIII. A Spectrum in the likeness of old Mr. Blagrave, seen near Reading. It is credibly reported by many honest and discreet persons, Inha∣bitants of Reading in the County of Berks, That about January last, there appeared several times a Spectrum in the likeness of old Mr. Blagrave, who while he lived dwelt in an House of his own near Reading, and when he dyed gave it to Mr. Daniel Blagrave, one of
the Long Parliament, and also one that sate upon the Tryal of the late King, by reason whereof this House is forfeited to the King, who hath bestowed it upon one who now lives in it. The Spectrum, as it is reported, hath sometimes met with some of this Gentleman's servants, either in or about the House, and hath warned them upon a great penalty to leave the House, that the Proprietor may enjoy it. That which makes this to be the more taken notice of amongst the people there, is, That after old Mr. Blagrave dyed, and Mr. Daniel Blagrave's elder Brother had by some unjust practices obtained pos∣session of the said House, the same Spectrum then appeared, and did warn out the present Inhabitants, saying to them several times, that the House belonged not to them, but to the said Daniel; upon which the difference betwixt the two Brothers was suddenly composed, and Daniel had quiet possession of the House according to that Settlement which old Mr. Blagrave had made, until the time of the late Wars, and that Reading was a Garrison for the King; at which time the King bestowed it upon one that begged it: But he and his servants were often disquieted by the same Spectrum, and were warned spee∣dily to depart, and resign up the possession again to Daniel Blagrave, who had a just and legal right to it. And not long after the Garrison of Reading being reduced by the Parliaments Forces under the Com∣mand of the Earl of Essex, Daniel Blagrave was repossessed of his House, and so enjoyed it till it became now forfeited to his Majesty, because of his Attainder by the late Act of Parliament. All these se∣veral passages are attested by many honest and credible persons, and we presume, that upon enquiry the whole Narrative will be found to be certainly true. XIX. A Troop of Horse seen in Notinghamshire. On the 28th of January 1661, betimes in the morning, near Wor∣sup in Notinghamshire, there was an appearance of a gallant Troop of Horse marching towards one Mr. Leak's house (who was High-Sheriff the last year, and a violent opposer of sober and good men, who were not of his perswasion in matters of Religion) several But∣chers, and others, who were travelling toward Worsup, met this Troop in the Road, and gave them the way, and stood still to behold them as they marched along; who affirm that the Riders were very goodly proper persons, and exceeding well armed and mounted: The Officers (as they report) marched in their respective places, and the Troopers
kept their ranks exactly. Also they report, that in their sight one of the horses threw his Rider, who mounted again presently with great agility, and fell immediately into his own rank and place again. Mr. Leak having speedy intelligence of the marching of this Troop towards his house, forthwith hasted away to the Marquess of Newcastle, who lived not far from him, and informed his Lordship, that the Phana∣ticks were up in great numbers. The Marquess (as it is reported) upon enquiry found, that no Troops either such as were under his Lordships command, or any other sort of people, did really march in an hostile manner that day, and therefore concluded that it was an Appearance like to that in Wales on the 20th of December, whereof we have before given an exact and perfect account. This is a thing much spoken of in the Country, and by very credible and knowing persons reported to be most certainly true; But we remit the Reader to a further enquiry for more full and ample satisfaction in these parti∣culars. XX. A dreadful Storm of Fire and Hail mingled together. On the first of February 1661, about six of the clock in the evening, there happened about Northampton a very strange and dreadful storm of Hail, and Fire mingled with the Hail in some places. It did run up∣on the ground in great sheets of Fire for a great way together. Others saw the Fire fall upon the Earth, which seemed to be covered with it, as with Glow-worms. Others observed it to fall upon their Horses heads like drops of Fire from a Brimstone-match. One that travelled from Northampton, had his Stick, or Whip, burned by the Fire, even to a coal, which divers honest and credible persons have seen, and do attest the truth of it. The Fire did fall upon some part of Wellingbo∣rough Town in the County of Northampton, and particularly upon some Sheep-skins in a Felmongers yard in the said Town and when they shook it off it sparkled like Fire, but the skins were not so much as singed by it. Divers very credible persons do report, that there was Blood also mingled with the Hail and the Fire: and particularly, one of much credit in Kettering, not far from Northampton, who was that evening in the Storm, affirms, that though while he was abroad he saw nothing but Hail and Fire, Yet, when he came home he found that his Coat was very full of spots of Blood. Of this Storm we have received a particular and exact account from very many persons, who themselves were in it as they travelled that night from Northampton
Market; and it is a thing so eminently known in those parts, that none need in the least to question the truth of it. XXI. A Bat disturbing an Episcopal Prebend in the time of his preaching. Upon the second of February 1661, Dr. Belk, one of the Prebends of Canterbury, did in the morning preach in the Cathedral there; and when he was in the midst of his Sermon, a flinder-mouse or Bat did come forth and flew several times from one end of the place to the other, and when he was earnest in speaking the Bat struck at him, which the People took great notice of, because of the unusual appear∣ance of that creature at that time of the day, and in the cold Winter-season, as also because of the great affront offered by her to the Dr. while he was officiating there. XXII. Many Ominous and strange Accidents have happened in the Ca∣thedral Church at Canterbury. There have happened also in that Cathedral this year several other Ominous and strange Accidents, viz. the Evidences, Leases, and other Writings which were orderly and carefully laid up in the Audit-house, belonging to the Dean and Chapter, have been in the night-time thrown about the Room, and some of them gnawed and torn to pieces. Many times also their Bags of Money which was received of the Tenants for Fines, have been removed out of the places where they were laid; some of the Bags also were torn, and the Money scattered about the Room. Sometimes also when the Doors were left fast shut over-night, they have been found wide open the next morning when the Officer who kept the Keys all night came to open them; yet none could discern that any violent means had been used to break them open. And one morning when the Prebends would have entred the Audit-house, to seal some Leases, or to do some other profitable busi∣ness in behalf of the Chapter, the Officer could not by any means at that time unlock the Door; though he had locked it very well the night before: A Smith was sent for to break the Door open, but all his Art failed him, and he was not able to do it; insomuch, that they were constrained to dig an hole through a very thick Wall, and go in that way into the House: and at their entrance (according to our best Information) they found the Writings and Money thrown about the
Room as before. It is also very confidently reported, that the Organs have sometimes played of their own accord at eleven or twelve of the clock at night. These, and several other passages of like nature, we have received from persons of very good credit and reputation, Inha∣bitants of that City, and we nothing doubt of the truth of them, they being the frequent and common subjects of discourse and mirth among the Citizens there. XXIII. An Ewe brought forth five Lambs together. At Hartly-Row in the County of Southampton, an Ewe did this year bring forth five Lambs together. This is a thing publickly known and talked of in these parts, and any one may easily inform himself of the truth of it. XXIV. An Ewe brought forth a Lamb, which had one head and two bo∣dies, and eight legs. At Lanceston also in Cornwal, an Ewe brought forth a Lamb which had one head and two bodies, and eight legs. The truth whereof will appear to any who have opportunity to enquire after it. XXV. A Monster with two heads, four arms, and four legs. About the month of February 1661, there was a very strange Mon∣ster born at St. Anstil in Cornwal: It had two heads, four arms, and four legs. How long it continued alive, and whether it be yet dead, we have not received certain information; but are assured from an ex∣traordinary good hand, that there was such a Birth; and we doubt not, but upon enquiry, it will be found to be as we have here related it. XXVI. A Woman delivered of four Children at a Birth. Much about the same time also, a Woman of St. Guinis, six miles from Lanceston in the County of Cornwal, was delivered of four Chil∣dren at a Birth, viz. three sons, and one daughter, who dyed present∣ly; but the three sons lived to be baptized, and were named Sha∣drach, Meshech and Abednego: but they are all three since dead, accor∣ding
to that Information we have received from a person of eminency and honesty, who lives near the place, and hath assured us of the truth of the whole Relation. XXVII: A Woman was delivered of a Child which had no Eyes. About the month before-mentioned, at a Town called Looe in the County of Conwal, a Woman was delivered of a Child that had no Eyes. The truth whereof is confirmed by very honest and credible per∣sons of the Neighbourhood. XXVIII. A dreadful Storm of Wind, accompanied with Thunder, Lightning, Hail and Rain; together with the sad Effects of it in many parts of the Nation. Upon the 18th of February 1661, being Tuesday, very early in the morning, there began a very great and dreadful Storm of Wind (ac∣companied with Thunder, Lightning, Hail, and Rain, which in many places was salt as Brine) which continued with a strange and unusual violence till almost night: the sad Effects whereof throughout the Nation are so many, that a very great Volumn is not sufficient to con∣tain the Narrative of them. And indeed some of them are so stupen∣dious and amazing, that the report of them, though from never so authentick hands, will scarce gain credit among any but those that have an affectionate sense of the unlimited Power of the Almighty, knowing and believing that there is nothing too hard for Him to do. Some few of which wonderful Effects we shall give a brief account of, as we have received them from persons of most unquestionable credit in the several parts of the Nation. In the City of London, and in Covent Garden and other pars about London and Westminster, five or six persons were killed outright by the fall of Houses and Chimneys, especially one Mr Luke Blith an Attorney, that lived at or near Stamford in the County of Lincoln, was killed that day by the fall of a Riding-ouse not far from Pickadilla: but because there are some very remarkable circumstances in this mans case, which do make his death to appear at least like a most eminent Judgment, and severe stroak of the Lord's hand upon him, we shall remit the Reader to what is hereafter in this Narrative recorded of him under another Topick.
From other parts likewise we have received certain Information, that divers persons were killed by the Effects of this great Wind. At Chiltenham in Gloucestershire, a Maid was killed by the fall of a Tree, in or near the Church-yard. An honest Yeoman likewise of Scaldwel in Northamptonshire, being upon a Ladder to save his Hovel, was blown off, and fell upon a Plough, dyed outright and never spake word more. Also at Tewksbury in Gloucestershire, a Man was blown from an House and broken to pieces. At Elsby likewise in the same County, a Woman was killed by the fall of Tiles or Bricks from an House. And not far from the same place, a Girl was killed by the fall of a Tree. Near Northampton a Man was killed by the fall of a great Barne. Near Colchester, a young man was killed by the fall of a Wind-mill. Not far from Ipswich in Suffolk, a Man was killed by the fall of a Barne. And about two miles from the said Town of Ipswich, a Man was killed by the fall of a Tree. At Langton, or near to it, in the County of Leicester, one Mr. Ro∣berts had a Wind-mill blown down, in which were three Men, and by the fall of it, one of them was killed outright, a second had his back broken, and the other had his arm or leg struck off, and both of them (according to our best Information) are since dead. Several other Instances there are of the like nature, but it would be too tedious to mention them: Let these therefore suffice to stir us up to Repentance, lest we likewise perish. There are also many Effects of this Storm which are of another na∣ture, whereof we shall give this following brief account. This Wind hath very much prejudiced many Churches in several parts of the Nation. At Tewksbury in Gloucestershire, it blew down a very fair Window belonging to the Church there, both the Glass and the Stone-work also; the Doors likewise of that Church were blown open, much of the Lead torn up, and some part of a fair Pinacle thrown down. Also at Red-Marly and Newin, not far from Tewksbury, their Chur∣ches are extreamly broken and shattered, if not a considerable part of them blown down. The like was done to most, if not all the Pub∣lick Meeting-places at Gloucester City. And it is reported that some hundreds of pounds will not suffice to repair the dammage done to the
Cathedral at Worcester, especially in that part that is over the Quire. The like fate happened to many more of them, as Hereford, and Leighton Beau-desart in Bedfordshire, and Eaton Soken in the same County, where they had newly erected a very fair Crosse of Stone, which the Wind blew down; and, as some of the Inhabitants did observe, that was the first dammage which that Town sustained by the Storm, though afterwards in other respects also they were in the same condition with their Neighbours. The Steeples also and other parts of the Churches of Shenley, Whaddon, and Woolston in the County of Bucks have been very much rent and torn by the Wind. The Spire of Finchinfield Steeple in the County of Essex, was blown down, and it brake through the body of the Church and spoyled many of the Pews; some hundreds of pounds will not repair that loss. But that which is most remarkable of this kind, is, the fall of that famous Spire, or Pinacle of the Tower-Church in Ipswich, It was blown down upon the body of the Church, and fell reversed, the sharp end of the Shaft striking through the Leads on the South-side of the Church, carried much of the Timber-work down before it into the Alley just behind the Pulpit, and took off the edge off one side of the Sounding-board over the Pulpit. It shattered many Pews. The Weather-Cock, and the Iron upon which it stood, broke off as it fell, but the narrowest part of the Wood-work, upon which the Fane stood, fell into the Al∣ley, broke quite through a Grave-stone, and ran shoring under two Coffins that had been placed there one over another. That part of the Spire which was pluck'd up was about three yards deep in the earth, and it is believed some part of it is yet behind in the ground: some hundreds of pounds will not make good the detriment done to the Church by the fall of this Pinacle. Very great prejudice hath been done also to private houses, many of them blown down, and others extreamly shattered and torn. It is thought that five thousand pounds will not make good the Repairs at Audly-end house which belongs to the Earl of Suffolk. A good part also of the Crown-Office in the Temple is blown down. The In∣stances of this kind are so many and so obvious, that it would need∣lesly take up too much time to give the Reader an account of the col∣lection of them, only, there hath been such a wonderful destruction of Brns, that (looking so much like a Judgment from the Lord, who the last year took away our Corn, and this year our Barns) we can∣not but give a short account of some part of that Intelligence which hath come to our hands of that nature.
A Gentleman of good account in Ipswich affirms, that in a few miles riding that day, there were eleven Barns and Out-houses blown down in the Road, within his view; and within a very few miles of Ipswich round about, above thirty Barns, and many of them with Corn in them, were blown down. At Southold, not far from the place before-mentioned, many new Houses and Barns, built since a late Fire that happened there, are blown down, as also a Salt-house is destroyed tere; and 1000 l. as it is believed, will not make up that particular loss. From Tewksbury it is certified, that an incredible number of Barns have been blown down in the small Towns and Villages thereabouts. At Twyning, at least eleven Barns are blown down. In Ashchurch Parish seven or eight. At Lee, five. At Norton, a very great num∣ber, three whereof belonged to one man. The great Abby-Barn also at Tewksbury is blown down. It is credibly reported, that within a very few miles circumference in Worcestershire, about an hundred and forty Barns are blown down. At Finchinfield in Essex, which is but an ordinary Village, about six∣teen Barns were blown down. Also at a Town called Wilchamsted in the County of Bedford (a very small Village) fifteen Barns at least are blown down. But especially the Parsonage Barns went to wrack in many places throughout the Land. In a few miles compass in Bedford∣shire, and so in Northamptonshire, & other places, eight, ten and twelve are blown down: and at Yelding Parsonage in the County of Bedford (out of which was thrust by oppression and violence the late Incum∣bent) all the Barns belonging to it are down. The instances also of this kind are innumerable, which we shall therefore forbear to make further mention of. We have also a large Account of the blowing down of a very great and considerable number of Fruit-trees, and other Trees in several parts; we shall onely pick out two or three passages which are the most remarkable. In the Counties of Gloucester, Hereford, and Worcester, several persons have lost whole Orchards of Fruit-trees; and many particular men's loss hath amounted to the value of fourty or fifty pounds at the least, meerly by the destruction of their Fruit-trees; and so in other parts of England proportionably the like dammage hath been sustained in this respect. And as for other Trees, there hath been a great destruction made of them in many places by this Storm. Several were blown down at Hampton-Court. And three thousand brave Oaks at least, but in one principal part of the Forrest of Dean, belonging to his Majesty. In a little Grove at
Ipswich, belonging to the Lord of Hereford (which, together with the Spire of the Steeple before-mentioned, were the most considerable Ornaments of that Town) are blown down at least two hundred goodly Trees, one of which was an Ash, which had ten load of Wood upon it: there are now few Trees left there. In Brampton-Bryan Park in the County of Hereford, belonging to Sir Edward Harly, one of the late Knights of the Bath, above thirteen hundred Trees are blown down; and above six hundred in Hopton Park not far from it: and thus it is proportionably in most places where this Storm was felt. And the truth is, the dammage which the People of this Nation have sustained upon all accounts by this Storm is not easily to be valued: some sober and discreet People, who have endeavoured to compute the Loss of the several Counties one with another, by the destruction of Houses and Barns, the blowing away of Hovels and Reeks of Corn, the falling of Trees, &c. do be∣lieve it can come to little less than two Millions of Money. There are yet behind many particulars of a distinct nature from those which have been spoken of; some whereof are very wonderful, and call for a very serious observation of them. In the City of Hereford, several persons were by the violence of the Wind born up from the ground, one man (as it is credibly repor∣ted) at least six yards. In the City of London and Westminster, especially on the Bridge and near Wallingford-house, several persons were blown down one on the top of another. In Hertfordshire a man was taken up, carried a pole in length, and blown over a very high hedge; and the like in other places. The Water in the River of Thames, and other places, was in a very strange manner blown up into the Air: Yea, in the new Pond in James's Park, the Fish, to the number of at least two hundred, were blown out and lay by the Bank-side, whereof many were eye-wit∣nesses. At Moreclack in Surry, the Birds as they attempted to fly, were beaten down to the ground by violence of the Wind. At Epping in the County of Essex, a very great Oak was blown down, which of it self was raised again, and doth grow firmly at this day. At Taunton, a great Tree was blown down, the upper part where∣of rested upon a Brick or Stone-wall, and after a little time, by the force of the Wind, the lower part of the Tree was blown quite over the Wall.
The great Fane at Whitehall was blown down; and one of the four which were upon the white Tower, and two more of them strangely bent; which is to be seen at this day, to the admiration of all that be∣hold them. The several Triumphant Arches in the City of London were much shattered and torn; that in Leaden-hall-street lost the Kings Arms, and many other rare pieces that were affixed to it. That in Cheapside, which represented the Church, suffered very much also by the fury of the Storm. And a great part of that in Fleetstreet (which repre∣sented Plenty) was blown down; but, blessed be God, none that we hear of were either killed or hurt by the fall of it. The Wind was so strong that it blew down several Carts loaded with Hay in the Road between Barnet and London, and in other Roads leading to the City of London. The Norwich-Coach with four or six horses, was not able to come forward towards London, but stayed by the way till the Storm was somewhat abated. It is also credibly reported, That all, or some of the Heads which were set upon Westminster-hall, were that day blown down. There was a very dreadful Lightning which did at first accompany the Storm, and by it, some of his Majesties Houshold conceive that the Fire which happened at White-hall that morning, was kindled; as also that at Greenwich, by which (as we are informed) seven or eight houses were burnt down. But before we close up our discourse upon this particular great work of God, we shall briefly give an account of a few signal and eminent Preservations which the Lord did that day vouchsafe to some who were in very great danger. One John Hall, an Inhabitant of Rance in the County of North∣hampton, being in his Chamber with three little Children, was sud∣denly surprized with fear that the Room would be blown down, and would therefore needs immediately carry down all the three Children in his arms at once: He was no sooner down stairs with them, but presently (as he feared) the Room fell, and if any one of his Children had been left behind it had undoubtedly perished. The Lord also wrought a wonderful deliverance for divers of the City Ministers who were that day at the Morning-Lecture at John Zecheries Church near Goldsmiths-hall. It is usual with the Ministers after the Sermon is ended to go into the Vestry, and spend a little time in discourse together, while the Congregation is departing the place,
which they did that morning also: but there being a fire in the Vestry, and the Wind so extream high, it blew the smoak down into the Room, which was so offensive to them that they did presently quit the Vestry and went to the Minister's house, which they had no sooner re∣covered, but a stack of Chimneys belonging to Sir James Drex his house, adjoyning to the Vestry, fell down upon it, and broke through it; and had not the Ministers, upon the fore-mentioned account, by a secret instinct of Providence been withdrawn, all or most of them had been destroyed, or at least very much hurt and maimed by that ac∣cident. Mr. Blith the Attorney's man (of whom we have given some ac∣count before) was also that day wonderfully preserved from perishing with his Master: for by reason of his stay, either to make water, or upon some other occasion, while his Master did run by a Riding-house near Pickadilla (which fell upon him and killed him) he escaped that danger, and was by a strange Providence preserved while his Master perished. The Countess of Rivers also having an House or Lodgings (as we are informed) about Covent-Garden, being that morning in bed, was much importuned by one of her Servants (who was exceedingly afraid of the falling of a stack of Chimneys which was over the Room where her Ladiship lay) to rise immediately, lest she might be killed in her bed; which accordingly she did, and her Ladiship was no sooner up and departed the Room, but the Chimneys fell, and brake down into the Chamber, and at the least two Tuns of Brick and Rubbish were upon and about the Bed where the Countess lay, by which she had been certainly smothered had not her Servant prevailed with her to remove so seasonably, which was of the Lord, that she might not perish. Also a Citizen of London, living at Bednal-Green, was by an emi∣nent hand of the Lord delivered that morning; for, according to his wonted course, he went into his Wash-house adjoyning to his Kitchen to wash his hands and face, which he had no sooner done, and de∣parted the place, but immediately the Wash-house fell flat to the ground; and if the Lord had not at that very moment ordered by his Providence that he should go forth, he had certainly been de∣stroyed. An honest man's son and servant in Northamptonshire, were that morning together in the Barn when it fell; and the servant was slain, but the son had only his hat beaten off his head, and received no other hurt.
An eminent Citizen of London going that morning into Thames-Street to speak with a Friend upon some urgent occasions, as he returned, and in the very sight of his Friend, who waited on him to the door, a stack of Chimneys fell down, and to the apprehension of his Friend, and all that were near, he was covered with them: for, the Bricks and Rubbish in great abundance, fell round about him, and made so great a dust, that for some space of time they could not see him, and did verily believe he had been buried in the heap: But it pleased the Lord to protect him, that not so much as one Brick did touch him, to the great astonishment of himself and all the Spectators. We have also very credible Information, that near Woburn in the County of Bedford, two men were the same morning threshing together in a Barn, which by the violence of the Wind was in a wonderful manner blown over them, so that by the fall of it nei∣ther of them sustained the least hurt. One thing more the Reader is desired to take notice of, That there was none of this Storm in Yorkshire, and all the Northren parts of England; and so likewise in Scotland: The Wind did in∣deed blow a little more than ordinary, but it was not so high that they could call it a Storm; and so they suffered not those Prejudi∣ces by it, which the people in other parts of the Nation did under∣go. What the Lord's meaning in it is, further than to stir them up to thankfulness, Providence may in due time discover. XXIX. A Woman delivered of a strange Monster. About the time last mentioned, a Widow in the Strand, and in Dunstans Parish, was delivered of a strange Monster; the heart of it was in the outside of the body, and did hang in a long piece of flesh, which was about the neck of the Child, like the Ribbon of a Knight of the Garter in which his George hangs. When the woman was in the extremity of her pain, the Midwife prevailed with her to confess who was the Father of that she went with, and it proves to be a Runagado Priest, a true son of the Church (though as yet un∣der age) and one of the three famous Georges that played the part of true Water-men in the Boat of the late Common-wealth; one that can preach in justification of the King's Death, as an act of great and honourable Justice; and if need be, swear home against those as Murderers who were Actors in it. But we shall say no more, lest
the Reader guess who it is, or lest we should be thought too severe in detecting holy Mother, most of whose Children are upon this, or some other as bad accounts, a very great scandal and reproach to her so much admired Disciplin and Government. The Mid∣wife her self, with other of the good women who were at the La∣bour, have often related this story, and are ready to make it good against him before his Brethren that sit in Judicatory, in any of the Baudy Courts, within the Jurisdiction of the Right Reverend, &c. (a Father of great and long experience in these affairs) Alwayes provided, that if the Priest be found guilty, he may not be per∣mitted to commute for Penance, but publickly undergo the same in the holy Vestment, washed very clean and white at the charge of the Parish, according to one of the Articles of Visitation, put forth by the Reverend Father his Name-sake of Winchester. XXX. A Woman delivered of a Child, in a way contrary to the course of Nature. About the first of March, 1661, one Horsey's Wife a Taylor, and an Inhabitant of the City of Chichester, being at a Neighbours house upon occasion of laying Plaisters to one there that had been sick of an Ague; before she could dispatch what she went about, was taken very ill, insomuch that the man's wife where she was, and some other women that were present, fearing that she would miscarry, prevailed with her to go up into a Chamber where they made ready a Bed for her. Being now exercised with very great pain and illness, she did earnestly desire some stale Beer, and after she had drunk of it, she grew exceeding sick in her Stomach, and immediately fell to vomiting very violently; and at last contrary to nature, did vomit up a male Child, almost a span long, very perfect in every part, without any deformity. She was so very weak and ill after it, that she could not go home to her house in almost three weeks time following. This is a thing so strange, and so contrary to the ordinary course of nature, that we had not the confidence to publish it, but that we have received the confirma∣on of it over and over again; the Woman her self, as also all those who were at that time present with her, constantly owning and af∣firming the truth of it. But in regard of the strangeness of the thing, we are not without our fears, lest there should be some mis∣take about it; therefore we are not forward to impose the belief of it upon any: however we have put down things so particularly, that the
Reader may be satisfied that it is not a fiction of our own, and if he have opportunity may make further enquiry about the truth of it: and so may believe it or not, according to the value he sees cause to put up∣on the Evidence. XXXI. The appearance of eight Men who ascended towards Heaven in eight Pillars of Fire. Much about the same time several Non-conformists being impri∣soned in Carnarvonshire in Wales, divers strong Guards were set in many places to prevent a Rescue (as was pretended;) amongst the rest, there were two Sentinels placed by a River side, one of which espyed eight Horsemen riding toward the River on the other side right against him; upon which he called to his fellow to take notice of them, and they both standing hard by, looked on them till they descended into the Water, as if they would have crossed the River; But imme∣diately they saw them ascend toward Heaven in eight Pillars of Fire. This hath been published to divers honest persons by the Souldiers themselves, by which means we came to the knowledge of it. XXXII. A Raven hath built her Nest, and brought forth her young in a Cathedral Steeple. It is certified by Letters from extraordinary good hands in Lincoln, that this Spring of the year a Raven hath built her nest, and brought forth her young in the greatest Steeple of the Cathedral there. It is a thing much observed and taken notice of in that City, all looking up∣on it as strange and prodigious, that that Fowl, contrary to its usual course, should make choice of such a place to build and bring forth in. XXXIII. The raining of Wheat in Dorcetshire. We are certified from very credible persons out of Dorcetshire, that in the month of March last, it rained Wheat in several places in that County; a good quantity of it was brought to Dorchester, and seen by many honest men there.
XXXIV. A strange Inscription round about a Brass Kettle. We suppose it is generally known and believed what happened at Edmunds Bury in the County of Suffolk, on the second of March, 1661, concerning that strange Inscription round about a Brass Kettle, seen and read by the man and his wife who are owners of the Kettle; and by four or five other persons besides. What the words were it is not convenient to relate, it being of a dangerous consequence to pub∣lish them; fearing lest indiscreet persons, and ill-affected, should make an ill construction and application of them: And besides, we are not without our jealousies, lest there should be something of Sorcery in it. We shall therefore only give a short account of some of the Circum∣stances relating to this Story, whereof we have had a very true Infor∣mation from unquestionable hands. The words were all in the English tongue, and written in one line quite round the Kettle; the letters were Roman Characters plain and legible: none of the words, except the word MOLECH, were writ in Capital Letters: all was written in words at length, and not in figures: The letters seemed to be of a blackish colour; written, not engraven, and, in the apprehension of the Spectators, sticking very close to the Brass, and more even with the Superfeces than Ink upon Paper. They endeavoured to wipe it out with a cloth, but could not: Yea, after that, the letters seemed more bright and clear than before. The Inscription continued about the space of a quarter of an hour, and then vanished as the dew before the Sun, only the word Molech continued a little longer than the rest. XXXV. An Owl appeared in a Cathedral in the time of Divine-Service, to the great disturbance of those who were present. Upon the sixth of April 1662, being the Lord's day, when the Dean and Prebends of the Cathedral of Norwich were engaged in their Service and Singing, an Owl from about the Quire gave them a very great disturbance: her Noat was so high, that she many times drowned those who were performing the Service. She bore a Part with them a considerable part of the time and made the People a great deal more merry than their Bagpipes and Anthems could do. This is
testified by ear-witnesses, and is indeed the common discourse of the Citizens there. XXXVI. The raining of Wheat in Lincolnshire. At or near Stamford in Lincolnshire, on the fourth of May 1662, being the Lord's day, while the people were at the Publick-Worship, there happened a very great Storm, in which did fall very great quan∣tities of Wheat upon the Leads of the Church, which some of the people gathered up, and it was viewed by the whole Congregation. A Lady not far from thence found a great deal of it upon the Leads of her House, part whereof she sowed in the Earth, and part she brought to London with her, of which many have been eye-witnesses, and do testifie the truth of it. XXXVII. Oak Leaves stained with Blood. In the same month of May, at a Town called Batley in Yorkshire, about four miles from Wakefield, in the Ground of one Michael Daw∣son, about the Carr belonging to that Town, a man climbing up into an Oak-tree to cut boughs, perceived his clothes to be very much stained with Blood; and upon search, he found the under-side of the Oak-leaves to be all bloody, not only in that Tree, but in another also not far from it. Several of the Leaves of the said Trees were afterwards sent abroad to divers persons in the Country, who had a desire to see them, and the Blood was dryed upon them, and they seemed as if they had been coloured and dyed therewith. This is a very certain truth, and attested by many eye-witnesses. XXXVIII. Much hurt done to divers persons by Lightning. About the beginning of June 1662, there fell down a sheet of Lightning upon the Town of Shaftsbury in Dorsetshire; it smote seve∣ral persons in the Streets down to the ground, and did them no fur∣ther hurt: it brake open the door and entered into the house of a godly Minister who lived in that Town; it smote down two of his Daughters and a young Child to the ground, without doing further hurt to them: it melted the Pewter-dishes in the Kitchen, filled the House with smoak, and went out at a pane of Glass which it brake.
The next day this Minister's son, a young hot-headed Conformist, died. The Minister himself will attest the truth of this Relation. XXXIX. The appearance of a Party of Horse seen near Dorchester. Upon the 19th of June, a reverend and godly Minister, one of the King's Chaplains, as he was travelling with his man between Winter∣burn and Dorchester, saw a great Troop of Horse upon the top of an Hill with Colours flying, some of them alighted and walked down the Hill: his man also saw the same, and did both really believe that they were a Troop of Horse, insomuch, that they put on and rode hard, that they might get into Dorchester before the Horsemen, to pro∣vide themselves of convenient quarters. But they still expecting when the Troop should come, and none coming, upon enquiry found that there were really no Horsmen thereabouts that day; so that it is ge∣nerally believed, that this Troop did belong to the Regiment that was seen in Wales, whereof account hath been given before. This Mi∣nister hath since been in London, and owns this Relation, though he is much puzled about it, because it is so evident to him that there was no real Troop then upon the Road; but he sayes, that he and his man did then behold them, and looked back almost twenty times upon them, and was then so really satisfied that they were a Troop of Horse with Colours flying, that he durst have taken his Oath upon it. Since his going out of Town, there is a Rumour, that the County Troop was abroad that day: but we have not time now to examine it; but having sufficient evidence of the truth of the foregoing circum∣stances, we are jealous lest this last Report should be raised by those who are unwilling that the works of the Lord of this nature should be sought out by them who take pleasure in them. But we shall leave the Reader to satisfie himself in the truth of this Report, which at present we have not time nor opportunity to do, and according as he finds things, to imbrace or reject this particular Relation. XL. The appearance of another Troop of Horse near Sir George Booth's house. It hath been also credibly reported, that another Troop of the same Body of Horse, was lately seen by several persons in or near Lech∣moor-wood, not far from Sir George Booth's: but we are not so posi∣tive
in affirming the truth of it, because we have not received such au∣thentick confirmation yet, as we desire: But we give the Reader this hint, that as he hath opportunity he may make further enquiry after it. XLI. The raining of Blood at two Towns in Buckinghamshire. About the 7th of July 1662, from very good hands it is assured, that it rained Blood at Sherrington and Lathbury, two Towns in Buc∣kinghamshire near Newport-Pannel. It stood in puddles in one yard in Sherrington; others having hung out their Linen upon the Hedges to dry, found them spotted all over with drops of Blood: Some who were abroad, found many drops of it upon their Clothes. The People there are very sensible of this, and much affrighted at it, none questioning the truth of it. XLII. A Fire kindled in a Heath by Lightning, which could not be quenched by the abundance of Rain that fell upon it. Upon the 8th of July 1662, a Servant to a very honourable Per∣son and one of the Lords of the Council, travelling in the mid-way be∣tween Farnham and Bagshot, in a great storm of Thunder and Light∣ning, saw a very great Fire on the Heath flaming up very furiously; he rode to it, and though it rained excessively, yet he saw it burn up a good part of the Heath; and notwithstanding the exceeding greatness of the Rain, yet it could not quench it, at which he was much start∣led and amazed, and came away and left it burning. When he came to Town, he related it to his Lord, who believes it to be true, and (though one of the wisest men in England) seems to be much affected with it when he discourseth of it, which his Lordship hath often done before Persons of Quality and Honour; by which means we came to the knowledge of it. XLIII. The appearance of a Sea and a Fog, and Ships and Boats, with other strange Prodigies, seen near Chatham in Kent. On the day before-mentioned, about nine of the clock at night, a person of much honesty and sobriety was with his son and his servant going home to his house at Gillingham, near Chatham in the County of Kent, and about two fields from Chatham as they were going, there
appeared suddenly a great Light from the Northwest, and by it they plainly saw before them, and not far from them, the appearance of a Sea, and at the East end of it a great and thick Fog; it was (as near as they could guess) about a mile in length. Then they saw betwixt the Light and the Sea, the appearance of a Ship under sail pressing for∣ward on its course, and sailing with great swiftness. Then immedi∣ately all vanished: But presently, the Light, Sea, and Fog appeared again, as also a second Ship bigger than the first, sailing alike course with the former, only it was not so near them: there seemed to lye a point of Land, much like the North-foreland, which the Ship laboured to get about. This in appearance seemed to be in a valley, and near to them, though the ground was no valley: as they beheld it, all dis∣appeared again, and nothing was seen. After this the Light appeared again, and the Fog and the Sea also, spreading themselves towards them as before, and seemed to be but in the next field from them. Beyond the Water appeared a Church, and upon the Water two or three Boats, which they plainly saw (for the Light made all things so clear as if it had been a Sunshine day) At length the Body of the Church was struck off and turned into the Body of a Tree, with a thick sprea∣ding top, then presently it turned into two or three hillocks of Smoak, and so vanished, and the Light, Water, and Fog withdrew again. But all presently appeared again, and were so placed directly before them, that they thought, if it should so continue, they could not get home. Beyond the Water, a Church-steeple, bigger than the former, did ap∣pear; it rose as it were out of a Hill, and sunk right down immediate∣ly, and then all disappeared. But soon after the same Light, Fog and Water appeared again, and then they heard a very strange noise, as if it had been of an Army of Men, at which the Boy being very much affrighted, did cling about his Father, saying, Father, yonder be Men; but they saw none, only they heard an noise, as if it had been of an Army of Men talking together, and making Fires as in a Leagure, two or three sparks of fire proceeding from the place where the noise was, and vanished away in smoak. Then in the Eastermost end of the Fog, they saw the appearance of a Serpent, with a sting in the mouth; the head was to the West, and the tayl to the East: After this, all va∣nished, and the Sky and all things about them were as before this Appearance, which came forth in these four several Scenes, and con∣tinued about three quarters of an hour. The whole is attested by one of the Spectators, who hath given it in verbatim, under his own hand.
Several strange and remarkable PRODIGIES and AP∣PARITIONS, seen on the Waters; from the Month of June, 1661. to the Month of July, 1662. I. Great Cakes of Blood seen in the Moat about the Tower. ON the 20th of June 1661, one of the Warders in the Tower, and divers Souldiers, with some Inhabitants there, saw in the Moat which is about the Tower, very many great Cakes of Blood, about thirty or forty foot at least from the Bank: The Blood seemed to be very fresh, as if it had been newly taken from some living creature; the Cakes lay in two rows, & were almost opposit to each other. When the Water was out of the Moat, they lay upon the Mud; and when the Water covered them, they were transparent through it. They were perfectly seen two dayes together, and on the third day there remained only some marks of them, which looked like rotten and putrified blood. This is attested by some of the Spectators, whose testimony we can safely give credit to. II. A great Porpus leaped into a Waterman's Wherry. On the 17th of July 1661, in the evening near Lee-Road, a great Porpus, about three yards in length, leaped into a Waterman's Wher∣ry, while he and his Boy (the Tide failing them) were laid down to sleep; it lay upon one of them, and almost pressed him to death: They both were extreamly affrighted at first, but when they perceived what it was, they bestirred themselves, and after a while killed it, and brought it along with them in their Boat. Many did see this Porpus, and upon enquiry it will be found to be certainly true; and according to the Watermens observation, it is very ominous and prodigious. III. The noise of the beating of a Drum in a Well. In the month of August 1661. for eight or ten dayes together there was heard the perfect noise of the beating of a Drum in a Well,
belonging to a private person, an Inhabitant of Owndle in Northamp∣tonshire: once the people drew out all the Water, and prevailed with one to go down to the bottom of it, who, when he was there, did hear the same noise as if it had been at the top of the Well. We are certainly informed, that the same noise was heard again very lately this Summer also. The Inhabitants are very much alarmed at it, in regard that the same thing hath happened many times hereto∣fore, upon some eminent and fatal changes. IV. A strange Double-Tide at London-Bridge. Upon the 20th of December 1661, the day of the Parliaments Ad∣journment, there happened at London-Bridge a very strange Double-Tide, the account whereof from several eye-witnesses, is as followeth. It was high-water that day about seven or eight of the clock in the morning; it ebbed about two hours and a half, and then, though there had been great rains, and the Land-floods came down very fast, and the day also was very calm and no Wind stirring, yet the Water re∣turned, and it flowed again, and so continued for the space of two hours, and then ebbed again according to its usual course. Some per∣sons did observe that this strange Tide happened just at the time when Sir Edward Turner, Speaker of the House of Commons, in his Speech that day upon the Adjournment of the House, was comparing the Restitution of our Monarchy, to the Return of the Tide after a very low Ebb. It must also be remembred, that upon this day also the great body of Horse was seen in Wales, whereof mention was made be∣fore. V. Great numbers of a strange kind of Fish taken at Boston in Lincoln-shire. There is certain information from Lincolnshire, that their Coast hath several times this Winter been frequented with a strange kind of Fish, which is rarely seen amongst them; the Inhabitants call it a Horn∣pipe. It is longer than a Mackarel, and hath two long beaks, each of which is like the beak of a Snite. An incredible number of them have come as high as Boston, where they took so many, as that they were sold for ten by the peny; and the Haven was so full of them, that they were frequently by many persons taken up in their hats. The people there look upon it ominous, and portentous of something extraordi∣nary.
VI. A Bloody Stream in Wales. At a place called Cogan in Wales, near Swanzey in Glamorganshire, a Woman going on a Lord's day morning this last Spring to take up Water out of a Stream which runs through the Town, she observed the Water to look as red as Blood, and being much affrighted and astonished at it, immediately she called several of her Neighbours to see it, who, for their further satisfaction, went up the Stream, and found that for a flight-shot in length, the Water was like Blood, but from thence to the Spring-head it was clear; also when they took up any of the Bloody Water and put it into a Vessel, after a little time it turned clear again. This is a thing generally known by the Inhabi∣tants there, and upon enquiry the whole story will be found to be cer∣tainly true. VII. A River of Blood in Lincolnshire. We have received very credible information, that for a good space of time the beginning of this Summer, a Pool or River about Lincoln∣shire continued to be of a Bloody colour; several persons did fill di∣vers Bottles with it, where it still appeared like Blood; they also dipped their Handkerchiefs in it, which seemed as if they had been stained with Blood, and did so continue. From some of those persons who made these experiments of it, we received the Information, and have sufficient ground to be satisfied in the truth of it. VIII. The form of a strange Monster seen on the River of Thames. Upon the second of May 1662, an honest and credible person, living near the Falcon on the Bank-side in Southwark, having occa∣sions to be on the Water about Aereife late at night, did discourse with the Watermen about the Book of Prodigies, saying he never could see any thing of that nature which that Book did make men∣tion of, neither could he believe there was any truth in those stories, or words to the same effect; and while he was thus discoursing, or immediately after, there appeared suddenly a very great Fire upon the Water, which gave a very clear light, and immediately they saw two
Ships coming very near them, and were sorely afraid that they should have been boarded by them, and therefore the Waterman did present∣ly bestir himself to get out of their way, but his Boat stuck fast, and he was not able to move it in the least: he thought at first he had been on ground, but finding it was not so, he attempted again to row, but could not make his Boat stir. The Ships now being very near them, on a sudden one of them was turned into the likeness of a very tall Man, of a most monstrous shape, about twenty foot in height as they conceived. Upon this, the person in the Boat being extreamly affrighted, fell on praying, and immediately that Appearance stood still, and was turned on one side; they being very near it, and look∣ing upon it about half an hour, did plainly discover the form of its countenance, and also its hair; at length they plainly saw fire come out of its belly, and then it moved towards the bank-side, and there he saw it consume away as if it had been a barrel of Pitch on fire, and so it vanished. The other Ship was turned into the form of a Castle, but they were so intent in fixing their eyes upon the former, that they can give no further account of the latter. After both of them were vanished the Waterman was able to move his Boat, but not before, and then they proceeded on their voyage, and have often since repor∣ted what is here related, and do constantly affirm the truth of it, as some of the Contributers to this Collection can testifie, who received the whole from their own mouths. IX. Several great Sturgeons taken in the River of Thames above Bridg. In the same month of May, several Sturgeons of an unusual bigness, have been taken above Bridge, and one near Hampton Court about the time of the Queens coming in. This also is generally looked upon as strange and prodigious. X. Strange Apparitions seen on the River Shannon in Ireland. Upon the 17th of June 1662, about eleven of the clock in the fore∣noon, there were by forty several persons, strange Apparitions seen on the River Shannon in Ireland, over against a place called Carrigofoyle, the account whereof, in a Letter from a known credible person, an eye-witness, take as followeth. First, there appeared a brown sandy Bay, with several great Bodies of Men upon it, and from them marched several Parties, and wheeled
about a Musket shot in length, and then all sunk by degrees. And in a short space of time after, the sand appeared again, and the men marching, and a ship coming in under saile, sailed towards them. Then appeared nine other Ships coming as it were from Lim∣merik; one of them was a very great Ship and sailed to Ennis Begg▪ an Island of one Peter Granneres, and then vanished both Sand and Men. After this they all appeared again both Men and Ships, and continued for a good space of time, and so vanished. XI. A strange Scum on the top of a great Pond, of a bloody Colour. On the 25th. and 26th. of July, 1662. and several days since, multitudes of People have taken notice with much amazement, of a Scum that covers over a great part, and many times the whole of a Pond at Newington-green, in the County of Middlesex, which is of a Blood Red Colour; the Banks are so discoloured with it, as if real Blood had been poured upon them. Hundreds of persons have seen this, and some have dipped their Handkerchiefs in it, and they are much stained with it, but not altogether so much as if they had been dipt in blood, neither is it so red as it appears to be while it swims upon the Water. Some part of the day the Pond is wholly freed of it, and is as clear as at other times. It is pos∣sible some Natural Cause may be assigned of it, however, as a Work of God, it is not to be slighted, or neglected; especially considering that some who have lived there forty or fifty Years, have never observed any such thing before. There is one thing further relating to this particular, very remarkable, that for a week or two last past, about twelve of the clock at noon every day, the Redness begins to abate upon the surface of the Water, and all the afternoon, the Pond is green until the next morning about seven of the Clock, and then by degrees the red Scum en∣creases, till the Pond be wholly covered with it.
Many strange and remarkable Accidents, together with divers eminent and signal Judgements, that have happened to several Ministers, that have been drawn to do things against their Light and Conscience, in the Worship of God. As also, Many other Persons, who have Molested and Perse∣cuted, meerly for Non-conformity, those who are of Tender and Peaceable Spirits in the Land. From the Month of April, 1661. to the Month of July, 1662. I. A Canonical and Conformable Parson who had uttered a false and lying Divination was smitten with a Cancerous distemper in his Mouth and Throat, whereby his Tongue Rotted in his Head, by which meanes he soon after died. AT Stradgwel, or Stradishal, in the County of Suffolk, one Mr. William Proctor, a Canonical Conformable Priest, who was formerly Ejected thence upon Articles of Scandal, as Drunkenness, Suborning to Perjury, &c. since the late Revolution, was restored to the said Place and Li∣ving of Stradishal again, where in his room, one Mr. Willam Folkes a very able and godly Minister, had been long setled by Sequestra∣tion; whose abode and stay there was much desired by the Inhabi∣tants, who that they might enjoy the Gospel by his Ministy, prof∣fered a considerable maintenance to the said Mr. Proctor, upon con∣dition he would keep to his other Living (whereof he was then possessed) and not displace the said godly Minister whom they so much desired. But he totally rejected this fair Proposal, and did force himself upon the People without their consent, pretending that he had a Revelation for it, and that it was Revealed unto him
that he should come into his Living of Stradishal again, and should enjoy it so long as he had been ejected out of it, which was about sixteen Years. But in a short time after, about the Month of March or April, 1661. it pleased the Lord to smite him with a Cancerous distemper in his Mouth and Throat, so that his Tongue (which had uttered this lying Divination) Rotted in his Head, whereof he died before half a year was expired. The truth of this is attested by most of the Inhabitants of the said Parish, who were both Eye and Ear Witnesses of the several Passages in this Rela∣tion. II. Two Witnesses against a godly Non-conforming Minister, the one killed the other. About the middle of April, 1661. one Mr. vel Minister of val in Cornwal, being very much maligned by some malitious Neighbours for his averseness to the Service Book, was by them Indicted at the Sessions for some seditious words, pretended to be spoken by him. Two persons especially were depended upon to make Oath against him, and to prove the Indictment. But before the time of the Sessions was come, there happened to be a Meet∣ing of several People to make merry (as they call it) at or near the Town before mentioned; Several of them continued togther drinking and rioting all the night; amongst them were the two in∣tended witnesses, against the said godly Minister; and in discourse together about their Manhood, they began to quarrel, and the one challenged the other to wrestle with him, which was ac∣cepted, and the Challenger was thrown by the other, which did so provoke him, that arising from the ground, he laid hold on a Rapier which was in the hand of one of the by-standers, and therewith immediately killed his fellow-witness, and forthwih fled for his Life, and according to our best Information, hath not since been hear of. By which Providence the further prosecution of Mr. Revel, fell to the ground, and so an innocent person was preserved by this eminent hand of the Lord against his malitious Prosecutors. Of the Truth hereof we have received clear and suf∣ficient Testimony from persons of Prudence, and unblemished re∣putation in those Parts.
III. A young man who was active in abusing the Solemn League and Cove∣nant, was smitten immediately by the hand of the Lord. According to our best information on the 23d. of April, or the 29th. of May, 1661. when the People of Grantham in the Coun∣ty of Lincoln, were assembled at the Bonfires, which were made in that Town, a young Man was very forward in abusing the So∣lemn League and Covenant, and did hang it up upon a Sign post, or gibbet provided for that purpose. It pleased the Lord immediately to strike him with a sense of what he had done, and he is since worn away to nothing but skin and bone: and whether he be now living or no, we can give no certain account. IV. An Episcopal Parson killed by a fall from his Horse when he was Drunk. About the Month of June, or July, 1661. an Episcopal Parson living about Brent-wood in Essex, being at that Town on a Fair or Market day, did there drink to great excess, insomuch that as he came home at night, he fell from his Horse, and by that fall was killed and taken away in his sin. This is a thing notorious in these parts, and no dispute amongst any of the Inhabitants there concern∣ing the Truth of it. V. A young Man drowned when he was Swimming on the Lords Day. On the 21. of July, 1661. being the Lord's Day, a young Man an Apprentice in Holnbourn, neglecting the work which the Lord hath enjoyned us on that day, went upon his pleasure down to Redriff, and at two of the Clock in the afternoon, when the People were going to the publick Assembly, he went to Swim in the Ri∣ver of Thames, where as it is conceived, the Cramp took him, and before he could get any help he was drowned.
VI. Several Persons who were active against the coming of a Godly emi∣nent Minister at Leeds, died suddenly. By Letters hearing date July 22, 61. from very credible Persons Inhabitants of Leeds in York-shire, we are assuredly informed that at the Sessions of the Peace, holden there, a little before the date of the said Letter, many honest sober men, who would have brought in Mr. Edward Bowles of York to be Minister there, were indicted. Four Men did swear a Riot against them, and within less than four dayes immediately following, three of them, being young, lusty, and healthful men, were suddenly cut off by Death, the fourth lay also in a sad manner, and it was expected also that he would die presently; but whether he hath since recovered or no, we have not heard. VII. A Person killed, and others hurt by Lightning, when they were en∣gaged in a drunken Meeting. At Wanford in Suffolk, on the 30th. of July, 1661. one Mr. Absolom, an Inhabitant there, provided a Barrel of extraordinary Srong-Bear for his Landlord, Sr. John Rouse a Parliament-man, and some other Company, viz. Captain Lemon, Mr. Dougate, Mr. Terril, and others; they all met at the said Mr. Absoloms House, about two of the clock in the afternoon, the day before mentioned; they drunk very freely, being met together for that very purpose; and when they were in their Cups, they began to revile and raile against some honest Christians, who lived not far from the place, and did indeed in that humour, very severely threaten all the Phanaticks; and as one of the Company hath confessed, they begun a very strange and unheard of Health, it was so horrid that the Gentleman would not name what it was, but cryed out very bitterly against it, and Sr. John Rouse, who began it. And as they were thus Blaspheming God, railing against his People, and abusing themselves and the good Crea∣tures of God, the Lord sent a great Storm from the South-east,
and with it a very dreadful clap of Thunder, which was as a warn∣ing piece to them; and within a quarter of an hour after another, and with that a terrible flash of Lightning, which came down with so great force upon the north side of the House, that brake thorow the Tyles and came into a Chamber which was over the Room where the Persons before mentioned were Drinking and Revel∣ling, it shook in pieces the Bedstead there, and then came down into the lower Room where the Gentlemen were; it threw one of them upon the Table, and wounded and bruised another of them extreamly, that he was forced to keep his Bed a great while after; it struck a third of them dead, who was burnt as black as a coal; and as the Jury affirmed, was the sadest Corps that ever was be∣held; all the rest so afrighted and amazed, that they were for the present as dead men: After this it went out at the South side of the House, and made as great a breach there as it did upon its en∣trance, on the other side of it. This is a Story so publickly known to be true, that none in the Country hath the Impudence to questi∣on it: Onely we do earnestly beg of the Lord that one evidence more of the truth of this Relation may be added to the rest, that the Gentlemen who are the survivors of this Eminent stroak from Heaven, may understand and be sensible of the meaning of it, and speedily repent and reform, lest God reserves them to be more signal Examples hereafter of his Wrath and Vengeance. VIII. An Episcopal Parson who was active in indicting a Godly Non-conform∣ing Minister, was murdered by a Distracted-man of his own Family. At the Summer Assizes last holden at Bury in Suffolk, on the 29th. of July, 1661. one Mr. Ashborn Minister of Norton, not far from Bury, did Indict, or cause to be Indicted, Mr. Taylor, a godly able Minister in Bury, upon the Statute of the 15. of Q. Elizabeth, against Conventicles, for meeting with some honest People to pray and Worship God. The Indictment was found by the Grand-Jury, and the same day or the next day af∣ter, while the Assizes yet continued at Bury, the forementioned Mr. Ashborn, was going home from a Gentlemans House where he dined that day, through a Meadow not far from his own House, where met him one Mr. Ward (who had been Distracted, and
was sent to he said Mr. Ashborn for Cure (who it seems was fa∣mous in the Country upon that account) and was now become very sober, and carried himself very civilly and orderly, and was suffered to go without any Keeper) the said Ward fell upon Mr. Ashborn in the Meadow, and with his own Fork which he then had in his hand, he thrust him through the Neck, and got him down upon the Ground, and then with Mr. Ashborn's own Knife which he pulled out of his Pocket, he Wounded him in several places, and left him dead; Mr. Ward was immediately apprehend∣ed and committed to Bury Goal, and no question before this time hath answered the Law for the Murder he committed. IX. A sad Judgment of God upon two false Witnesses against a Godly Non-conforming Minister. Much about the same time, one Mr. Ince a Godly Faithful Mi∣nister at Dunhead in the County of Wilts, was by the false Oaths of two Malitious persons in the Parish (instigated by another, whom we shall have a sad occasion to mention hereafter) bound over to appear at the Assizes; but before the time came, one of these Witnesses was strucken with a sore Sickness, at which time he was very much troubled in his Spirit for his wicked pur∣poses, and designe to testifie falsly against that good Man, he ex∣pressed hearty repentance for it, and immediately dies. The other whose name was Thornes, being desperatly hardened in Sin, notwithstanding the Signal Judgment of God upon his fellow Persecutor appears at the Assizes, and swears most falsly and malitiously against Mr. Ince, upon which he was cast, and according to our best Information, was fined about forty or fifty Pounds; immediately after which, as this miserable forsworn Wretch was returning home from the Assizes, there arose a Pimple in his Cheek, which soon after turned into a Cancer, and by degrees did eat further and further into his Cheek, till at last after he had endured many very sharp and tormenting Paines, it killed him. This is a thing publickly known, and the truth of it not at all questioned by any in those parts.
X. A sad Judgment befalling a violent Rayler against a Godly Non-con∣forming Minister. Not long after the time last mentioned, Mr. Ince the Faithful, able Minister before spoken of, was by Violence and Oppression driven out of his Living, and the Malice of some of the Inhabi∣tants being so great against him, meerly for Righteousness sake, it was not judged safe for him to abide in the Town any longer, whereupon he resolved suddenly to remove to some other place; and in order thereunto, Wagons were provided to carry away his Goods, which one Mr. Moullins (an Inhabitant of the said Town of Dunhead, and a great Enemy to Mr. Ince) seeing, the night before Mr. Inces departure, expressed a greater deal of Joy at it, and did openly speak Words to this effect; To morrow when this Ince goes away, I will keep the Merriest day that ever I kept in Dunhead: But when the morrow came, the Lord by a sad hand of providence quite changed the Scene, and made him keep one of the most Sorrowful dayes he ever kept in his whole Life before; for that day going forth in the morning with his Cart, his Foot slipped, and falling down he was not able suddenly to recover himself, and the Wheel of the Cart went over his Leg and brui∣sed it very sorely, so that he lay all that day in extream pain and dolor, at last it Gangrened, and after two or three dayes ex∣tremity of Torment, he miserably ended his Life. This also is publickly known to be a certain truth, and no doubt made of it by any that live there-about. XI. A great Reviler and Persecutor of Good men, taken away suddenly by Death. Much about the same time, one Captain Rand a Sea Captain, (who hath been publickly taken notice of as a Man of a most de∣bauched and vicious Conversation, but especially he was observ∣ed to be a notorious Reviler and Persecutor of Non-conforming Ministers and People) as he was upon a Lords Day in the Chap∣pel
at Shadwel in Stepney Parish, was suddenly and strangely smit∣ten with the hand of the Lord, which made him cry out and roar in a strange and unusual manner, in the Congregation, out of which he was immediately carried, and within a very short time after died. XII. One who hreatned to Indict an honest Non-conforming Minister, was sudenly taken away by Death, and so prevented in his Design. We have received certain Information from very credible Persons, that about the time last mentioned, the Mayor of Bridge∣north in Shropshire, did very sharply threaten the Minister of that Town, who is a godly Non-conformist, that if he did not presently Conform, he would have him Indicted the next Sessions; but God prevented him, for he going to walk in the Fields, was suddenly taken very ill, and within a day or two after at the most, died, and so could not put his threatning in execution at the Ses∣sions, which followed not long after his Death. XIII. An uncharitable Abuser and Reviler of Mr. Hugh Peters, killed by a fall from his Horse when he was Drunk. We have been certainly informed from very good hands, that one Colonel Carnaby, who lived in or about the City of Durham, did frequently affirm with great uncharitableness, to divers sober persons in Durham, that Mr. Peters was drunk when he was hang∣ed; not long afe this, on a Lords Day, the said Colonel Carna∣by was invited, wih some other Company, to one Colonel Stew∣arts house to dinner, where they horribly prophaned the Lord's Day, and fell o excessive drinking; and the said Colonel Carnaby was so drunk, that upon his return home that night from Colonel Stewarts, who lived not above two miles from Durham, he first lost his Company, and afterwards, within half a mile of the Towns end, lost his Way, and took to the Road leading to Newcastle, where the next Morning he was found dead in a Pool of Water and Dirt,
with his Face downwards, yet there was not so much Water in the Pool as would cover him. This is notoriously known at Durham, and it is observed by the People there, that he who falsely and ma∣litiously accused another for dying in his drunkenness, was himself really overtaken with that sin, and by the righteous hand of the Lord, cut off in it. XIV. One suddenly dies, as he was accusing and complaining against some godly Non-conformists, to the Bishop of Chester. By Letters from very honest and sober persons in Cheshire, it is affirmed as a most certain Truth, that before the first Bishop of Chester died, an Informer comes to him at Chester, and acquaints him with some refractory People at Wiggon in Lancashire, who would not conform to the Laws and Cannons of the Church. He makes bitter Complaints against them, but before he could finish his story, the Lord finished his dayes; for while the Accusation was yet in his Mouth, he fell down before the Bishop, and died immediately. We doubt not but upon enquiry, others besides Phanaticks will satisfie the Reader of the Truth of this Relation. XV. One that very much rejoyced at the false report of a godly Ministers Death, was suddenly strucken with Sickness, and dyed: The Minister, blessed be God, being yet alive, and well. In the Month of September, 1661. it was frequently reported, that Mr. Venning, an Eminent Minister in this City (who lay long exceeding weak of a violent Feaver) was dead; which coming to the ears of a Person of some Quality, near Fanchurch-Street, seem∣ed to be very welcome news to him, and he expressed much joy at it; he could not contain himself, but in a most unchristian, yea, inhu∣mane way, when he came home, immediately imparted it to his Wife and another Woman who was with her, who he knew very well, did highly esteem and honour Mr. Venning, and his Mini∣stry, saying in a triumphing and insulting manner, What will the Women now do? for their God Venning is dead: It pleased the Lord
within a short space after, to strike this man with Sickness, where∣of he presently died. But blessed be the Lord Mr. Venning is yet alive, and restored by the mighty Power and Goodness of God to his perfect Health again. XVI. A great Persecutor of an Eminent Godly Minister, killed by one in his own defence, whom, he being in drink, assaulted upon the High-way. At Dunhead in the County of Wilts, lived one Captain Bennet, a violent Persecutor of Mr. Ince, the faithful and able Minister of that place; he was often urged by the said Mr. Bennet to read the Common-prayer-book; but one time above all the rest, he brought the Book to Church with him, and in the face of the Con∣gregation did present it to Mr. Ince, and with great violence and many menaces, did urge him to read it; but upon Mr. Ince's mo∣dest refusal, he grew outragious, and was even drunk and mad with Passion, threatning Mr. Ince, that he should not long conti∣nue to preach there; wherein he was as good as his word, for by the violence and fury of this Man especially, he was soon after forced to relinquish his place, and to his great prejudice to depart the Town also. When the Captain did thus demean himself, manifesting little less than the very venom and rage of Satan himself, Mr. Ince did by a kind of Prophetick Spirit, declare to to some in the Congregation, that he believed that this man would ot dye the common Death of other Men; which did accordingly come to pass: for not long after, the said Captain being much in drink, and affronting and assaulting one Mr. Dimon, a Citizen of London, in the Road near Salisbury, was killed by Mr. Dimon in his own defence; of which Fact, he was by Law acquitted at the Assizes following, and that by a Jury of Gentlemen, who were well known to be sufficiently prejudiced against the Parliament-Party, of which Mr. Dimon was judged to be one. But the mat∣ter of the Fact was so clear and apparent, that in Honour and Conscience, they could not condemn him. This Relation is so publickly known in the Country, that nothing need be said to in∣duce any to believe it.
XVII. An Episcopal Priest, who by Violence and unjust means, did possess himself of the Living of a Godly and able Minister, and Sub∣orned false Witnesses against him; had his Leg broken in a drunken Quarrel. One Mr. Piers, an Episcopal Priest, a man of a most vitious and debauched Conversation, did very unjustly and malitiously disturb one Mr. Field, a godly Minister, in his Rectory at Uffington, in the County of Lincoln, and endeavoured by virtue of an illegal Pre∣sentation from a private Patron, to possess himself of Mr. Fields Living; but Mr. Field overthrowing him at Law, he Suborned Witnesses against him, who swore him into a Prison, and then in a surreptitious way he gets possession of the Place, and the same day intrudes himself into Company, with whom he drank like the Head of his Tribe, and swore no less than the biggest Lifeguard-Oaths his Master could suggest to him, and then falls to quarrelling with some of the Company, who in despight of the Charm of his Sur∣single, did make bold with his Coat, and beat him sufficiently; and in the fray his Leg was broken, whereof he lay in most sad torture for many dayes; and whether he is since recovered or not, we have received no certain information. XVIII. A Judgement of God that happened upon a Man and his Wife, who Swore falsly against a godly Minister. Also one John Brown a Taylor, and an Inhabitant of Uffington before mentioned, was a known malitious Enemy to the said Mr. Field, the Minister, and one that by the instigation of the drunken swearing Priest before spoken of, did take an Oath against him most falsly and desperately. The next day after he had thus sworn, his Wife being very big with Child, fell down from a Ladder, and falling presently into Travel, was with great hazard delivered at last of a dead Child, which as the spectators have affirmed, was all over as black as Ink. Brown also himself not long after fell down, and by the fall was sadly bruised, insomuch that for many dayes
after he was not able to move himself without help. How God hath since dealt with him or his Wife, we have not heard. XIX. A great Persecutor of some godly Ministers, killed by the fall of a Riding-House, which was blown down by the Wind. Unto these two last mentioned particulars, we shall add one more, because it concerns the same honest Minister, Mr. Field, though otherwise it comes in out of order, in respect it bears date after many particulars, which ought according to our method, to have been inserted before it. One Mr. Luke Blith, an Attorney, living at Stamford in the County of Lincoln, an Officer in the late Kings Army, and in the present Militia, was a most violent Persecutor of Mr. Field, and did about the beginning of Hillary Term, 1661. express a great deal of rage and bitterness against him, and two other Godly Ministers in the Country, viz. Mr. Brown, and Mr. Richardson, and did openly swear, that if they did not speedily Conform, he would not leave them an Horse to ride upon, nor a morsel of Bread to eat; and accordingly came up to London, in order to the effecting of what he had in his malice designed against them. And particularly on the 18th. of February, 1661. before he went out of his Lodging in the Morning, he railed most bitterly against the Ministers of the Gospel in general, but especially against Mr. Field, saying, He would do his Work for him that day. But the Lord prevented him in his purpose, for that very morning (as we have related before) he was slain by the fall of a Riding-house, near Pickadilla, which was blown down by that most tempestuous wind, which a great part of England hath sad cause to remember happened upon that day; and whereof we have given so large account before. The Truth of these three last Relations is confirmed by ample and sufficient Te∣stimony. XX. A violent Persecutor of good men, his Horse sunk under him in a Pond of Water (according to an Imprecation which he had used a little before) he narrowly escaped Drowning, but present∣ly fell Sick of a Feaver, and dyed. One William Covel of Horniger, or Horningseath, in the Coun∣ty
of Suffolk, two miles from Bury, a violent Adversary to the Gospel, and the Faithful Preachers and Professors thereof, did se∣veral times instigate the Constable of the said Town, to present certain Conscientious and Peaceable men for not coming to the Parish-Church to hear Service; but the Constable did not at all hearken to him therein, being unwilling to have his hand in Per∣secuting and Molesting any of his Godly Neighbours: Upon which the said Covel was so enraged, that he wished his Horse might sink under him if he did not indict the Constable at the next Sessions, because he neglected (as he affirmed) his Duty, in not Presenting those honest Men, who refused to hear the Com∣mon-Prayer: But it pleased the Lord to rebuke the rage and madness of this Man; for about the latter end of the Month of November, 1661. before the time of the Sessions, upon a Market day, coming from Bury, and riding into a Pond not far from his own House, to wash his Horse, as he was wont to do, his Horse (which never used to do so before) did sink under him into the Water, where he was in danger of being immediately Drowned, being sometimes under the Water, and sometimes above Water, as himself confessed afterward; but it pleased the Lord, that one coming by and seeing him in this Condition, did presently call forth some of his own Family, who came seasonably to his help, and got him out of the Pond before he was Drowned. But though he escaped then, yet the hand of the Lord did still follow him, for he soon after fell into a violent Feaver, whereof in short time he dyed. And this is yet further to be noted, that he was the man, who a little before his Death, did put the Parish to about 80. l. Charge, by reason of his extraordinary busling to get the Bells new Run, and new Hanged: And it pleased God that he was the first in the Parish for whom the Death Bell did Ring, after the new hanging of the Bells. The certain truth of this whole Relation is attested by very many honest Persons, Inhabitants of the said Town. XXI. A Railing Prelate, Smitten by the Lord with a sad Tormenting Disease. About the Month of January, 1661. a reverend gaudy Prelate, did put forth a Book in Print, Intituled, A Pillar of Gratitude,
humbly dedicated to the Glory of God, the Honour of his Ma∣jesty, &c. in which Book, pag. 62. (having before in many Rheto∣rical strains, bitterly Scolded against his Quondam fellow Cove∣nanteers) he hath this angry and uncharitable passage; That the Projects of the Presbyterians have Froth in their Head, and Blood in their bottom; as the Water of those men who labour with the Stone, and Strangury, and have their Wounds from within. It pleased God within a few dayes after the publishing of this Book, to smite the Bishop with that tormenting distemper, which he there makes use of, to set off his false and scandalous Impeachment of so con∣siderable a part of the most conscientious and peaceable People in the Land. He lay in very great extremity of Torture, and by reason of the Stopping of his Water, his Life was in great hazard, and so was forced to send for a Chyrurgion, who by making use of his Probe, did help him to make water, which was Froth at the top, and blood at bottom: And that the Lord might make him yet more sensible of it, he repeated the stroak a second time after the same manner, as we have been credibly in∣formed from very eminent and considerable Persons. We could heartily wish, that there were now alive another Mr. Rogers of Wethersfield, who would deal effectually with the Conscience of this proud frothy Prelate, that he might be blessed with a more sanctified use of the hand of the Lord, in his Visitation of the Strangury, then of his broken Leg, in the former times. XXII. An Apostate Minister, struck with sudden Death, by the immediate hand of the Lord. About the end of December, or beginning of January, 1661. one Mr. Edwards, minister of Bettus, in the County of Salop, who formerly was very zealous for Reformation in the Presbyterian way, and of late became a great Conformist; upon a Munday Morning (after he had Preached and Conformed the day before) going very well out of his House to lead a Colt to the Water (his Servant at that time being otherwise imployed) was suddenly smitten by an Hand from Heaven, and returning presently into his House, and looking with a very pale and dejected Counte∣nance, his Wife asked him how it was with him? to whom he re∣plyed,
Oh! the hand of the Lord is upon me, or Words to that effect; he immediately took his Bed, and within a very short time dyed. The Jury that sate upon him, could find nothing about his Body that might occasion his so sudden Death; only there ap∣peared a small print of a Blow or Wound between his two Shoul∣ders: But that which is further observable in this Story, is, That every night in the week before the Death of this Minister, the Parish-Church Door was flung open, though locked very fast all the day before. One evening especially, two very sufficient Men of the Town, finding the Door open, lockt it very fast, and tryed with all their strength to break it open, but could not; then they departed, and within an hour after returned and found the Door wide open. Also three Nights in the same Week, viz. Munday, Wednesday, and Saturday, the Bell of the same Church (there being but one) was heard to Ring several times of its own accord. The truth of this whole Relation is attested by the Inhabitants of the Town before mentioned. XXIII. A New Conformist killed by a fall from his Horse. Also one Mr. Thomas, a Minister that lived near Bridgenorth, in Shropshire, (a person of the same Character with Mr. Edwards, Minister of Bettus before mentioned (onely for his endowments and abilities far more eminent and famous in the Country) ha∣ving been at a great feast, making merry with divers Gentlemen, his Neighbours, as he was riding towards his home in the Even∣ing, fell from his Horse, and the next morning was found dead in the High-way. This is a thing publickly known, and great observa∣tion made of it in all those parts of the Country. FINIS.
THE CONCLUSION. VVE shall not any further at present enlarge this Narrative, lest we make the Book to swell in price beyond the abili∣ties of the generallity of the People, (who are all equally concerned in these things) to compass it. There are about half a Century of particulars yet behind, some of which are as, if not more re∣markable than any that are here published, which in another Book by themselves, if the Lord give opportunity, shall immediately within few dayes succeed these, which are here offered to the World. In the mean time we cannot but hope for so much Charity from all ingenious, especial∣ly religious Men, into whose hands this account may fall, as to be candid∣ly interpreted in this undertaking, and that they will believe, we have here set down nothing, but what hath been communicated to us from persons whom we at least esteem of unblemisted Credit and Reputation. We will not be confident but that there may be some Mistakes, (it being very hard for a Story to be the same in the Translation which it was in the Original;) but this we can confidently avow, that there is not the least Forgery, nor wilful Mistake in the whole Work; and we hope that none have abused us in our Intelligence, which we also have examined and re∣ceived with all the Caution imaginable; and therefore do believe that the Reader upon enquiry will find no ground for any material Exception to any part of this or the succeeding Collection. We shall close up all with that Doxology of the Psalmist, Psal. 72.17, 18. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who onely doth wondrous things: And blessed be his glorious Name for ever, and let the whole Earth be filled with his Glory; Amen, and Amen. Errata. Page 12. l. 35. for Kirby read Raby. p. 15. l. 3. dele It. p. 15. l. 6. d. He. p. 25. l. 9. for prudence 1. pardon. p. 64. l. 19. f. super∣feces 1. superficies. p. 68. l. 30. f. an r. a. p. 75. l. 28. f. hear r. heard. p. 80. l. 9. f. greater r. great. p. 83. l. 28. blot out [the.]
