R5 13385698 99344
GREAT NEVVS FROM SAXONY: OR A NEW and STRANGE RELATION Of the Mighty GIANT KOORBMEP, OF His Devouring Men, and of the great Rebel∣lion raised by him, and his Confederates in the Midd SAXONY. IN A LETTER sent over from NODNOL, to a Peer of the Realm of ENGLAND; Dated the 10th Day of this Month of August. Now made Publick for General Satisfaction. My Lord, IN Obedience to your Lordships Command, I continue my Corre∣spondence, and I think it especially my Duty so to do, as often as Accidents of any considerable moment happen among us. I have formerly told your Lordship of the mighty Giant living in these parts, so great of Stature, as it is thought no former Age can pa∣rallel: He is about 15 Foot high, with Limbs in every part great, yet beau∣tiful and proportionable. He is not above 30 years Old, his Name
KoorbmeP, Count of Mount YremoG, one of the highest Mountains in the Empire, and Lord of Notliw Castle in Mercia, the usual place of his Residence. He was born of right Noble Parents, only one small blot lay upon the Family; for that his Grandfather was a Senator, and sate in the Assembly of the Angli (a great Nation of this Countrey) when they had murdered one of their best Princes, and exiled another. This young Giant in his Youth, seemed to be one of the most hopeful and towardly Personages in all the Land, and continued so many years, till happening into the company of Ebrietas, a most notorious Strumpet and Sorceress, she so bewitch'd him, that he fell in Love with her; and having Carnal Knowledge of her Body, begot a Monster, or rather Devil, call'd Insania; which to the Admiration of all People, spoke as soon as 'twas born; and excited her Father to the perpetration of most unheard of Villanies. He, who before seem'd to be composed onely of Courtesie and Good∣ness, Kindness and Affability; was all on the sudden chang'd into a Brutish Mon∣ster and a Canibal. He presently eat up one of his Friends, as a Commence∣ment of his future Cruelties; not out of need, but general Spleen to Man∣kind; together with wanton Bestiality. He bought up hundreds of huge devouring Creatures, not much unlike your English Mastiffs; and with the Carcasses of his slain Guests he fed them: after he had first com∣pell'd them to accept the loathsome Embraces of his she Ebrietas Devil. He bought a Lion for the self same purpose; and on a time, being set on by Ebrietas his Whore, against his Vertuous Lady; he lock'd the Lion into her Chamber, one whole day together; and coming home at Night he kill'd the Lion, because the Lion had not devoured his Wife. These things being told at Court, our Prince sent General Lex to seize this Giant, as a Murderer, who took him by surprize, and made him Prisoner in Caesar's Tower. There was a Beautious Lady at our Court, of high Extraction, nearly ally'd to the Prince himself; her Name Leuitas; and (as it is Natural for Handsome Women to love great Men) she entertain'd so much kindness for KoorbmeP, that she pro∣cured his Pardon and his Liberty, on his Paroll, ever after to live orderly, and obedient to the Laws; and to shun the company of Ebrietas, to whom he ow'd all his Faults and his Misfortune. But Liberty and Ease quickly perswaded this mighty Man, to recant the Promises▪ he had made under restraint. The very first time he met with his Baggage Ebrietas (the Bastard In∣sania coming also into company; for they were seldome asunder) she prevail'd with him to devour Yenoc, a Person of Quality of his Acquain∣tance, in the very Suburbs of this City; which so incensed the Prince, that he was again seized, before he could reach his Castle of Not∣liW; and now all People did expect nothing less than his Destruction, as a just reward of his Crimes. But it seems he was familiar with Pecunia, another eminent Witch (for you must know there are a∣bundance in this Countrey) and she so intoxicated the Understanding of the Evidence, and casts Mists before their Memories (as well as their Eyes) that they had nothing material to say against him: And so upon a solemn Tryal before his Just Peers, he was forc'd to be Publickly Ac∣quitted and Discharged, with only a severe Reprehension. After this he liv'd indifferent quietly some few years together, and might have done so his life-time, if he could have excluded his Old Whore from
his Company. But she and her Bastard still insinuating themselves into his Favour, rais'd an Army themselves; and prevail'd with him to joyn with them, in a publick War against General Lex (the sole Administrator of Affairs under our Prince) and on the 18th day of this present month of August, they entered in Hostile manner, into the Country of MahnruT Green, destroying all before them; Prince Noctis (under whose Government that part of the Country was) with all the strength he could gather together, opposed▪ this mighty Giant, Force against Force; but notwithstanding a brave Resistance, KoorbmeP the Giant came unawares, and eat up Prince Noctis, and another famous Commander, his Friend and Confederate, whose Name I have forgot∣ten; which had like utterly to have discumfitted our Party; till at last more Assistance coming in, by down-right Valour they forced the Giant to fly with his Followers. Great search has been made after him, but without any effect hitherto. Madam Lenitas is banisht the Court, it being partly her fault that all this Mischief has happened. And now General Lex is sent out with a great Army, to take the Giant dead or alive; and to fight the Army of Ebrietas, which we hear is grown very powerful; and most People believe will create a longer and more dangerous War, than that which once happened between Spain and the Ʋnited Neatherlands; or that now depending between our Em∣peror, and his Hungarian Rebels. Sir, By the next I expect to tell you, the Giant is made Prisoner; but when the Rebellion of the Witch E∣brietas, and her Confederates will be at an end, is out of my Prospect, and beyond the Skill of the most cunning Astrologers in all our Coun∣trey. NodnoL August 20th 1680. Your Lordships most humble Servant, B. R.
