S2093 R13288 13135551 97916
THE Scotish Inquisition; OR, A Short Account of the Proceedings OF THE Scotish Privy-Counsel, Justiciary Court, and those Commissionated by them, whereby the Consciences of good Men have been Tortured, the Peace of the Nation these several Years past exceedingly Disturbed, and Multitudes of Innocent People cruelly Oppressed, and inhumanely Murdered. IN the Tract of these years, altho' Informing was a Trade more encouraged than in the Reign of Tiberius, yet they Arraigned mul∣titudes without Informer or Accuser; and whoever appeared not upon their Summar Ci∣tation (which oftentimes was impossible) were treated as Criminals. They seized many of all Ranks, and detained then months, and years, without any significa∣tion of the cause of their Imprisonment; and seldom Liberate any such without Exorbitant Bail: but if they could find the least shadow to prosecute any suspected to mislike their Arbi∣trary courses, they precipitated their Process, not allowing them time or means to vindicate their Innocency. They sent their Inquisitors through their Pri∣sons and Citizens houses, to examine whom they pleased, upon most intricate Questions of Church and State-government, and made their refusing to answer, or dissatisfactory answers, the foun∣dation of their Indictments; others seized in the Crowd at Executions, and some when visiting the imprisoned, were Condemned and Execu∣ted, for refusing to justifie their Severities against their Brethren, and disowning their Dagon of Non-resistance. They frequently sent out Spies to Prisons, Cities and Country, under disguise, who by simulating their dissatisfaction at the Exorbitan∣ces of the Government, and Zeal for persecuted Pety, might draw words from the most wary, sustaining such and other Informers as habil Wit∣nesses to the taking away the Lives of many Innocents, notwithstanding of one Express Act of Parliament to the contrary. They often prosecuted without a Libel; and when they formed Libels, they seldom restricted themselves to the points therein contained, hold∣ing them, as confessed who refused to answer their captions and Extranious Questions. They not only employed Emissaries, but Judges themselves were active to suborn Witnesses against the Lives, Estates and Honours of Peers and worthy Patriots (a palpably gross manage∣ment of such an Intrigue, having qualified a per∣son for a chief Seat in their High Court of Ju∣stice) and when they could not find such Exe∣crable Ruffians to serve their turns, they forced Pannals to answer de super Inquirendis, in the most Criminal cases. They have often sustained Jurors and Witnesses, who could not purge themselves of prejudice or partial Counsel. They have Indicted, Tryed, Condemned and Executed persons in one day; and when Inter∣cession hath been made for some time to prepare for Death, it hath been answered, They shall have no time to prepare for Heaven, Hell is too good for them. They have kept some in expe∣ctation of Reprieves and Pordons, till the very day and hour of their Execution; others they have hanged early in the morning, thereby pre∣venting the peoples seeing their Cruelty, and hearing, the dying persons last words, and too palpably designing by such surprizals the Ruine of their Souls. They frequently beat Drums about the Scaffolds, their Cause being such as could not bear the words of dying Christians. They searched several, when removing them from the Prison to the Scaffold, seized their Te∣stimonies, that so they might not come to pub∣lick. They would have their Laws to reach Thoughts as well as Actions, and many against whom they could charge no matter of fact, they sought to reach their Lives for their Thoughts, asking them, What think you of the Govern∣ment, &c? Some they have wheedled to con∣fession, by promising to favour their Ingenuity, upbraiding them for dissemblers if they would not speak freely, and by mock-expostulations; viz. Are ye ashamed of your Principles? Are ye afraid to give a Testimony, &c? and forced them to subscribe their Confessions before the Council, which they produced as Witness against them at the Criminal Court, whereupon they were Sentenced and Executed. When any refused to give Categorical An∣swers, then could they extort all by Torture,
with their Engines of Cruelty, the Boots, fired Matches betwixt the Fingers, and Thumbkins, and after torturing hanged several, tho' thereby they could extort nothing. When some had answered all their Questions, and cleared themselves of all charged against them, yet would they not pass them so, but im∣pose some of their wicked Oaths, which they concluded they would not take, and according to the measure of tenderness they discovered in any, they apportioned the Oaths; to the stricter the more smooth; to the lxer the more harsh; such as once their own natural Consciences did scar at. They required not only to have their Laws obeyed, but subscribed also, holding it not suf∣ficient that people transgress them not, but like∣wise own the justice of them, and the lawfulness of the Authority Enacting them, and swear to maintain them, and yet when some have com∣plyed to all they sought, yet would they not discharge them, but upon Bond to answer again when called. Not only Extrajudicial Confession will su∣stain with them, but when they have given the publick Faith, the King's Security, the Act and Oath of Council, that such Confessions should not militate, yet they have brought it in as Evi∣dence, and given it upon Oath, when their for∣mer Act and Oath was produced in open Court in demonstration of their Perjury. They used frequently to pack Juries, picking out such as they thought any thing tender, and not bloody enough, and sometimes Listed some who they concluded would not concur, that thereupon they might get occasion to exact their Fines. Sometimes when the Jury hath brought in their Verdict in favour of the Pannal, they have made them return and resume the Cognition of the Process again, and threatened them with an Assize of Error if they did not bring him in Guil∣ty, yea frequently the Advocate threatened them under most peremptory Certifications if they found not the Impannalled Guilty; so that their using Juries was but for the Fashion. They have Sentenced innocent Persons twice, once to have their Ears cut off and Banished, and after the lopping off their Ears, they have re∣examined them, and Sentenced them to death. They used to stage several together, of whom they knew some would comply, to tantalize o∣thers with the sight of their Liberty, thereby tempting them to bite more eagerly at their naring Bais, to wound the Conscience. They have not only Murdered many innocent Christians in taking their Lives, but also endea∣voured to Murder their Reputation and the Cause they owned, loading it with most re∣proachful Epithets, which was their peculiar policy, to bring the Heads of Suffering to points most obnoxious to common Censer, d most Extrinsick to Religion, cutting off the ithful Professors of Religion, and true Lovers of Li∣berty, under the odium of Enemies to Govern∣ment. Some they Arraigned whom they could nei∣ther reach by adducing many Witnesses against in Tryal, nor by their Examination with their cruel Torture of the Boots, yet hath had their whole Estate seized, and also been sent to Prison in a Rock within the Sea, without being Con∣victed of any Crime. They finding their means and motions under colour of Law, and Trals were too slow and troublesom to acquire y their designed Cruel∣ties, and that the publick Executions tended more to confirm and multiply the Lovers of Religion and Liberty, than to diminish and deter, took a more compendious way of sending out their Soulders impowered to Challenge and Examine whom they pleased, and to tender Oaths required by no Law, and to punish such by present death who refused to Swear, or scru∣pled to Answer their ensnaring Questions, which bloody Commissions were so faithfully Execu∣ted, that within few Weeks above Fifty inno∣cent Persons were cruelly Murdered in cold Blood, without either Tryal or Conviction, or respect to Age or Sex. Although the multitudes of Families ruined by Exorbitant Finings, Forfeitures, Banishments, Imprisonments, Free-quarterings and Plunder∣ings of Souldiers, and Batbarities of their High∣land Host: the many cruel Edicts and Proclama∣tions they have published, the unlawful Bonds, and wicked self-contradicting Oaths imposed and pressed, the many Exactions whereby they have impoverished the Country, the many open Op∣pressions, horrid Tortures and Cruelties practi∣sed upon Innocents, the multitudes of Persons Male and Female, whom they have Murdered, Persecuted, Oppressed and Destroyed, are so many and various that they cannot be Collected: Yet some have been at no small pains to gather as much of these, as when published in a Mar∣tyrology of these times, (which is purposed to be done with all convenient speed) will give the World to know as well the Faithfulness, Pati∣ence, Courage and Constancy of these who suf∣fered, together with the Equity of their Cause, as the Inhumanity, Illegallity and Severity of their Cruel and Bloody Persecutors. LONDON, Printed, and are to Sold by Richard Janeway in Queens-Head-Ally in Pater-Noster-Row. 1689.
