S2247 R26232 9398532 42962
A Seasonble WARNING TO Protestants; FROM THE CRUELTY and TREACHERY OF THE PARISIAN MASSACRE, August the 24th. 1572. WHEREIN, The Snares laid for the Innocent are Detected, and Posterity Cautioned not to Believe. WITH The Pope's Bull to Encourage and Justifie the Massacre and Rebellion of IRELAND. Collected from the best French Historiographers. LONDON, Printed for Benj. Alsop, at the Angel and Bible over against the Stocks-Market. 1680.
A Seasonble WARNING TO Protestants; From the Treachery and Cruelty of the Massa∣cre of Paris, August 24th. 1572. An Introduction to the ensuing History. WHoever shall place out a few Pence to Purchase, and a few Hours to Peruse this Tragical History, and shall thence create to himself panick Fears of Papal Power, and not learn to suspect Papal Promises, has clearly thrown away his Coin and time in buying, and Reading it. For the true Design of this Pamphlet, is not to intimidate Mens Spirits with dreadful Apprehensions of the Papists Strength, but to Arm and Fortifie their weak Souls against it; nor to discourage them with a dismal story of Romish Treacheries, but to Caution them to a prudent Jealousie of being ensnared by them. An Attempt of great Serviceableness to the present Age, for I am perswaded there was never yet any Impostor that made it his Business to deceive, but he might always find a Number of Easie, Ductile, Tractable Souls, that were as ready to be deceived as he could wish. We are commonly Liberal, nay, Prodigal of severe Language, and hard words, against Treachery, Falshood, and Perjury, and yet though Popery has upon these Accounts been Stript, and Whipt, and Pillory'd, and Burnt in the Hand, Fore-head, and Shoulder,
'tis an even wager, that in the next Instance, we shall be as palpa∣bly over-reacht, as if we never had had fair warning given us of their Policies, nor ever smarted for our own hasty belief. I intend not to Anticipate the History it self, by making Tragi∣cal declamations against the Inhumanity, the Barbarity of the Gri∣sian Faction, therein described. The Narrative it self will do the Reader that piece of Service without my assistance, which must be an Impertinent Tautology, if I should; or else a lame and defective Stoy, if I should not Transcribe the Book in the Introduction. But the Treachery of that Contrivance, as it made way for the Cly, is that alone against which I must now Caution the Reader, which if he shall take, and Skilfully improve, he has the Encou∣ragement of an Infallible Observation, That none ever yet perished by Popish Fury, that wre  first Cajoled by Popish Subtilty; but if he shall despise the Cation given him, he must expect to fall under a more severe Axiome. That they whom God intends to Destroy, he first Infatuates, and then leaves them to be scourged by their own Credulity 'Tis the poorest Alleviation of Misery in the World, to Complain that we were Trappn'd into our Miseries; and none meet with less pity (what-ever they deserve) than those silly good Natur'd Pools, that suffer their careless Foot to be taken a second time in that Snare out of which they were once delivered: He perishes justly, that pe∣rishes after open Proclamation, and Personal Experience of Danger; and must be presumed willing to be Cheated, who is twice snickled by the same Fallacy. We pity him that once strikes upon a Rock, but if he Ship-wrack a second time, let him pity himself. Wise Men have Authenticated that Rule, Nervus est Sapientiae il fidere, He that trusts none, can never be Cheated: For the weak∣er to be over-powred by the stronger, is no Reproach; for the In∣nocent, plain-hearted Man to be out-witted by an old beaten Cheat, is an easie supposal; but to trust that Man, that has given me de∣monstration that he will deceive me, and whose Interest it is to de∣ceive me, this I say is unpardonable. Suspicion always Dwels next door to Wisdom; and I reckon him the onely Secure Person, that carries so much Jealousie in his Breast, as to make him wary, and yet so much Wit with it, as to conceal his Jealousies from those whom he suspects. The best Expedient I can think on at present, to awaken us out
of our Security, is to make a Visit to Ludgate, where, if we Ex∣amine Prisoners, by what Accident they came into that Condition, they are all in one Tone and Tune; They lie not in for their own Debis, but were either Bound for Knaves, or had Knaves Bound to them, who left them in the lurch to Repent at leisure the for∣wardness of their Faith, and withal bewail that their Repentance so muh resembles that of Hell, that it is fruitless, and booless. And though the Apology of the Individuals may be Disguised with different Circumstances, yet the Total Sum of their Plea mounts to no more than this little, that they ventured their Estates, where they durst have ventured their Lives, but he that appear'd the Picture of Honesty, proved the Pattern of Roguery; and now they must ex∣plate other Mens Crimes, by Folly made their own, in a Nook of Hell, more terrible, because more real than that of Purgatory. I confess the Miscarriage of some odd single Persons in this kind is not to be remedied, unless we could put depraved Humane Nature once more upon the Stocks, and when we had Carin'd her, and made her tight, could Launch her anew into the World. But for Kingdoms, Common-wealths, for Great Bodies of able Head-pieces, to be charm∣ed into a dead sleep by the soperiferous Rod of our Mercurial Jesui∣tical Politicians, this is that, which begets my wonder and astonish∣ment; especially when it may be presumed that some of them have Travelled by the help of History into former Ages, where nothing more frequently occurs, than whole Charnel Houses filled with the Bones of those Confiding Fools, whom their own Credulity had be∣tray'd into their Graves, with this sorry Epitaph to perpetuate their Memories, Here lies a Good Natured Fool. The Story of John Huss has been worn so thread-bare, that it's now Scandalous to wear it any longer; who trusting to the safe Con∣duct of Sigismund the Emperour, ventured himself to Constance, where the Infallible Council declared, That no Faith was to be kept with Hereticks; and accordingly made him the first Example of their Opinion, and Burnt, what little Honesty they had lest, and the good Man in the same Fire. Luther indeed escaped much better at Wormes, which we ascribe not to the great Truth of the Papists, but the greater Faithfulness of God, who moved the Emperour to assert Luther's Protection, and not basely give him up to the Hands of them whose fingers itcht to be dealing with him.
Nor dare I Condemn those single presidents of Christian Forti∣tude, who have taken their Lives in their hands, and laid them at Gods Foot, and afterwards laid them down at the Stake in Defence of the Truth against its Enemies; for if none should Suffer, where would be our Martyrs? If all should Suffer, where would be our Confessors? If all were alike Zealous, we should want a Seminary for the next Age. If all were equally Timerous, we should want Witnesses for the present Age; but this we must Condemn, when A Protestant People, wheadled with Sugred words, and smooth pro∣mises shall Surrender themselves upon Discretion to Papal Power, which is their constant Method to get us into their Iron Claws; and then we may weep our fill, whilst they sit and Laugh at our Credulity. And to speak a known Truth, there are none that hear worse on this Account (I mean their Credulousness) than the Protestants of whom their Enemies Insult, That what the Hereticks ever got by Fighting, they always lost by Treating; and what the Papists lose by dry blows, they always recovered by Finesses. We have indeed believed our selves almost out at the heels, and have Traded so long on Catholick Publick Faith, that we are well∣nigh Bankrupts. And yet we that have smarted so sore, by trust∣ing their Equivocating Oaths, have learnt so little Wit, (which we have bought and paid for so dear) that we are ready to run the same Risque, and venture into the Lions Den, when there are no Foot∣steps that may Encourage us to hope for a safe Return. I know well they that are no Slaves to their words, and abhor that Conscience, which would be their Master, have a huge Advantage over others who deal upon the Square, to draw them into those Snares they had laid for them; nor is it any new thing to see the less considerate part of Mankind perplexed with a thousand Inconvenien∣ces, which praecaution and fore-sight would easily have discovered and prevented, which being Neglected, like Hectick Fevers, and left to discover themselves, prove Remidiless. And though these Traps by some few circumspect Persons are discerned and notified, yet the Misery is, The few that are not Cheated, are so weakned by the heedless Vulgar who are, that they become a Prey to the Fury of their Enemies; as the sheepish many were before made a prize to their falshood; and thus the Multitude being caught in the Old Muse set for them in the Hedge, the rest are knockt o'th' Head by Club-Law,
and both the one, and the other, first or last meet in the same pit of Ruine, though driven or drawn several wayes thither. 'Tis no contemptible Artifice of our Catholicks, that they have their Decoy-Ducks, in every Company where innocent and lesse∣wary men converse together, and when any specious and plaucible Pretence is given out to charm suspition, these Instruments instructed for the game, tell us how dis-ingenuous it is to suspect and enter∣tain sinister conceits of Persons of Honour, and Reputation, and that we ought to put the fairest construction the words will bear upon such Promises and Protestations, for why should we suspect evil where none appears? and when they have once gotten us into the Tram l, they shall be fairly dismist, and our necks wrung off without mercy. There was never man that could conceal an inveterate grudge better then Absalom, till a fit juncture should invite him to execute his implacable malice; Revenge boyled in his heart, but a Ban∣quet must be the Train to the Trap, and then he that could smile so friendly in Amnons face, could strike him home under the fifth rib, and need not repeat his blow. I have smil'd to see with what applause some purblind spectators entertain'd a Health (at a feast too) where a solemn Protestation, (like a lump of Sugar dissolved in the glass, to make it go merrily down,) was made, To secure the Protestant Religion; and the gul∣lery meeting with some ears that were of a just bore for it, past for a proof of Reconcileableness: But if Protestants will be of the Orthodox Faith, to save their lives, they must be Nullifidians, or rather positive unbelievers. As much faith as you please in God, where you have his veracity to assecurate your faith; and as little in men of that Complexion as ever you can for your lives; and perhaps there's as great Truth in this Article of my Creed; That Protestants must be saved by their unbelief; as there is in the Ranverse of it, That Protestants must be saved by their Faith. The Crocodiles tears, and the Syrens Songs are equally suspicious, equally dangerous, which point the Author of the Impartial history of the Massacre of Ireland, had made out to satisfaction; who observes that immediately before the eruption of that barbarous outrage, the Irish Papists shewed the greatest complaisance, and debonarity im∣aginable, so that some began to hope they were approaching to∣wards
humanity, and going to strip themselves of the Satyre and Canniball: but never did a dead Calm Prognosticate such a dread∣full Hiricane? nor a morning Sun, ever conclude the day with such Cataracts of fire, and brimstone. It seems a wonder to me that the wild-Irish, who are but one, (if one) degree removed from unreasonable bruits, should be ca∣pable of acting the hypocrite; but I wonder not at all they could play the part of murderers: for they who have no sentiments of honour, or honesty, know no difference of good or evil, under∣stand no distinctions of virtue, or vice, but what there bellies, or more sottish Priests infuses into them, 'tis as natural for them to be ferine, as for their own Native Wolves to howl for their prey, and the only Question is, whether they taught the Wolves or the Wolves taught them that Barbaric kind of yelling. Now then if it be so unpardonable a sin to believe Catholick promises, I hope I may advance one step further, I say, 'tis no Capital crime to believe their threatnings, for they that will be worse then their good words, will be full as bad as their evil ones, and as I would never desire better grounds for my Suspicion that a Papist intends me no good than that he Flatters; so neither can I desire clearer grounds for my assurance that he designs me mischief, than that he Menaceth. When Queen Mary was at a low ebb of Fortune, how did she Caress and Complement the Suffolk Gentry, but when she was once settled in the Throne, and the Crown firmly rivetted upon her Head, her swelling Promises to preserve their Persons, to secure their Religion, to Indulge tender Consciences, prov'd but a Tym∣pany, and she went so long with that Great Belly, that at last she Miscarried of a Cushion. That temper of Spirit therefore which I would recommend to all true English-men towards the Papists is this, neither slavishly to fear them, nor in any case to trust them. First, Not to fear them; for though they presume strangely upon  that they may form what Plots they please against our Lives and Religion without Control, and may deal with us like Felons assign∣ed to the Colledge to be dissected and mangled after Execution; yet we would let them know, that such Anatomies are not to be practi∣sed upon us whilst we are alive, nor do we intend to be Scotcht in∣to
Collops, or chopt into mince-meat to save their Longings, without our own Consent, which I can assure them they are not likely in haste to obtain. I have seen a sorry Lap-dog, a Ladies great Jewel, to teaze, and towze, and mowzle a Cat with Imperious Pride up and down the Chamber, but when Majestick Puss has awaken'd her provoked Courage, and given the Proud Puppy to feel the sharpness of her Claws, the ridiculous Elf would run whining to Miss for Protection. Let not the Papists if they have Wit in their Anger, rouze the sleep∣ing English Lion, perhaps he may give them such a swinge, as shall make their rotten Bones rattle in their Skins, and run to Rome to Complain to His Holiness what hard Usage they have met with from the Hereticks. For my own part, I will talk of dying by their Hands when I am in their Power, and will Compound as cheap as I can for my Life when I lye at their Mercy, and in the mean time will use all Ho∣nest means, Providence shall afford me, not to fall into the one, nor need the other. If any shall ask, What means I account unlawful to prevent their Cutting my Throat? I will Answer according to my present thoughts, In good Earnest I do not know, nor perhaps ever shall, till they can teach me by what Right they can Butcher me, in any case where∣in I may not Honestly Defend my self: I know some of their Friends in Masquerade, Preach up other Doctrine; That we must then prepare to preserve our Lives, when our Enemies have dis∣patcht us; and as (they say) our Irish Tories never think their Enemies dead, till their Heads are separated a Yard at least from their Bodies: So we must be well assured the Papists have destroy∣ed us, before we think of obviating the Destruction; that is, It's then only Lawful to Defend our selves when 'tis too late. Secondly, Not to Trust them. It's observed by the Ingenuous Author of Il Cardinalismo, That the Politicks of the Roman Con∣fistory are quite different from those of all the European Courts: They take other Measures, they proceed by other Maxims peculiar to themselves, and manage their Intrigues in other Methods than Vul∣gar Statists: And the Reason perhaps may be, that having propo∣sed to themselves this One great End, to Advance their Monstrous and Impious Kingdom over and above the Universe, they must bog∣gle
at no means, how Villanous soever, that looks fair towards its accomplishment. For as Christians have their Ʋnum Necessarium, which Commands all prescribed means to reach it; so have the Ca∣tholicks their One thing Necessary too, the Acquiring, and Securing that Secular Grandeur that has bewitched their Souls, in Order whereto, all Differences of Just or Unjust by Reason, or Scripture assigned, are Cashiered, and the only thing considerable with them is, whether it will Advance the Design, and beyond that they look no further: Hence is it, that to Flatter intolerably, to Perjure stre∣nuously, or Murder unmercifully, are but various lines that meet in the same point, and Virtue that opposes their mischievous Projects, is a more abominable Name than Vice, that furthers them. It is not long since these Politicians pluckt off the Mask, and in plain English words threatned we should feel the keenness of their Wild-Irish Swords, and I am ready enough to believe they intend∣ed really as they spoke (in one thing we may allow them to be sin∣cere) that they are designing of Ruine, always provided, that we will sit still like Milk-sops with our fingers in our mouths, and only desire them to be good to us, and Cut our Throats as handsomly, and easily as they can, and not disfigure our Weasons; and some Sweet-Natured Protestants are Consulting, not how they may wea∣ther the Storm, but how they may drown decently. But more lately they have pluckt in their hornes, to save their heads, and retreat to their old Axiome; Children are to be cheated with Toys, and men with Oaths. A principle which unglews the Joynts, and cuts the Sinews of all Society asunder; For an Oath being the highest Security that man can give to man of his veracity, either in asserting, or promising, if once they have got the Knack to dispense with its Obligation, and turn the Sacrament of Piety in∣to a Bond of Iniquity, which an Omnipotent Pope can do, all Go∣vernment is dissolved, and Mankind thrown into a state of Confu∣sion, wherein each mans hand is against another. And what Security can they give that lesser Cords should hold them, who can as easily snap asunder these Sacred Bonds, as Sampson did the green Withs that bound him? If Faithfulness fail, all Faith must fail; where there's no trustiness, there ought to be no Trust: And since they have declared That no Faith ought to kept with Here∣ticks (and the Pope with one turn of his Infallible Hand can make
us so) Protestants must be Chronicled for the most errand Fools that ever went in long Coats, and wore a bauble at their Backs, if ever they give them Faith who have declared they will keep none: And if they have Religiously Vowed to Betray us, I know not what can Excuse our Lethargy, if we do not make a Counter-vow never to believe they will keep touch in that one thing, who have been firm and constant in nothing but Falshood and Perjury. Suppose then we heard a Voice from Heaven, saying, Tolle & Lege! Take up this Book, and Read it! And an Echo to that voice, Let him that Reads Ʋnderstand, yet must we take out our Lesson too, That no Faith is to be given to Popish Promises, which except we be perfect in, we must begin again, unless we will lose our Labour in the first, for want of better Attention in a second Reading. I shall Conclude with one Scripture (whilst we have them in good English) Psal. 55.23. Bloody and Deceitful Men shall not live out half their Days; where I observe a strange Conjunction between Cruelty and Treachery; but that which is most Useful to us is, that when they threaten we shall not live out half our days, God hath threatned, They shall not live out half of theirs; and God's Thun∣der-bolts will do surer Execution than the Popes. Of all which we have unparallel'd Examples in this little History, viz. Of Papal Cruelties and Treacheries, and that Divine Nemesis which pursued and followed the Bloody Murderers.
The Massacre of PARIS, August the 24th. 1572. FRancis the Second dying Decemb. 14th. 1560. made way for the Entrance of Charles the Ninth, whose Minority not admitting him to the Actual Exercise of the Government, the Queen Mother was by the Parliament of Paris admitted Queen Regent, and the Administration of the Kingdom Committed to her the 23d. of the same Moneth of December. The Queen, like Nero's Nurse, Trained up her Young Pupil to Blood, and he, though Young, being subtle beyond his Years, drunk in her Instructions as readily as she could infuse them, for she being Originally an Italian, had in her Constitution Cruelty and Treachery, to serve her own Occasions, and spare enough for her Son. There had been in this Kings Fathers days a Bloody Persecution raised against the Protestants, for which they never wanted Reasons, that had a Will: But it was thought advisable in this Juncture to mitigate the Severity of it a little, and wait a fitter Season to exe∣cute their palliated Malice, which, though covered in the Ashes, was not extinguished: To this end, and to render the poor Pro∣testants secure, the Reproachful Names of Papist, Hugonot, or Pro∣testant, were forbidden upon pain of Death. The Protestants, who judged it their Duty to Govern themselves by the out-side of the Pro∣clamation, Conscienciously refrain'd from those provoking terms; but the Papists, who understood beyond the Letter of it, forbore not there usual Terms of Hereticks and Hugonots. To beget the greater Confidence, a while after, all Magistrates are straitly Commanded to Release those who were Imprisoned for Religion: And the King of Navarre (a professed Protestant) is Declared the Kings Lieutenant-General, has the Keys of the Palace
delivered to him, which hitherto the Duke of Guise, of the House of Lorrain, had kept by the Office of Grand Master. Not long after followed the Kings Coronation, to Honour which Solemnity, a New Edict came forth, Commanding all Magistrates not to Molest or Disturb the Protestants upon account of their Religion; and further Ordering the Possessions, Houses, Goods that had been seized upon that score, to be restored. The face of things seem'd to smile upon the Hugonots, and they were willing to promise themselves Peace and Rest after long Trou∣ble, from the Royal Promises; when unexpectedly to them, An Or∣der comes forth from the King, Queen, and Duke of Guise, That all Protestant Ministers by a day prefixt do depart the Kingdom, and that no Religion be openly professed but that of the Romists, upon such Penalties as were therein expressed. The Protestants thus surprized, had no way left, but by most Humble Addresses to Supplicate his Majesty to Admit a Conference between some of the Prelates and their Ministers, which at last was appointed to begin at Poissie, Sep. 9. 1561. where the Doctrines and Principles of the Protestants were Discussed and Examined in the presence of the King. His Holiness who never well liked these Conferences (upon even terms) suspecting the Issue, dispatches the Cardinal of Ferrara to the King, with his Fatherly desires, (which Dutiful Sons will Inter∣pret Commands) that this Matter might be referred to the Determi∣nation of the Council of Trent. But France was not then very fond of that Council, and for some Reasons of State, suspected the De∣signs of those Fathers; so that nothing was done that way. The Catholicks of France not Approving the tedious Methods of Application to the Council, in which (as in all Great Bodies) Mat∣ters of Weight move heavily, betook themselves to their more Ex∣peditious ways of Murdering the Protestants. The Parisians fall furiously upon all that came in the way of their Rage, and without any Colour from the least provocation, Fire the Suburbs: At St. Medard they Ring the Alarum-Bell, and then Wound, Kill, Hang up great Numbers of Protestants, and amongst the rest, one Mon∣sieur Gableston, a Knight; all which were posted into the other World, before they could have time to consider either why they were sent out of this World, or whither they were a going. And
throughout the whole Kingdom the Protestants generally met with the same Measures. But the Queen, who saw her self not strong enough to go through with the Attempt, pretends to be mightily Concern'd for the Pro∣testants, and highly to resent the hard Usage they had found from the Multitude; and therefore Summons all the Eight Parliaments of France to meet at St. Germains, where by the King, Queen, the Princes and Nobles it was finally agreed, That the Protestants should have the full, and free Liberty to Profess and Exercise their Religion, and in Order thereto, to Meet and Assemble Publickly. This Edict was Dated, and Solemnly Sworn to the seventh of Ja∣nuary, and was therefore called, The Edict of the Pacification of January. And now to Rock the Protestants once more asleep (which was very easie to do, seeing they had been so long kept awake by Blood-shed, and Fury) the D. of Guise must pretend great dissa∣tisfaction at the Favours shewed the Protestants, which part he was well qualified to Act, and therefore in seeming Discontent he re∣tires into Spain, having first taken exact Measures with the Queen how he might there lay the Ground-work of the Designed Tra∣gedy. The Queen on her part Dissembles as well as an Italian could do, and discovers her Just Resentments at the D. of Guise's departure, openly Declaring she was Necessitated to joyn with the Protestants, to Secure the King, and her own Person, against the Practises of the Guisian Faction. She therefore sends to them to crave their Assistance, not that she might know what to hope, but what to fear from their Arms. The Protestants, whose Innocency would not let them suspect that Villany and Treachery should lodge in the Breast of a Person of that Character, of which they found no Seeds in their own, could not possibly sound the Bottom of this Dissimulation, and there∣fore readily offer the King and Queen to Defend them with their Lives and Fortunes, against the D. of Guise, and his Party, who (as was then rumour'd) had invited the Spaniard into France, which was indeed only an Artifice to induce the Protestants to be∣lieve that the Queen was real in her tendries to them, because In∣terest would teach her to satifie her self, with the whole Power of
the Hugonots against the power of Guises and Spain. And so well were they skill'd in the Art of Dissimulation, and acted their parts so to the life, that the common sort of the Pa∣pists, who were not fit to be entrusted with the design, looked up∣on these appearances to be realities, and murmured most bitterly against the Queen. for her favours shewed to the Protestants. About this time the King of Navarre, Constable of France, and some few others deserted the Protestant Cause, and Apostatized to that of the Papists: The Duke of Gitise, and his brother the Cardi∣dinal of Lorrain, with the Constable, and many other principle Pa∣pists, knowing that tho the Protestants were more numerous by their late Persecution (which is the usual blessing that waits on Couragious suffering for the true Religion,) yet withall observing them to be very secure, thought it a fit time to return from Spain, and in their journey towards Paris at Vessay, they fall upon a Con∣gregation of Protestants, assembled for the worship of God, and in a most inhumane manner, (agreeable only to themselves) Massa∣cres 200 men, women, and children, which was not the blunting, but the sharpning of their swords for greater executions: with this success they advance to Fountain-blean, where they seize the King outwardly by Force, secretly by his Consent: while the Pro∣testants bewailed that their good King should thus wretchedly be made a property, to Colour, or Cover their ambition. At Paris they offerd outragious dealing to the Protestants, deface their pla∣ces of Religious worship, which they could the better justifie hav∣ing the Royal Name, and Authority, to vouch for what they acted; for who would be so hardy as to resist them that were Commissioned by his Majesty. This example of the Grandees at Paris was enough to warrant and encourage the other Papists to commit the like Insolencies all over the kingdom; which Alarmed the Protestants, and made them think there was some Collusion: and therefore began a little to pre∣pare for their own Defence; which the Court discovering, despair∣ed of effecting their main design by force, and therefore had re∣course to their old Artifices, once again to make them secure in their own thoughts, to which end the Queen-mother pretends her self af∣fraid of the Duke of Guise, and his exorbitant power, she writes to the Prince of Conde (a firm Protestant) that he would timely pro∣vide
for their Common safety; at whose Command, the Prince with Admiral Colligny march with their Army, to Defend the King, Queen, themselves, their Religion and Liberties against the Guisan Faction, maintained by Foreigners; and this Commenced The first Civil war in France. The Queen finding the Protestants Army much greater then she expected, and sooner raised then she imagined, put on a face of joy, when her heart had another look, and repined with great Regrett, knowing upon the view of their strength, that they were able to give battle to the Duke of Guise, the King of Navarre and all her Accomplices. She therefore perswades the Prince and Admiral, that she would enterpose with her whole power and Interest to com∣pose Publick differences to their satisfaction by which Policy, she slackned their prosecution of the War, till the Catholicks were in a better posture to receive them: but these gallant Princes who could sooner dye then be guilty of an unworthy action, were un∣der great disadvantages, because they were acquainted with no∣thing but sincerity in their own breasts. The Queen having as she supposed reacht the end for which she put on the Mask, now openly throws it off, and Proclaims the Prince of Conde, and the Protestants, Rebels; but the Prince pleading that he was a Prince of the Blood, by the Laws of France ought to have a share in the Government; that his Majesty ought not to be kept a prisoner, and led in Triumph by Foreiners, nor to grant Commissions by Duress, being indeed all this while in Honorary Captivity, and therefore it was too unlimited and Arbitrary a power, which she arrogated to her self: first to cause them to Arm, and then to Proclaim them Rebels for Arming, so that they flatly refuse to lay down their Arms, but upon Reasonable Terms. Such was the assistance heaven afforded to these Forces that they reduced the Insulting Papists to a necessity to Renew, and confirm to them the Pacification of January, with a plenary Indemnity which (was perhaps more then needed) for whatsoever acts of hostility had been committed in that War; wherein the Protestants had this sig∣nal evidence of their courage, that both the Duke of Guise, and the King of Navarre lost their lives in it. With what bestial savageness, rather then humane valour the Ca∣tholicks managed this War, is best known to their Ravishing of
Virgins, ripping up women great with child, burying men alive, cut∣ting out the hearts, and livers of some, and then eating them, out of wantonness, not hunger, wherein Rage and Fury, supplyed the want of true Courage and Gallantry; and all these horrid villanies com∣mitted after faith past, oathes given, and fair quarter promised. This Peace continued as long as the Papists Interest would allow it to be sacred, and no longer, viz. from April 1562, till March, 1563; During which time they secretly reinforced themselves, and onely waited an occasion (which when it should be useful, they knew to make just) to fall upon the secure Protestants. The fifteenth of December following, the Parliament at Roan de∣clared that King to be out of his Minority, and capable of taking the Reins of Government into his own hands; who then Solemnly swore, that he would inviolably observe The Edict of Pacification, severely threatning the Infringers thereof with the utmost penal∣ties, which once more put the unwary Protestants in possession of the Fools Paradise. About this time (that no mischief might be sacred without the benediction of holy Mother Church) the Cardinal of Lorraine con∣sulted the Fathers at Trent. About the most proper means to ex∣tirpate the Protestants out of France; who prudently advised, that an Alliance of all the Catholick Princes should be formed, and concluded: pursuant hereto the King makes a progress for his Diversion, and (as if casually in his journey) meets with the king of Spain, where these two Princes (without any noyse for fear of awaking them that were fast asleep) enter into this Association; the Duke of Savoy, easily is brought in, the Emperor becomes a party to it; and the Popes Legate solemnly joyns their hearts and hands; which confe∣deracy, because it was entred into for such Pious ends, was called the Holy League. Pope Pius the 4th. earnestly desires the most Christian king to receive the Decrees of his Tridentine Councill, in his Dominions, which was strongly seconded by the Spanish, and Italian Embassadors, and that the Edict of pacification might be Cas∣sated and disannulled; but this Proposal because it might rowse up suspicion, was (though not rejected) at present waved. The King and Queen coming to Lyons, one of the Towns as∣signed to the Protestants for the free exercise of their Religion, by the late Peace, forbids them peremptorily the exercise of their Religion,
and in all other Fortified places: by which one Nod of his head, he sufficiently intimated to his apprehensive Catholicks what was his Royal will and Pleasure: nor would they give him the trouble or Inconvenience to speak his mind more fully, but fall to their work in Crevan, Bourgoyn, Tours, and many other places; where the Number of the Slaughtered Protestants was so great, that the Ri∣vers ran with their Blood; and all this in a time of Pacification, and therefore more Connatural to them who delight to shed the Blood of War in Peace. But in Order to somewhat more Satisfactory to the Humour of his Holiness, the Duke D'Alva is sent by the King of Spain with an Army into the Low-Countries, to make sure work with the Prote∣stants on that side: And the French King, under the pretence of a Guard for his Person, and the better Securing the Protestants, and his Frontiers, raises an Army of Switzers; but some Letters miscar∣rying, gave plain Intimation, that they were raised to seize the Prince of Conde, the Admiral, and the Heads of the Protestant Party; wisely reckoning, that if the Heads of that Interest were lopt off, the rest would be a liveless, and useless Trunck, without the Influence of their Courage and Conduct. Upon this Discovery, and the Kings denying to do them Justice for the daily Insolences offered them, and Barbarous Massacres committed upon them, according to the Edict of Pacification, so Solemnly made, so frequently Confirmed, the Protestants stand up∣on their Guard, which was adjudged a welcome Occasion for the beginning of The Second Civil War. The Issue of this War, was much like that of the former; for the Protestants, though Inferiour in Numbers, yet Superiour in Courage, and Innocency, which is the Root of Courage, bore up against this Formidable Combination of Rome and Hell; so that the King and Queen, not finding the Event to answer their great hopes conceived from an Army composed of the Flower of the Strength of France, Italy, and Spain, and Marching under the Blessing and Prayers of his Holiness,. propose a Treaty of Peace; to which the Protestants having no other Designs, than the Securing to them∣selves that Liberty which God and Nature had given them a Title to, and of which by the Laws of the Land, they had been Actually possessed of, readily agreed to, and the Edict of Pacification was
once more Confirmed, by Virtue whereof, they were freely, and fully to enjoy the Publick Exercise of their Religion, notwithstanding whatever Restrictions and Interpretations had been made to the Contra∣ry: The Protestants were to deliver up to the King all places of Strength at present in their Hands, except three, which by the Ar∣ticles of the Peace, were to be kept as Cautions in the Prince of Conde's Name, during the term of two full Years, from thence to be expired. The King not having obtained his Ends by War, Resolves to ef∣fect it by the Peace: And first, he Dissolves his Council, and calls a Junto, or Cabinet-Council, consisting of some few Privadoes, who might safely be entrusted with the Great Secret, Excluding many, who by Birth and Office were Entitled to that Dignity: The Main Resolve of this Cabal was to Surprize, and Cut, off the Prince of Conde, the Admiral, and the Chief the Protestants, who were then at Noyers: In Order to which Exploit, the King gives Instructions to his Forces in those parts, to draw towards Noyers, pretending only the Conveniency for Quarters. The Prince and Admiral were at their old pass of Security, and had not the least intimation of their Enemies Approach till they were near the Town; yet Providence having reserved them for o∣ther ends, they made their escapes by many wonderful Providen∣ces, through great Dangers and Difficulties to Rochelle. But the King with his Council were too far Advanced to make an Honourable Retreat, and therefore to rescind the late Peace, and former Edict of Pacification, contrary to all former Oaths and Pro∣mises, an Edict comes forth, To make it Treason to Profess or Exer∣cise any other Religion in France, but that of the Romists, upon pain of Death. In which Edict, to satisfie the World how little he va∣lued his Royal Word, the Reputation of his Oaths and Promises, he Declared, That albeit he had formerly by many Edicts permitted the Freedom of Religion, yet his true meaning was, to retain, and cause to be retained of all Men the onely Romish Religion within his Realm. This Edict we may well conceive was entertain'd with all imagina∣ble Joy and Triumph by the Papists, as with extream surprize by the Protestants, and with the utmost Indignation by the rest of dis∣interessed Mankind; for what could be more Barbarous, more Sa∣vage, than to put a Secret meaning upon his Edicts, which was di∣rectly
contrary to the plain words of it? But the Papists would make and take a small Occasion, or no Occasion to execute their boyl∣ing Rage upon the Protestants; and hence arose the Third Civil War for Religion, Anno 1569. In this War the Prince of Conde lost his Life bravely Fighting in the Field, and was Succeeded by Henry his Son, who, with the Prince of Navar, were chosen Generals of the Protestant Army. On the other side, the Young Duke of Guise, who with his Fa∣thers Estates and Titles, Inherited also his Malice against the Prote∣stants, was made Successor to his Fathers Command in the Army, and admitted into the Cabinet-Council. The King, Queen, and Duke of Anjou, Besieged St. Jean de Angelo, which holding out Valiantly against the most furious Assaults of the Kings enraged Army for two Moneths, was at last Necessita∣ted to Rendition upon Honourable Terms, to have all their Lives saved, to March out with Horse, Arms, and Ensigns Displayed, with all their Goods and Movables: But as soon as they Marched out, they were Disarmed, Plundered, and Murthered, except some few who saved themselves by flight. Such Faith do Papists keep with Here∣ticks, who might have found fairer Quarter from the Tartars than they had from the Most Christian Turk. And here in a third instance of the Issue of this War, we may admire the goodness of God, that notwithstanding all the Assistance sent from the Pope and the Cathlick King, yet were not the French able to Destroy the Protestants in that one Kingdom. The Cabal being once more defeated in their Projects, Resolve to take New Measures, wherein they were directed by the best Ad∣vice the Pope and his profound Conclave could give them; and the King, though Young in Years, was grown Old in the Mystery of Dissimulation, and capable of Counsel that might attain his Ends. The King therefore, with the Queen-Mother, the D. of Anjou, the D. of Guise, and Cardinal of Lorrain, have recourse to their former Methods, to destroy the Protestants by a Peace, and pro∣secute their most deadly Hatred under the Disguise of Friendship. But the Court were so Conscious to themselves, how little they deserved to be trusted, who had so often falsified all Oaths and Pro∣mises; and suspecting that the Protestants would not easily be brought to bite at that Bait, under which they had so often found
a Hook, do agree, that it must now be the highest Security imagi∣nable that could be able to circumvent them. They set therefore their Invention on the Rack, and torture their Brains to Invent some Fallacy that might bring them within the Snares they had laid for them. The King sends Secretly to the Admiral, and protests to him, that the King of Spain, and the Duke D' Alva had been the only Occasion of those Broyls, which had now so long wasted France; and that he had received such Indignities from the Spaniard, by their Murdering his Subjects in Florida, by abetting and countenancing the Revolt of Final, and by Poysoning his dear Sister the Queen of Spain, as was vehemently suspected, and casting out words touch∣ing her Honour, that he could suppress his Just Indignation no lon∣ger, but was Resolved to Vindicate himself by his Sword. At the same time he sets a Treaty on foot, wherein it was more Secretly than sincerely proposed to make Count Nassaw, (who was the Prince of Oranges Brother, and a particular Friend to the Admi∣ral,) General of an Army against D' Alva: Of this he Advises the Admiral, and declares his intent was, that his Catholick and Prote∣stant Subjects (for both were dear to him) should Unite against Spain, their Old, and Common Enemy. None could blame the Admiral if he suspected all this to be but Collusion, and yet he could not pierce into the bottom of the De∣sign. He knew very well, that at this very time the Spanish Em∣bassador was of the Kings Cabinet-Council; that the D. of Guise, and the Cardinal of Lorrain were Pensioners to Spain, and how to Reconcile these things with a Hearty War against the Spaniard was too difficult for his Understanding. On the other hand, for Count Nassaw to Command an Army in the Netherlands, would be a great Security to the Protestants in France, and a great Relief to the Dutch, by diverting their Cruel Enemy the D. D' Alva. The King had studied Answers to all Objections which he fore∣saw the Admiral and the Protestants would make, and he managed the Affair with that Dexterity, that the Protestants were once more willing to hope that the King might be real. At last a Peace was Concluded, August 11th. 1570. The Pro∣testants are restored to their Civil, and Religious Liberties: This Peace was Ratified by, and Confirmed in Parliament, was Congra∣tulated
by several Foreign Embassadors, in whose Presence the King Signed the Articles, Gave his Faith by Oath, That he would ever most Sacredly, and Inviolably perform them, that he would Secure to the Protestants the Exercise of their Religion, and at the same time Confirmed most Solemnly the Edict of January, 1561. The Protestants upon the Warranty of so many Oaths and Ar∣ticles, transacted with such seeming Seriousness, and visible Solem∣nity, began to grow very Secure; when the King and his Council, knowing that it must not be a Slumber, but a deep and dead sleep that would make them Obnoxious to his Stratagem; that he might remove all flaws of Suspicion and Jealousie, that might possibly yet abide in their minds, Issues out strict Orders into all the Provin∣ces, that all his Catholick Subjects should have a high Regard of and Esteem for the Kings good Subjects the Protestants, for that it was the Kings Express Command it should be so: He proceeds, and agrees with Count Nassaw for the Raising the fore-mentioned Army against Spain; he offers the Admiral to be Captain General, and desires him to repair to him at Paris, that he might give him Ad∣vice in that, and other his Important Affairs. The King confers many great honours upon the Protestant, and that they might not suspect him for a Polititian, he gives up him∣self to his pleasures, seems to mind nothing but his women, and his Recreations. And yet further to heighten the assurance, The Duke of Guise, the Cardinals of Lorraine, and Pelvey, the Duke of Mounpensier, with other known inveterate enemies of the Protestants, grow discon∣tented, and leave that kingdom; when all this was but Artifice, the king and his Council having resolved upon their final ruines, and utter destruction, and all this was but practise to get the Pro∣testants fast asleep, that they might send 'em out of the world in a golden Dream, and an Additional, or Collateral security was given them by permitting the Prince of Orange to bring such Prizes as the States ships should take at any time from the Spaniard into the French Ports. But the Master-peice of the Court-policy was to propound a match between the Prince of Navarre, and Marguerite the kings sister; which the king protested was for the confirming the Anci∣ent consanguinity, and the late peace between the two Kingdoms of
France and Navarre, and especially to give the Protestants a lasting and unquestionable assurance of his sincerity towards them; where∣in he punctually pursued his own Maxime of State, Qui nescit dis∣simulare, nescit Regnare! He that knows not how to dissemble, knows not how to Reign! And now the King issues out Orders for the fitting out of ships at Rochel, to intercept all succours that should be sent from Spain for the Relief of D' Alva, (but indeed upon design to seize Rochel it self, as will afterward appear.) He orders the Admiral to dispatch espyals into the Spanish West-Indies, that he might in due time seize some convenient share of them. What ever had been taken from the Admiral, Count Rochfoucault, Theligni, or others during the War, by order of the king is re∣stored; The Admiralls friends are sought out, and without their seeking prefer'd; The Protestants might have suspected such a sun∣shine day, to be but a Breed-storm, but that they were ashamed to be incredulous after such testimonies of Cordial affection. And now the King, that he might out-doe the world, and him∣self in dissimulation, pretends great distrust of the Duke of Anjou his brother, who was the declared enemy of the Protestants; and he expresses his Jealousies of him, for that (said he) The Prelates depended more on the Duke than the king himself; and what could now the easie Protestants think less then that the King standing upon these Terms with his own Brother, would use their services to secure himself against his brother, and that faction. At one time the king gives the Admiral a hundred thousand crowns, and on the death of the Cardinal of Chastillon he gives him all his Rich Moveables, and his Revenues for one year. The Admirals place being below the Marshals of France, the king declares it to be his Royal pleasure that he should sit next to Montmorency the first Marshal, and above all the rest, and to let them see that he had not Confined his real affections to the Protestants of his own Kingdom, he writes to the Duke of Savoy, that for his sake he would shew favour to the Protestants in his Dominions. And yet further that the Admirall might be loaded with honour, and from the Trust the Prince reposed in him, he might learn to Trust his Prince; he writes to the Admirall once more with his own hand, to Authorze whatever he should do in the War against Spain.
In the mean time the Pope is secretly instructed to express his re∣sentments of the Kings great favours shew'd to the Hereticks; the Pope was not wanting to evidence his dislike of them, which so nettled the common Catholicks in France, that they (not privy to the Intrigue) began to clamor against the Government, as dis∣affected to the Catholick Cause, and too much Inclined to the Hu∣gonots. In the beginning of June 1572, the Marriage between the Prince of Navarre and the Kings sister was agreed. And the Queen of Navarre and Count Nassau came to Paris to congratulate and Com∣plement them, upon occasion of the happy Allyance; Two dayes after came the Prince of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, many No∣blemen, Collonels, and gentlemen of the Protestant Religion, whom the King receives with all demonstrations of Royal favour, and there was nothing seen amongst them but universal joy and complacency, for the hypocrisie of the Court was not visible. And now the King perfects the Treaty with Gount Nassau, and it is also concluded that this famous wedding shall be solemnized at at Paris. Monsieur Cavagnes, a Gentleman belonging to the Admi∣ral is advanced to great Honour, and he was thought a fit person to go to the Admiral to desire his presence at the Marriage, with whom the king might advise about carrying on the War with Spain. The king plucks down a Cross formerly erected in Paris, as a Reproach∣full Monument of the Papists Triumph over the Protestants. And his Majesty dispatches Briqilemault express to the Admiral, to re∣peat his former desires that he would visit the Court, where he might assure himself of the most honourable Reception, that  King could give to a Subject, or a Subject receive from his  which he intended should be Martyrdom. The Admiral who hitherto had prudently forborn the Kings pre∣sence, is now at last stormed in his resolutions, rather then perfect∣ly cured of his Jealousies, but he thought it would look ill, that af∣ter so many evidences of the kings favour he should cherish suspi∣cions in his breast of the kings insincerity; and therefore commit∣ing the event to providence was determined to go, and rather feel death once, then fear it alwayes. At his Arrival nothing was omitted that might settle an opinion in the Admirals breast of the Kings good will to him; The King
calls him Father, Protests he never knew what it was to enjoy him∣self till that day, which was now Crowned with that content and sa∣tisfaction to his soul, that his inward peace might now equalize that of the most retired from the tumults of the world; with many more words which had nothing amiss in them but the Hypocrisie. The Queen mother, her sons, the whole Court make him their vi∣sits, all which he received with a countenance which testified he nei∣ther sought, nor slighted their Addresses. The Admiral was now called into the Consult about the War with Spain; Forces are raised, their Marches are prescribed; but the Duke of Guise by the Kings Order advertises D'Alva, how he might surprize them, which was done, many slain, some taken Prisoners, about whose Release the King writes to D'Alva. The King empowers the Almirall to raise what Number of men he judged necessary, and assigned out of his Treasury money proportionable to the War. And then to shut the back door he enters into an Alliance with Queen Elizabeth of England, by the first Article of which League he engaged him∣self to observe the Edict of Pacification; and now again he swears to allow, and maintain to the Protestants their Religion, Liberties, and Properties, that he might be perjured all over the world. In the spring-tide of all these transcendent favours to the Prote∣stants, the Queen of Navarre was poyson'd by one Renault the Kings Perfumer: a fair Present of Perfumed Gloves being sent as suitable to the wedding, married her to her grave: but because by her death, the young Prince became King of Navarre, the French ng had no more Reason to express more real sorrow for her,  shew'd real love to the Protestants. the 17th. of August 1572. The now King of Navarre  with great Pompe and Solemnity married to the Kings Sister,  was celebrated on a stately scaffold before the Palace; where the King before that vast Confluence of people assembled to feed their eyes with the spectacle, declared with most religious hypo∣crisie, that he gave not his sister in Marriage only to the King of Navarre, but to the whole Church of the Protestants, to unite them one to another, and to himself in the bond of an Indissoluble Union. The whole body of the Protestants being now gathered toge∣ther in Paris, the heart of the Nation, the King reasonably pre∣sum'd
that the Remoter parts were destitute of Spirits, and there∣fore he sends Orders to Strozzi, who with the ships equipped in pretence against the Spaniard, rode before Rochell, to seize the Place, he like a Mercenary Souldier, who at the Command of his King would have plundr'd his god, briskly attempts the place, but his design being discover'd and thereby disappointed, taught him to deny his Intentions, or however the French King to dis∣own the Treachery, and to exonerate himself, by loading his In∣strument. It was not civil for the Admirall to leave Paris assoon as the wedding day was over, and therefore he intended to allot a few dayes to Decency, and the Catholicks administred him an occasion which turn'd his Complement into necessity, for complaints of great outrages committed against the Protestants were brought from several parts, which obliged him to wait for the redress of them: and having for that end attended the Council somewhat later then ordinary Aug. 22. as he return'd, he was shot through both his Arms with Brass Bullets; and some have since Commented up∣on the nicety of the Mettal, and determin'd that Catholicks cannot afford to go to the cost of Silver Bullets, but in the Case of a King. This shot was made from a window of a Priests house, by one Mannevil, but it did not yet appear to have been done by the Kings privity: for he sware bitterly, when he first heard the fact, that he would make the offender the saddest example of Justice, that any Age could produce. But the Assassin was escaped, though the house was dilligently searched by the Kings Officers, assoon as ever it was sure he was out of danger, and all the Gates of the City were commanded to be shut, upon the pretence that the Murderer might not evade, but really that the Protestants might not escape the designed Mas∣sacre. Four eminent persons are appointed strictly to examine the mat∣ter, who search into it, as far as they durst, upon whose report the King declared with his wonted Integrity, that the injury was indeed offer'd to the Admirall, but the dishonour to him∣self. The Admiral being wounded was conveyed to his lodgings, where he discovered the same spirit of Christian patience, whilst his
Wound was searching, and the Bullet cut out of his Arm, that he had always used in the whole course of his Life. The King, Queen-Mother, the Dukes of Anjou, and Montpen∣sier, with many other Courtiers, made him a Solemn Visit, and with Oaths, which they had always ready, protest the Abhorrence of this Barbarous Action: The King, who had formerly assigned him a Guard of fifty Gensdarmes, for his Honour and Security, in∣vites him to remove his Lodgings into the Louvre, and appoints him a stronger Guard, and Commands his Physicians and Chirur∣geons to apply themselves to his Cure. Not long before this, the Protestants apprehending causes of fear, some of them represented their Jealousies to the Admiral, and par∣ticularly the Vidame of Chartres, a Person of great fore-sight, Ad∣vised the King of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, and others, to withdraw themselves timously from the Danger; amongst which intimations of a breeding Storm, these deserve to be Recorded. A Letter was intercepted from the Cardinal Peleus to the Cardi∣nal of Lorrain, Importing Great hopes of a good Issue of that great Affair Resolved on in the Cabinet-Council: That the King, by his pru∣dent management of Matters, had quite Cured the Protestants of their Suspitions, and that the Marriage would Effect the Business: That notwithstanding the preparations for a War with Spain, that King and this understood one another well enough: That the Forces raised against the Catholick King, were not really intended to give him Trouble, but should subserve another purpose; which Letter was brought to the Admiral. Another was sent to him, with Advice to Remember the Catho∣lick Maxime, That Faith is not to be kept with Hereticks; to consi∣der the Implacable Malice of the Papists against the Protestants in ge∣neral, and himself in particular; that the Queen-Mother, being an Italian, was Irreconcileable: That the King had so accustomed him∣self to Swear, and forswear, to Defile himself with Whoredoms, could have no Conscience; that it was his Principle, That he was not bound by any Oaths or Covenants made to his Subjects: That he had boast∣ed how he had deluded One by his Dissimulations, and that it was No∣torious, he had Sworn to bring all the Protestants by these Articles into the Net he had laid for them. But the Protestants were so blinded with the Kings Protestations,
that they could not be perswaded to open their Eyes, for the King had written Letters to the Governours of the Provinces at home, and his Embassadors abroad, what great Grief he had conceived for, and what utter dislike he had of the late Attempt upon the Person of the Admiral. And to colour the Matter more handsom∣ly, the King Advises the Admiral's Friends to take Lodgings in that Street wherein his House was, that they might be a Lifeguard to his Person. There was now a Secret Cabal held in the Privy-Garden between the King, the Queen-Mother, the Dukes of Anjou, Guise, and the Count de Retz, how they, having brought the Protestants into their Toils, might at once rid themselves of them: Where it was Re∣solved, That they must take the present advantage so happily of∣fered, which if they should neglect, might perhaps never more smile upon them. It seems a Wonder to many, that the King, who now for above two Years had Counterfeited Love, and Kindness, Faithfulness and Truth with so great exactness, and to the Life, did not really con∣tract some of those Vertues, or something of those Vertues by long practising the shews of them. And some thought that it would look somewhat unbecoming his Majesty, that he who had in the Play Per∣sonated the Most Christian King, should on the sudden appear on the Stage like Hercules Furens: That there might therefore be found a Justifying Cause for this Change in him, the D. of Guise is direct∣ed to give it out by his Adherents, That the Protestants had a Plot upon his Life, that he could no longer with Safety reside in the midst of his Enemies; and having spread the Rumour, He, with the D. of Aumale, address themselves to the King, Complaining that they were Threatned by the Hereticks, and were in danger of their lives; and that seeing their Zeal and good Affections to the Crown were either slighted, or under valued, they therefore, in a seeming hear, desire leave to retire into the Countrey. The King seems to be Highly displeased with them, bids them go whither they pleased, but withal tells them, if they be found Guilty of the Admiral's Hurt, he will certainly find them out. The D. of Guise with his Friends in great Discontent take Horse, and pretend to leave Paris, but Secretly they Obscond amongst some of their Confidents, have privately obtained the Kings Orders
for the Executing their long Contrived Plot. These Orders were communicated to the Chief of their Friends about the Town, and Advice given they should Arm, and be in readiness against the word given. Upon the 24th. of August, 1572. being a Lords Day at Night the D. of Guise calls for the Provost of the City, and the Heads of the several Wards, produces, and Reads to them the Kings Com∣mission, charging them to be in readiness upon a Signal: He Com∣mands Lights to be hung out at every House; That the Catholicks should distinguish themselves by a white Cross upon their Caps, That they should Destroy the Admiral, and all the Protestants with∣out exception. All this while the Dukes of Montpensier, and Nevers, with ma∣ny Lords of the Faction, attended the King at the Entry of the Louvre, and the Royal Guards were Commanded to assist them in the Massacre. The D. of Guise being thus strengthened, Marches with the D. of Aumale, the Grand Prior of France, and 300 Commanders to∣wards the Admirals Lodgings, and joyns those Treacherous Guards which the King had assigned to him seemingly for his Preservation, to his real Destruction. They Murder all they meet with, that were Friends to the Admiral, and presently break into his Chamber, and Murder him, whose late Wounds made him unable, and whose Greatness of Soul made him unwilling to resist. The D. of Guise, out of a wanton Cruelty, Commands his dead Body to be thrown out of the Window, which with a Barbarous scorn he kicked and trampled on, saying, This is he! a Blessed Beginning! Let's now go on, in the Name of God! So Customary it is with these Miscre∣ants to Commence their greatest Villanies in the Name of God. The Great Bell of the Palace was now rung (which was indeed the Sign for the Rabble to fall on) and Proclamation made that it was the Kings pleasure that all Protestants should be immediately Destroyed: This was a needless Spur to them, who ran to mischief too fast already; and when their own Cursed Principles and Inclina∣nations whip'd them on to Violence, such Authority must needs in∣crease the Rage. The Papists therefore address themselves to this Meritorious Work with all Chearfulness, and without Regard to Age, Sex, and
Condition, Murder all they could find; amongst the rest, there fell that Night Count Rochfoncault, and Count Teliqui the Admiral's Son, whose Noble Spirit disdained to Survive his Great Father; and when the Sword of these Villains was at his Throat, bewailed nothing but that he had been accidentally accessary to his Father's Murder, by inducing him to give Credit to the Kings Promises. The D. of Guise, all this while, with Montpensier, Gonzagne, the Grand Prior, and many other Popish Lords Rode about en∣couraging the Multitude to Compleat the work, who found their Bodies sooner wearied than their Malice with acts of Cruelty: The Streets were filled with dead Bodies of Murder'd Protestants, wherein it was Questionable, whether the Number of the Slain, or the manner of the Slaughter were more Execrable. Women with Child were Murdered, and it was accounted great gain, that one stroke had destroyed a couple: Living Infants were torn out of the Wombs of their newly dead Mothers, for fear some Accident should help them into the World before they should send them out of it. None found worse Quarter with them than Young Virgins, whom they made the Objects of their most terri∣ble Fury, because they would not be the Abjects of their base Lusts. Little Children suffered upon a special point of Policy, that they might not leave a Nursery of Hereticks behind them; in this thing more unmerciful than the Turks, who Murder not the Children of Christians, but train them up to become their Janizaries. The Noyse of sixty thousand Murderers, whose Clamours were increased by the Echoes, filled all places with Horror, and repre∣sented a Hell to all but those whose Heaven is Barbarity. The Pavements, Market-places, Streets, were all stained with Blood, which ran down the Kennels into the River, rather to Pollute the Seine, than wash away its own Guilt; and all this shed by such a mixture of Cruelty and Treachery, that though both were great, 'tis Questionable whether were greater. One Nights Rage was not enough to satisfie their Thirst, & there∣fore without more sleep than what might give them breath, they fall on fresh the next day, as if the formers Cruelty had rather whet∣ted, than glutted their Appetites: But they had so improvidently Husbanded their Fury, that they left little to do for another day. They search all Cellars, Vaults, Garrets, and whatever Secret
places the Protestants might possibly fly to, to escape present De∣struction. They Sacked, and Plundered four thousand Houses, Murdered above five hundred Barons, Knights, and Gentlemen, besides Ten Thousand of Inferiour Ranks. And because many in the Suburbs might be supposed willing to save their Lives by flight, they beset all the Roads leading from Paris, and whomsoever they found were with the same unmerciful mercy Butchered. The King had sent his Couriers to the Governours of the Pro∣vinces, whereby he required the Cities and Towns to Imitate the Example of Paris, and without Exception to the Law of God, or his own, to Destroy the Mother with the Young ones, and to be Impartially as well as Inhumanely Cruel: And in the Interim, causes the King of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde to be brought before him, where he acquaints them, that not onely in Paris, but through the whole Kingdom, the Hugonots were cut off; that now they were at his Mercy for their Lives, which upon their speedy Reformation, and Embracing the Catholick Religion, but upon no other Terms, might be secured to them. The King of Navarre Humbly besought His Majesty to Re∣member his many Oaths and Promises made to them, that for his own Person it ought to be Sacred by the Law of Nations, being A King; that the new Relation wherein he stood to His Majesty by the Marriage of his Sister, ought neither to be Cemented with, nor Dissolved by Blood: and by all that was Sacred entreated him not to put him upon a Temptation to make Shipwrack at once of Faith and a good Conscience. The Prince of Conde Answer'd with much Resolution, That his Majesty might be pleased to Remember the many Solemn Oaths and Promises he had made, both Publickly and Privately to the Protestants, which by the Laws of God and Man he was Bound to keep Sacred, and that if he did violate them he would certainly Expose himself to the Severe and Impartial Vengeance of God: He proceeded, that as for his Body and Estate, his Majesty might dispose of them as he thought good, but he should make a very sad exchange to lose his Conscience and Religion to save his Life: The King in great Fury flung away from him, saying, Mass, Bastile, or Death, and that he should have three days to Consider of it. The Prince Answered as Gallantly, As for the first, by the Grace of God
I will never chuse it; but for the two other, his Majesty might chuse for him which he pleased. The next day all the Gentlemen and Officers that waited on these two Young Princes were by the Kings Guards Murdered, the King looking on, and feeding his Bloody Soul with the Spectacle: These Gentlemen were about two hundred, who all Suffered Death with much Courage and Resolution, onely Modestly reflecting upon the Kings Treachery. When the Kings Order arrived in the Provinces to Massacre the Protestants there, the Catholicks were transported with incredible Joy, and fell to their Natural Food, that is, Murder and Rapine, without saying Grace, though his Holiness afterwards, when they had been glutted with Carnage, gave God Solemn Thanks. At La Charite, The Italian Horse, with the French, cut all the Protestants in pieces; where the modes of cruelty were so vari∣ous and barbarous, that nick will blush to relate, which never chang'd their countenance to Commit: Travelling women were stab'd into the bellies, and thrown out at the windows, and exposed in the streets, the infants not fully separated from their mothers, had their soul seperated from their bodies, representing Christianity with so ugly a face to those who cannot distinguish between Pope∣ry and Christianity, That Turks and Jews applaud themselvs in their Infidelity, and chuse rather their own Miscreancy then such Catholicism. Assoon as the Kings Edict arrived at Lyons, Mandelot, the Go∣vernor commanded the Gates to be shut, and made Proclamation it should be present death for any Protestant to stir over his thresh∣hold: Assoon as he was furnisht with Instruments to abet his de∣sign, he summons them all to Appear personally before him, who immediately sent to the Common prisons, and because they were too narrow to hold them, he shuts up the rest in the Arch-bishops Palace, and commands the Common-Executioner to take a compe∣tent Number of Assistants with him, and murder them all. The Reader will look for nothing but blind obedience from such a Crea∣ture; but now behold a wonder. The Executioner answered, Sir, I am an Officer of Justice, not a cut-throat, and will not execute any man till the sentence of the Law hath pass't upon him; and the Soldiers too refused to be the ministers of such Tyranny; so that
he was forced to let loose the rabble upon the unarmed Protestants, and they with knives and hatchets, or whatever other weapons of cruelty their Rage administred, murder that vast Number. But first they began with the disports of cruelty, cutting off the fingers of some, the noses of others, the Members of many others, till having played with the prey for some time, they hewed them in pieces, or otherwise dispatcht them all at last: and that they might not lose the contentment they took in the acting of these vil∣lanies, they expose the naked bodies of these Massacred Innocent men, and women to the open view, in unseemly and immodest postures; and that they might gratifie their profit as well as plea∣sure, they rip up the bodies of the more Corpulent, and sell their grease or fat, for cutinary, or Medicinal uses. Nor were these inhumanities peculiar to Lyons, but at Troys, Meaux, and many other places, they had their scenes of cruelty and reacted their former Tragedies. At Orleans they continued the Massacre for three days, where the Bodies of Men, Women, and Children were thrown to the Dogs, who, perhaps, spared them more than these Canibals. At Tholouse, Bourdeaux, they committed the same outrages, and yet the Faith and Patience of the Saints and Martyrs of Christ Trium∣phed over all. At Roan were Murder'd 6000 Men, besides Wo∣men and Children; in all which Instances of Cruelty, their Fury shewed it self Immortal in Persecuting the Dead. The King now had cunningly Cast his Net, but yet some of the small Fry had escaped his Drag; and therefore to let the World see how accomplish'd a Dissembler he was, he issues out his Pro∣clamation, wherein he Declares his Grief for the Blood that had been shed (and there was cause for more real Grief than he was guilty of) That it was contrary to his Will and Command, and that he was Resolved most Severely to Punish the Murderers; and therefore Commiserating the Deplorable Condition of those that were fled for shelter to Caves, Dens, Woods, and Mountains, he Invites them to Return, promising to Secure them against all Injuries whatsoever. It is a wonder that any Creature should be so silly as to come near that Trap, which had already been stained with the Blood of their Fellows; we have onely this to say in their Excuse, that they chose rather to die once by a Sword, than to be always
dying by Cold and Hunger; and therefore they will once again ad∣venture upon his Royal Word, not knowing perhaps but that Rage and Fury might have been so wearied, though not satisfied, with a glut of Blood, that they might have spared, or however reserved those Fragments for another Collation. France had now been for more than a Moneth One great Slaughter-house. And the Odium of the Cruelty was resented strangely by some of his Allies; and in∣deed some Papists, who were not Bigots, nor so Priest-ridden as the most, spoke very untowardly of the Kings Actions. That he might therefore extenuate his Crime and Shame, he sends Letters to Foreign Parts, where Murder was reputed a sin, and casts the blame upon the Duke of Guise, and his Accomplices: But in those to Spain and Rome, where Murder was Merit, he ingrosses the whole Glory to himself, and speaks of the D. of Guise as no other than his Instrument. Two days after the dispatch of these Packets, he asserts this late Action in the Parliament of Paris, and owns that all was done by his Commission; but because every Mans thoughts must stumble upon a difficulty, how could such a Commission consist with his for∣mer Oaths and Protestations? He pretends, That the Admiral and the Hereticks had Conspired against his Person, and his Nobles, who being too Numerous to be Punish'd in the Ordinary tedious Forms of a Court of Justice, Reasons of State would Justifie his more Expeditious procedure, wherein, though some small Circumstan∣ces might not be so Regular, yet they had but paid those Lives to the Sword, which they owed to the Wheel; and for the Guilt of the Admiral, he would in a few days make it Evident to the World. A Commission is presently granted to certain Judges, who Hang up the Admiral in Effigie, his Coat-Armour is Torn, or Reversed, his Castles are all Demolished, his Woods Cut down, and all the Marks of Treason fixt upon his Memory: This was a dreadful Sentence, and wanted nothing but Truth and Proof to have made it bear a face of Justice. Those Gallant Gentlemen, Briquemault, and Caviagnes, are al∣so Apprehended, and dealt with by Threats and Promises to Con∣fess the Admiral's Design against the King and the D. of Guise; but they Confess'd nothing, because they had nothing to Confess, and told their Judges, they durst Appeal to the Consciences of them
and their Accusers touching the Admirals and their own Innocency. These Judges it seems were not Corrupt enough to gratifie the Design, but being Conscious of the Integrity of these Gentlemen, refused to pass Sentence upon them: But the Work must be done, and therefore a Second Commission is issued out to Delegates bet∣ter prepared for the Service, who, upon a slighty Examination, immediately Condemn'd them; yet with offer of Life, if they will but Accuse the Admiral, which they bravely Scorning, Exe∣cution was Committed on them, that is, a Legal Murder. The King, Queen, D. of Anjou, with the Court, would needs be Specta∣tors of the Execution, before whom, to the last gasp, they vigo∣rously asserted the Admirals, and their own Innocency, and pray'd God to forgive the King his Cruelty and Treachery. The King not long after appoints a Form of Abjuration, where∣by the remainder of the Protestants were Commanded to Renounce their Religion; some few timerous Spirits yielded, and yet were Murdered, to tell the World, that there's no Revenge so Glori∣ous to Catholicks, as when they can with one blow stub the Body and the Soul; and to warn surviving Protestants, That they that will basely save their Lives, shall lose them. VVhat the Pope Contributed to this Massacre, by his Counsel and Advice, by his Prayer and Blessing, by his Forces and Troops, has been before intimated; but how he accepted this Service when it was performed, we must now Relate. His Legate freely Absolv'd the Murderers of the Protestants at Lyons of all their sins, which was a dangerous point; for if they acknowledge them to be sins, we shall Question the Popes Power of Forgiveness; but we will Charitably suppose that they were but Venial sins, which needed no Pardon to secure them against Hell, but onely a Pardon of Course to prevent Purgatory. But when once the Blessed News came hot to Rome, and had ob∣tained an Authentick Credit by an Express, (for the Tidings were too good and great to be believed upon Rumours) then did his Holiness, and his Cardinals in their Scarlet Robes double died with the Blood of the Servants of Christ, march in Solemn Procession, caused all the Great Guns to Thunder out their Joy, and Sung Te Deum! We Praise thee O God! As if they would make a God of Infinite Mercy accessary to their Cruelties; and a Jubilee was pro∣claimed
in Honour of it, that Heaven, Earth, and Purgatory might ring with the loud Acclamations of their Triumphs. In Paris, the King, Queen, and Court went to Nostre-dame in Solemn Procession to give God Thanks, who neither desired nor deserved it, having neither Heart in the Approving, nor Hand in the Executing a Design so contrary to his Nature and Command∣ment: They might better have stay'd at home, saved their pains and thanks for their own perfidious Heads, and Hearts, and Bloody Hands; for whatever in the work they thought might deserve Praise and Commendation, but how then should the World be Cheated, and God Mocked? His Holiness, In perpetuam rei Memoriam, caused the Draught of this Massacre to be hung up in his own Chappel in Peinture, that when his Zeal to his God should cool, he might have before his Eyes a Memorial of his Obligations to him to be thankful; which makes me think the Pope has some ill-favour'd God of his own more than we understand, who is so delighted with Blood and Carnage, which we know the True God of Christians professedly to abhor. I will Digress a little with the Readers leave and patience, and shew that this Barbarous Cruelty of the Papists, was not peculiar to the Papists of that Age, or that the Old Serpent has lost his Poy∣son by length of time; 'twas a Fury peculiar indeed to Papists, but yet Common to all Papists, in all Ages, and is the true Catholick Religion, if we may Credit that Famous Maxime of Lirinensis, Quod ab omnibus, quod ubique, quod semper, illud demum est vere Catholicum. That Savageness which has obtained amongst all the Papists, at all times, and in all places, where they had Power, is true Catholick Savageness. Let the Reader at his leisure, look into Germany, Poland, Piedmont for Instances: My Occasions call me homewards, and will onely touch upon the Coast of Ireland as we Sail along. Nor is it the 300000 Innocents there Murdered by the most hideous Methods of Cruelty, which no Age, no History but of the Papists can parallel, that I shall insist upon, but with what un∣speakable Joy it was received by his Holiness at Rome, and what Hand he had in the Contrivance of it. The Pope sends a Letter, Dated at Rome, Octob. 18. 1642. to Excite Oneal the Arch-Traytor, to Prosecute the Rebellion: Com∣municating
to him, and the rest of his Catholicks there engaged in the Catholick Cause, the plenary forgiveness of all their Sins: And In Articulo Mortis, full Absolution, and Indulgence, with his own Pon∣tifical Benediction. In another Letter, Dated at Rome, Feb. 1. 1642. To the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Nobles, and People of Ireland, he assures them of Divine Assistance if they prefer the Safety of the Catholick Faith be∣fore all other Respects, and suffer nothing to be Transacted prejudicial thereto: Beseeching God of his Divine Clemency to be propitious to their general Endeavours and Enterprizes. Now, sure the Pope has a god by himself, when Divine Clemency must be entreated to Bless and Favour Inhumanity and Cruelty. His Holiness (if you will not henceforth call him his Filthiness) sent the following Bull to his dear Irish Children. ƲRBANƲS OCTAVƲS, Ad futuram rei Memoriam! Having taken into Our serious Consideration the great Zeal of the Irish towards the propagating of the Catholick Faith: And the Piety of the Catholick Warriours in the several Armies of that Kingdom — And having got certain Notice, how in Imitation of their Godly and Worthy Ancestors, they Endeavour by Force of Arms to deliver their Enthralled Nation from the Oppressions, and Grievous Injuries of the Hereticks, wherewith this long time it hath been afflicted and heavily burthened: And Gallantly do what in them lies, to Extirpate, and totally Root out all those workers of Iniquity. We therefore being willing to Cherish them with the Gift of those Spiritual Graces (whereof by God We are Or∣dained the Onely Disposers on Earth) by the Mercy of the same Almighty God, trusting in the Authority of the Blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul, and by Virtue of that Power of Binding and Loosing, which God was pleased without Our deserving to confer upon Us: To all and every of the Faithful Christians in the afore∣said Kingdom of Ireland now, and for the time Militating against the Hereticks, and other Enemies of the Catholick Faith,— Do grant a full and plenary Indulgence, and absolute Remission for all their Sins.— And withal heartily desiring all the Faithful in
Christ, now in Arms as aforesaid would be partakers of this most precious Treasure. To all and every one of the aforesaid Faith∣ful Christians, we grant License, and give Power to chuse unto themselves for this effect any fit Confessor, whether a Secular Priest, or a Regular of some Order, as likewise any other Select Per∣son approved of by the Ordinary of the place, who, after a dili∣gent hearing of their Confessions, shall have Power to liberate and absolve them from Excommunication, Suspention, and all other Ecclesiastical Sentences and Censures, by whomsoever, and for what Cause soever pronounced or inflicted upon them. As also from all Sins, Trespasses, Transgressions, Crimes, and Delinquencies, how Hainous and Atrocious soever they be. Given at Rome, in the Vatican, or St. Peters Palace, the 25th. day of May, 1643. and in the Twentieth Year of Our Pontificate. M. A. Maraldus. But if any desire more ample Satisfaction that the Pope has In∣fluenced all the Murders, Wars, Massacres, and Miseries of Eu∣rope, let him either Read the Memoires of Former Ages, or view the Transactions of the present; or for a Compendium of all his Villanies, let the diligent Observer peruse but the late Complica∣ted Plots and Conspiracies of the Catholicks in Great Britain. The Papists had scarce Complicated their Cruelties in France, when the Just and Holy God began to make Inquisition for the Blood of the Innocent, which they had shed like water upon the ground. A Credible Author has Observed, that of a thousand of the Chief of these Murderers, which escaped the Justice of Man, not above ten escaped the Just Vengeance of God, but drunk of that Cup Righteously which they had made others Unrighteously to drink. Charles the Ninth, the great Designer of the Massacre, a Man made up of Dirt and Blood, like Nero, in his Constitution, was Macerated in Dirt and Blood in his Dissolution: This Cruel and Treacherous Prince, in the Flower of his Age, not exceeding 24 Years, had Blood breaking out at all the passages of his Body, he lay rolling and wallowing in his own, who had caused so many thousands to be choaked in theirs: He was Tormented with strange
Terrors of Conscience, affrighted in the Night with hideous noises, and in a disparing Condition gave up his polluted Soul to the Divine Justice. Henry the Third his Successor, and Brother, who was that Duke of Anjou, so active in the Destruction of the Protestants, was stab'd by Jaques Clement, a Jacobin Monk, in that very Chamber, and place of the Chamber, on that very day of the Moneth on which he had Consulted, and Consented to the Bloody Massacre. The D. of Guise, and Cardinal of Lorrain, two more of that Accursed Cabal, well known Instruments in the whole Wickedness, were Murdered by the Command of the same Henry the Third. Thus we may Read Mens sins often-times in their Punishments; and the Exemplary Justice of God, in making them the Instruments of one anothers Punishments, who had formerly been the Instru∣ments to one anothers Villanies: And we cannot but further Ob∣serve, That both these Princes, who had made so many Children Fatherless, were themselves written Childless by the Hand of Heaven, neither of them leaving any Lawful Issue behind them to Inherit their Crown, Kingdoms, or Malignity against Religion. VVhat Rewards the Holy Father of Rome gives to his Children, when they have Executed his Displeasure upon Gods Children, we see also, in that Henry the Third; and in Henry the Fourth, who, to save his life and Kingdom, denied his God, and thereby lost both: He first denied God with his Mouth, and Chastel stabbed him in the Mouth; and when he proceeded to Renounce God with his Heart, Ravilliac stabbed him at the Heart: And thus he that had bequeathed his Heart in a Complement to the Jesuites, had it seized by them before he intended to resign it. VVhat Use the Protestants are to make of this Dismal Tragedy, has been Noted in the Introduction to this present History; which is, onely never to Trust them who have always been False and Treacherous. No History for 400 Years last past giving us an In∣stance of any Invasion made by the French (who are now the only Formidable Horn of the Beast) where first they had not prepared their way by the Treachery of a Party amongst those whom they had Invaded. To Expel the Papists out of the Nation, is to Ex∣pel at once all our Danger, provided, we Expel our Sins with them: But Priests and Jesuites are not onely Proclamation-proof, but
Law-proof. VVhat the Historian says of Astrologers in Old Rome, I may well apply to the Papists in our England, Est genus hominum quod semper retabitur, & semper in Ʋrbe nostrâ retinebitur. There are a Company of Rascals that are always sending, but never sent away; always going, but never gone from England; perfect Ʋbi∣quitarians, and, like their Bread-god, here, and there, and every where, but no where Honest. These are those Egyptian Frogs which crawl, not onely into private Houses, but into the Palaces of No∣bles and Princes, nay, dare to croak in the Bed-Chambers, nay, in the Beds of Kings. Against whose encroachments we have no Remedies but Union amongst our selves, and watchfulness against the Common Enemy. The French Historian Notes, that before the Massacre of Paris the Protestants were as Secure as the Generation before the Flood; we are never less Secure, than when we are most Secure. They were then grown careless in the VVorship of God, drowned in world∣liness and much Sensuality unbecoming their Holy Profession; they were grown remiss in the Observation of the Lords-day, and upon a Lords-day the Torrent of Barbarous Cruelty broke in upon them. I pray that we, who are too like them in sin, make not up the pa∣rallel with too much exactness in Punishment. I Conclude with the Confession of Thuanus, an Impartial Histo∣rian (though a Papist.) Wise Men (saith he) that were not ad∣dicted to the Protestant party, seeking all manner of Excuse for that Fact, did notwithstanding think that in all Antiquity there could not be found an Example of the like Cruelty. FINIS.
