S2688 11907322 50750
GLORY's RESURRECTION; BEING THE Triumphs of London REVIVED, For the Inauguration of the RIGHT HONOURABLE Sir Francis Child, Kt. Lord Mayor of the City of London. CONTAINING The Description (and also the Sculptures) of the Pageants, and the whole Solemnity of the Day. All set forth at the proper Cost and Charge of the Honour∣able Company of GOLDSMITHS. Publish'd by Authority. LONDON: Printed for P. Barnham in Little Britain, 1698.
To the Right Honourable Sir Francis Child, Kt. Lord Mayor of the City of London. MY LORD, IN Your Lordship's Accession to the CHAIR, advanced by so many Eminent Merits to that High Post, there needs but a very little Spirit of Prophecy to foretel with what true Glory Your Lordship will execute that Honourable Trust. To say, Your Lordship will answer the Expectation of the World, speaks too little: There's something more than Expectation, an Universal Assurance and Confi∣dence of Your Lordship's Performance. And whilst the Worshipful Company of GOLD∣SMITHS, have, after a three Years Cessation, reviv'd the Customary Splendor of the City on this Solemn Occasion, I dare not say, 'tis wholly their own Natural Grandeur and Magnificence, so much as their Gratitude that furnishes the Entertainment. Your Lordship makes so considerable a Lustre, and gives that Ornament to their Society; that this Publick Triumph, on Your Inauguration-Day, is not so much a Present they make You, as a Debt they pay You.
Of all Your Lordship's numerous Virtues, the truly Noble Train that attend You thither, Your Unshaken Constancy to Your Native Altars seems to carry the Leading Glory. Your Lordship's truly Christian Undivided Knees, pay that greater and more entire Adoration to an Eternal Throne, than to make at one time a Cain's, and, at another, an Abel's Sacrifice. Your Lordship would start at so poor a Prevarication with Omnipotence, as to bring a Sheaf of Stubhle to Your Morning Oblation, and a Lamb to Your Even∣ing one. Nor are Your Lordship's Moral Perfections less Conspicuous: You ascend to this Metropolitan Dig∣nity, wholly untainted with the too common Avarice of Greatness. No, my Lord, You come not thither to Gather, but Shower the Gold; whilst warm'd and ani∣mated by Your own innate. Principles both of Charity and Hospitality, those two Illustrious Ornaments of Ma∣gistracy, Your Lordship has resolved to recal from their late Banishment: And indeed those truly radiant Virtues could never appear on the Praetorian Chair with nobler Lustre than now; considering they will so immediately break forth in that full Glory there, after so total an Eclipse before. 'Tis thus Your Lordship designs in Your Administration of Your Mayoralty to waken and revive the late drooping and languishing Honour of the City: And indeed to give a new Resurrection to the Grandeur of the Chair; which I may honestly say has some time lain buried. 'Tis thus, my Lord, the Shades behind You will illustrate Your own Glories before You; Or, to speak in the Goldsmiths Dialect, Those Foils will set off Your Diamond.
But what has yet more nobly signaliz'd Your Lord∣ship; In the late Suppression of the Defaced and Adul∣terated Coin, at the time when all the Private and Pub∣lick Banks of England, and indeed the whole Currency of Exchequers and Treasury's stood almost intirely stopt; at that time when 'twas no forfeited Credit even for the proudest Court or City Heads to play the Insolvents; 'twas then Your Lordship's Particular, I might say, Only Pride, that when all the other Golden Veins of the Nation were stagnated, Yours alone kept their whole open Circulation: You answered all Bills with the same prompt and entire Satisfaction, perhaps to the Wonder, at least to the Envy of the World. And tho' the then general Examples all round Ye, might have excused You from that Stretch of Payment; yet Your Lordship so valued Your Reputation, as to do Justice even to a Supererrogation. And here methinks Your Lordship's very Coat of Arms, the long Hereditary Escutcheon of Your Family, by a kind of Prophetical Herauldry seems to blazon the very Virtues of Your Lordship that bears them; when Your Lordship's Argent Eagles truly soard, whilst your Neighbours flagg'd and droop'd. But in enumerating Your Lordship's singular Worth and Deserts, I am enter'd into too large a Field, and therefore shall modestly retire, with subscribing my Self, My LORD, Your Lordship's most Devoted and most Dutiful Servant, E. SETTLE.
TO THE Worshipful Company OF GOLDSMITHS. AS we are all naturally Ambitious to serve the Noblest Masters, You may believe, Gentlemen, that my humble Muse takes no common Pride in being call'd up to entertain You. For besides the particular commanding Merits of so many Honourable Members of Your Society, I cannot but consider what extraordinary dazling Lustre even Your Profession it self carries with it. When I enter into the Goldsmiths Laboratory, methinks I see even Soveraignty it self shine there: The very Strongest Nerves of War, and the Richest Bles∣sings of Peace, in effect the only Product of Your Forge, are all Your own. Nay, even Crown'd Heads hold their very Thrones but by a Precarious Tenure, without Your Mints of Gold to support 'em. The famous Columbus in his Peruvian Discovery, found out a New World for little more than only to supply Your Furnace: Nay, the very Sun himself is but the Goldsmiths Fellow-Labourer, whilst his most vigorous Beams warm the rich Beds, and impregnate all the whole Mineral Veins, to furnish Your Shops of Gold. Gold, I may honestly say, (Your Handy-work) does all Things, nay indeed is all Things, or at least makes all Things its own. 'Tis from the Golden Mine that the Pallaces of Monarchs, nay the very Temples and Altars of Heaven, receive not only their Noblest Ornaments, but even their very Foun∣dation. And tho', 'tis true, that sometimes that too fatal Mineral, may be the Tempta∣tion of Vice, or the Purchase of Shame and Injustice; yet to over-ballance those more unhappy Influences, 'tis no less the highest Reward of Virtue. Industry, Study, Labour, and all the honest Toils of Life sweat only for that Prize: In short, we are all Smiths at Your Anvile, and only hammer for the Gold. Thus, tho the Golden Show'r may sometimes fall into a wanton Danae's Lap, yet 'tis that very glittering Metal too, that wreaths the Bracelets, and moulds the very Coronets for a Diana. But, Gentlemen, not to expatiate upon so voluminous a Subject, 'tis enough to Congratulate Your present Pride and Glory, in having the fairest Royal (or at least Deputy Royal) Collar of SS's, and the Richest Gold Chain of England, among You: To whom wishing all Continuance of Honour, and Your Selves of Happiness, I am, GENTLEMEN, Your most humble Servant, E. S.
The Procession and whole Solemnity, as follows; perform'd on Saturday October 29th, 1698. THE whole Company selected for the Management of the Triumph, meet at Seven in the Morning at Goldsmiths Hall, viz. 1. The Wardens and Assistants in Gowns faced with Foyns. 2. The Livery in Gowns with Budge, and their Hoods. 3. The Foyns and Budge Batchelors in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods. 4. Forty Gentlemen Ushers in Velvet Coats, each a Chain of Gold about his Shoulders, and a white Staff in his Hand. 5. Thirty other Gentlemen carrying Banners and Colours. 6. The Serjeant-Trumpet wearing two Scarfs, one of the Lord Mayors Colours, and the other of the Companies, with 36 more Trumpets, where∣of 16 are His Majesty's. 7. His Majesty's Drum-Major, wearing a Scarf of the Company's Co∣lours, with four more of his Majesty's Drums and Fifes. 8. Seven other Drums and two Fifes with Scarfs. 9. The two City Marshals riding on Horseback, and six Persons at∣tending with Scarfs and Colours of the Companies. 10. The Foot Marshal and six Attendants with like Scarfs, &c. 11. The Master of Defence and his Retinue in like Scarfs, &c. 12. Several Pensioners in Gowns and Caps, bearing Standarts and Banners. 13. Other Pensioners in Gowns and Caps, carrying each a Javelin in one Hand, and Target in the other, having the Arms of the Company's Founders and Benefactors. All these Rank'd by the Foot-Marshal, marching Two by Two, the Company's Ensigns leading; the Pensioners, four Drums, and one Fife, and four more Drums and Fifes bring up the Rear of this Division. After them the Pensioners with Standarts; four Trumpets, the Supporters and Crest of the Company, six Gentlemen Ushers, then the Budge Batchelors concluding the Second Division. Six Trumpets, two Gentlemen, one bear∣ing the City's, the other the Company's Arms. Then eight Gentlemen Ushers, and next the Foyn Batchelors make the Third Division. Two Gentlemen Ushers bearing Banners, two more Gentlemen Ushers, and then the Livery. Next the City Trumpets, then two Gentlemen bearing the City and Lord Mayors Banner. Then the Gentlemen and Court of Assistants, &c. Four Drums, six Trumpets, two Gentlemen bearing Ban∣ners, four Gentlemen and four Pages, and then the Wardens bring up the Rear. In this Order they march from Goldsmiths Hall, attending his Lordship, who joins the old Lord Mayor at Queen-street end, where the whole Com∣pany move through Cheap-side to Three-Crane-Wharf, where the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Livery, and part of the Gentlemen Ushers take their
Barge for Westminster, whither his Lordship is attended, with the several Barges of the respective Companies, with Flags, Streamers, several Plea∣sure-Boats, with Hautboys, Flutes, Trumpets, and all manner of Mu∣sick. &c. His Lordship having taken the Oaths before the Barons of the Exchequer, returns with the same Attendants and Splendor to Dorset Stairs, where, at his Landing, he is saluted by the Artillery Company, in all their Mar∣tial Ornaments in Buff and Silver Head-Pieces; and thus, with the whole Cavalcade, moves forward towards Cheap-side. In his March, he is first entertain'd with this Pageant. The First PAGEANT, The Amphitheatre of UNION. A Large Fabrick, design'd after the Corinthian Order, elevated with four Marble Columns fluited with Gold, and twisted round with Lawrels of Flowers. Above the Etableture of Gold and Silver are erected four Noble Golden Cups, being part of the Bearing of the Company's Arms. In the middle of all this Noble Building, on a Quadrangular Seat, sits UNION in Chief; with a Chaplet of Flowers on a Golden Head-piece, and a Lawrel of Oak, signifying Love and Wisdom. The Attri∣butes or Graces attending on UNION, are three other Persons richly habited with their proper Ornamento, being Piety, Harmony, and Dili∣gence, with the Ensigns and Banners of the Company's Arms. UNION thus addresses his Lordship. UNION's Speech. WHen sacred UNION holds her Seat Divine, The sweetest Harmony of Pow'r is Mine. By Me is the Great Hinge of Empire mov'd, The Magistrate obey'd, and Prince belov'd. But when true UNION joins all Hearts and Hands, Tis only when some Darling Head commands. So Rules Great WILLIAM: So, my Lord, shall You; A Copy from that Great Original so true, As Caesar to His Throne; You to Your Chair, Have brought the Universal Darling there.
depiction of Union
S. DUNSTAN. depiction of St. Dunstan
The Second PAGEANT, The GOLDSMITHS Laboratory. A Large and Spacious Work-shop of several Artificers, distinct in their proper Apartments for the several Operators in the Mystery of the Goldsmiths, containing Forges, Anvils, Hammers, and other Instruments of Art, &c. In the middle of this Laboratory, on a rich Golden Chair of State, is seated St. Dunstan, the ancient Patron and Guardian of the Company, array'd in his Pontifical Ornaments, expressing his Prelatical Dignity, in a Surplice of white Lawn, over which he wears a large Cope, &c. On his Reverend Hoary Head, a Golden Mitre beset with precious Stones and Pearls of great Value: In his Left Hand he holds a Golden Crosier; in his Right Hand a Pair of Goldsmiths Tongs, an Emblem of his Patronage; and under his Feet lies the Devil. On each side this Noble Seat is plac'd Apollo and Esculapius his Son, in their proper Habits, bearing the City's and Company's Banners, and play∣ing on several Melodious Instruments, as well for his Lordship's Diver∣sion, as to preserve a Harmony and Decorum among the Artificers. Beneath the Steps of Ascension to the Canonical Chair, in opposition to the Patron, is placed a Goldsmiths Forge, with Fire and Crucibles filled with Gold; a Boy blowing the Bellows. On either Hand, in the Front of this Shop, is set up a large Press of Gold and Silver Plate, with Compters, &c. representing a formal Shop of Trade: On each side are Jewellers at Work, with Anvils, Hammers, Stones, Sparks; besides a Planisher, a Raiser, a Drawer and Chacer, &c. Several Artificers beating out Plate, and fashioning several Vessels of Gold and Silver: Likewise an Essay-Master with his Class, Frame and Ballance, for trying of Gold and Silver by the Standard. In another Apartment is Disgrossing, Flatting and Drawing of Gold and Silver Wire. In another are included Finers and Refiners, Melting, Smelting, Fining, Refining and Separating Gold and Silver, both by Fire and Water; and the Master-Forger and three other Workmen making a Massy Piece of Plate, Singing and keeping Time on the Anvil. Here His Lordship is addrest by St. Dunstan. St. Dunstan. THE Triumphs of this Day, deserv'd so well, When Fame shall in Recorded Story tell, Those Oracles of Truth— Devil. Can You speak Truth? St. Dunstan. Peace, snarling Devil! Thus I'll stop your Mouth. [Catches him by the Nose.] Down to thy Hell, there croak, thou Fiend accurst, See this great Day, and swell'd with Envy, burst. In ancient Times when Saints were once ador'd, St. Dunstan was the Goldsmiths Patron Lord:
And whilst on this proud glittering Stage I stand, With all this shining Treasure on each Hand; What tho' the World worships the Saint no more, Still there's whole Thousands that my Shrine adore A thousand homaging Eyes this Sight behold; Not me their Idol, but my Shop of Gold. But let that Superstition end: Here's all That does a juster Righteous Homage call; Whilst your Illustrious Triumphs to attend, Both Shrine and Saint to You, my Lord, must bend. That Nobler Lustre my pleas'd Eyes behold, Your Richer Virtues far out-shine my Gold. The Third PAGEANT, A Triumphant CHARIOT of Gold. ASTRAEA, the Goddess of Justice, in a long Robe of Silver, a Crimson Mantle fringed with Silver, a Veil of Silver fringed with Gold; on her Head a Plume of white Feathers set with precious Stones: In her Right Hand a Touch-stone; in her Left a Golden Ballance with Silver Scales. At a Descent beneath this Goddess are placed Charity and Concord, as the necessary Supporters of Justice; and on a Seat remote, sits another Virtue, call'd Truth, supporting the Reins, and guiding the Chariot of Justice. This stately Chariot is drawn by two Unicorns, most exquisitely Carved and Gilded with equal Proportion to the Life. On the Backs of these two Unicorns are mounted two Beautiful Young Princes, one a Barbarian, the other an European, sounding forth the Fame of the Honourable Company of Goldsmiths. At the Feet of these most Noble Creatures is seated four other Virtues, as Prudence, Temperance, Courage, and Conduct, all properly attired, each holding a Banner display'd with the Kings, the Lord Mayors, the City's and Company's Arms. ASTRAEA thus Salutes His Lordship. JUstice of old by long Oppression driven, Left the Tyrannick World and flew to Heav'n. But when Great NASSAW, Albion's Scepter bore, Our Laws and Rights sent kindly to restore, She visited the Albion World once more. Thus whilst our Caesar yields a Trust so large, As proud Augusta to Your Guardian Charge. As He from Heav'n His Sovereign Justice drew; He's Heav'ns Vicegerent, His Vicegerent, You. Astraea then must here her Pow'r resign, Her brightest Glories in Your Hand shall shine. You'll best, my Lord, my Righteous Ballance hold, No Poise so even as in the Scales of Gold.
The Chariot of Iustise. depiction of the Chariot of Justice TO THE WORSHIPFULL THE COMPANY OF GOLDSMITHS; The Prints of these Pageants as a lasting Monument of this year's Triumphs, are humbly dedicated.
depiction of Honour
The Fourth and Last PAGEANT, The Temple of HONOUR. THIS Pageant being the Representation of the true Merit that has rais'd His Lordship to that Honourable Dignity; in the chief Seat in Front sits a noble Figure personating HONOUR, with the Banner of the City's; on his Head a Silver Head-Piece and a stately Plume of Crimson Feathers, his Vest embroider'd with Gold, Silver, and precious Stones; a Robe of Scarlet inrich'd with Embroidery of Tissue, with Buskins, and a Silken Scarf fringed with Gold. On the same Basis, in three other Seats, are planted Peace, Plenty, and Liberality, properly drest, as the suitable Attributes and Attendants on HONOUR. At the Feet of these are laid the four Principal Rivers of Trade, as Tiber, Nile, Danube, and Thames, with their several Hierogli∣phicks, in Rich Habits, with Garlands of Flowers, and Banners flying, &c. Ths Structure is formed of the Compositive Order, most nobly set forth with Painting and Carving in Gold and Silver to an infinite Lustre, being made of that precious Stone called Lapis Lazuli. On the upper part over each Pilaster are four Pyramids of Trophies of Armour, Bows, Qui∣vers, &c. being the ancient Emblem of Honour, Love and Virtue, and crown'd with the Four Imperial Crowns of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland. HONOUR's Speech. WHilst my best Wreath decks those Deserving Brows, To her lov'd Lord the pleas'd Augusta bows: Augusta, who Your humble Suppliant, calls Once more for her old Hospitable Walls: She wants to see her ancient Greatness raign, When her proud CHAIR did all that State maintain; That Visiting Princes fill'd her PRAETOR's Train. Why do I court You to perform that Task, When that's already granted e're I ask? Doubt not her ancient Grandeur You'll restore, You'll be Your SELF, and she needs ask no more. His Lordship here moves to Guild-hall to Dinner, being Graced by the Lords of the Council, the Judges, and the chief Nobility of England, His Honourable Guests; where the Solemnity of the Day is concluded with all the Festival Magnificence and Splendor suitable to so most Noble an Entertainment.
SONG. TO Britain's Dread Caesar, we'll tune up our Joy: To Caesar, and Caesar's Great City-Viceroy: Tis Caesar has lent him the Scales and the Sword, And Augusta salutes him her Guardian Lord. Whilst the World all around her, 'Twixt Envy and Wonder, Shall see her proud Chair like the Throne shine in Gold. Of War he has ended the Toil and the Pain; And WILLIAM's Work now is to Smile and to Raign. In the soft Sweets of Peace, in one Olive Bow'r, The Crown and the Chair, the whole Scepter of Pow'r, All blooming like Aaron's old Wand we behold; Whilst calmly possessing The Halcyon Blessing, We'll merrily troll round the Goblets of Gold. The Ermin and Fir, the Robe and the Gown, On this side the Chaplet, on that side the Crown, Together shall taste that General Joy, Which the whole Pow'r of Hell shall never destroy: Our Albion thus blest, this Scene to behold, The Day shall shine brighter, The Sun gallop lighter, And Phoebus new-burnish his Chariot of Gold. FINIS.
