S3720 13111287 97663
AN ACCOUNT OF THE SCOTISH ATLAS, OR THE DESCRIPTION OF SCOTLAND ANCIENT & MODERN, BY His Sacred MAJESTIE'S special Command To be published presently, BY Sir ROBERT SIBBALD D. M. His MAJESTIE'S Physician in Ordinary, and Geographer for His Ancient Kingdom of SCOTLAND. EDINBURGH, Printed by DAVID LINDSAY, Mr. JAMES KNIBLO, JOSUA van SOLINGEN and JOHN COLMAR. M.DC.LXXXIII.
Mark ALEXANDER BOYDS Verses in commendation of Scotland translated out of Latine by J. B. A Noble place near the Pole Artick lies, Which on each side the Sea with Waters plies. Yet is it not sore pinch'd with Winter-Frost, Nor do the Sun's hot fiery Beams it rost. To which both Name and Honour Scota brings A Noble Branch of the Egyptian Kings. Their Granaries she fill'd with store of Corn; Laws and Religion stablish'd, them t'adorn. Their Vales with Corns, Pastures with Flocks abound; Store of rich Metals in their Mines are found. Nor doth this Plenty make them idle sit: Artificers they have of skill and wit. Though gentle-natur'd, soon they fly to Arms; Not more devout, than causing hot Alarms.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE WORK Designed, OR THE SCOTISH ATLAS To be Published. AMongst the many Sciences, which perfite and adorn the mind of man, Geography is worthy of all praise: because it both affordeth matter of much delight, and likewise is of much use for the life of man. This World being a Theater, whereupon each act their Part, and by the several Personages, which they represent, very much demonstrate the marvellous Wisdom, Power and Goodness of GOD, who hath contrived all for the perfection of the Universe his great Work, and by his never erring Providence bringeth all about to the accom∣plishment of his good will and pleasure: Man, who is the lesser World and Abridgement of the Greater, cannot but find the advantages of Geography, by which we see all the parts of this great Machine, even which are most remote from us, and look upon these who are absent, as if they were present with us. What delight must it give us, when we learn by it the Situation of Coun∣treys, Towns and Rivers, as well as if we had viewed them with our eyes! It is certain that most of men have a great desire to travell, and it is certainly an inexcus∣able fault to be ignorant of what concerneth our own Countrey: Yet many, because of their poverty or want of health, are deprived of these Advantages. And therefore we are much beholden to Geography, by which all the face of the World is exposed to us, and we can even sitting at home view the whole Earth and Seas, and much sooner pass through them in our studies, than Travellers can do by their Voyages; and so may, without the hazard of being infected by the vices of Forreiners, improve our minds and reap all other Advantages from them. Not to mention here, how the Policy of each place, the studies of Theology, of Natural Philosophy, History and several Arts may be improved by this knowledge. I shall only instance in Merchan∣dising, Navigation and the Pactice of Medicine. And for Merchandising, (which with Navigation is the great support of corpora∣tions) it can hardly be entertained without the knowledge of the Countreys and their Products, of the nature and manners of the Inhabitants and Rodes that lead to them, which the Maps and descriptions joyned to them inform us of; and by the Maps the Mariners come to know the situation of the Countreys they intend for, the Rout they are to follow and the Dangers they are to be aware of. As for the Practice of Medicine, Hippocrates hath abundantly proven, that a Physician, who would practise aright, must first know the place.Lib. de Aë∣re, Aquis & Locis. Now considering these great uses of Geographical Descriptions, many complained that there was so little done, as to the Description of our Countrey: For the Theater of Scotland published by Bleau, for all its Bulk (except it be the Description of some few shires by the learned Gordon of Straloch, and some sheets of his of the Scotia
Antiqua) containeth little more than what Buchanan wrote, and some few Scrapes out of Cambden, who is no friend to us in what he writeth. And in respect that there are many Islands around this Ancient Kingdom of Scotland; and many impetuous and contrary Currents and Tides, and in several places the Coast is full of Rocks, or Banks of sand, which ought to be exactly described for the security of Trade. And because the face of the Country, by the peace and quiet we enjoy under his Majestie's happy Government, is quite changed from what it was of old; and now for Stately Buildings, Parks, fertile Fields, we begin to contend with the happiest of our Neighbours: therefore a new and full description was much desired by all ingeni∣ous persons. For these considerations His Sacred Majesty, the Father of his Countrey, and gra∣cious and wise provisor of all that may be for the profite and honour of it, hath com∣manded and ordained, by His Letters patent under the Seal, Sir Robert Sibbald one of His Phisicians in ordinary and His Geographer for His Ancient Kingdom of Scot∣land, to publish an exact description of Scotland Ancient and Modern, with the Maps. And, that the Maps may be exact and just, the Lords of His Majesties Pri∣vy Council in Scotland gave Commission to John Adair Mathematician and skilfull Mechanick, to survey the Shires. And the said John Adair, by taking the distances of the several Angles from the adjacent Hills, hath designed most exact Maps, and hath lately made an Hydrographical Map of the River of Forth Geometrically surveyed, Wherein, after a new and exact way, are set down all the Isles, blind Rocks, Shelves and Sands, with an exact Draught of the Coasts, with all its Bayes, Head lands, Ports, Havens, Towns, and other things remarkeable; the Depths of the Watters through the whole Firth, with the Courses from each Point, the pro∣spect and view of the remarkable Islands, Head-lands, and other considerable land∣marks. And he is next to survey the Shire of Perth, and to make two Maps there∣of, one of the south-side, and another of the North. He will likewise be ready to de∣sign the maps of the other Shires, that were not done before, providing he may have sufficient allowance therefore. And, that these, who are concerned, may be the bet∣ter perswaded thereto, there is joyned with this Account the Map of Clackmanan-Shire taken off the Copper-Plate done for it, where may be seen not only the Towns, Hills, Rivers and Lochs; but also the different face of the grounds, which are Ara∣ble, and which Moorish: and by convenient Marks you may know the Houses of the Nobility and Gentry, the Churches, Mills, woods and Parks &c, In obedience to His Majesties command, the said Sir Robert Sibbald printed Que∣ries for obtaining the Information that was necessary for the Description of each Shire; and hath been at the pains to collect several Manuscripts Ancient and Modern, which may illustrate the said work; and hath recovered several Ancient Inscriptions, which were never published before; and hath now made that advance in the work, that if the rest of the Informations from the Shires be sent in shortly, and these few Shires be designed, which are not yet done, this Description in English (whereof this is the Account) may be very soon ready for the Press. For the further encouragement of these, who may be Subscribers for the Copies, it is fit there be some Account of it given, which is as followeth. The said Atlas Scoticus or Description of Scotland Ancient and Modern is to be in two Volumes; the one in Latin, the other in English. The Atlas in Latine may contain about an hundred printed sheets of large Lum∣bard-Paper, in the great Letter the Atlas is usually done upon: & it will contain some seventy Maps, whereof there are upwards of twenty more than are in the Thea∣trum Scotiae done by J. Bleau; and of these several are exactly surveyed. In this Lati∣ne Copy the Scotia Antiqua will take up more than twenty sheets of Print, and is done exactly from the Greek and Roman Authors, and the best Manuscripts and Ancient Records. The contents of the several Books are set down in the Latin Account pre∣mised. The Scotia Moderna likewise is done in Latin, according to the account given there, so it remains that there be ane account given of the Atlas in English, which is to be published first. The Atlas of Scotland in English may contain eighty sheets of printed large Lum∣bard paper, and about seventy Maps. It is divided into two parts, the General and the special part. The General part Containeth the general description of
Scotland, where there is a short Description of Britain and Ireland. Then Albanie or Ancient Scotland is briefly described, where the names and the reason of them are given; the condition of the Countrey from its first discoverie and Possession till the coming in of the Romans; whence they came, where the first Inhabitants are shewed and the several Nations that frequented it then; and the customes, manners, Reli∣gion and Government of the State under that Period are made known. Then the condition of the Kingdom, while the Romans were here, how far they prevailed, what Monuments they left, the division of the Countrie and Names of the People then, the condition of the Picts till their Overthrow, and the planting of the Chri∣stian Religion in Scotland is manifested; The state of Religion and Government from thence till Malcom Canmore, in whose time the English Tongue, and the Titles, Manners, Customes of Living, which is now, was introduced. There is an Account also of the Forreigners, that invaded us during this Period. To Ancient Scotland belong these Maps. Albion and Ireland, With the lesser adjacent Islands. The Map of the British Islles, done by Ortelius. A New Table of Albania or the Most ancient Scotland. Ancient Scotland, done by Robert Gordon of Straloch. Then Scotland, as it is now, is described, where is shewed the Extent and the Bounds of it, the Latitude of it, the Figure of it, under what Climate and Paral∣lels; the length of the longest Day there; the Division of Scotland into three Penin∣sulae, the South one, the Middle one and the North one, The Rivers upon each side running far into the Countrey are separated by a small Tract of Land from meet∣ing, else they would make three Islands of the continent of Scotland. It is also di∣vided by the Mountains, and by the Qualitie of the Soil, and Nature of the Inha∣bitants and their different manner of life, into the High-Lands and Low-lands, and the Highlanders and Low-land-men. And by the several Jurisdictions it is divided into Shires, Stewartries, Baileries, Bishopricks; which are shewed, with the Counties under them. Formerlie it was divided into two Kingdoms; that of the Scots, and that of the Picts, beside the Roman Province. The Islands about Scotland are shewed, and there is an Account given of the Na∣ture and Quality of the Soil, and the natural products of it: viz. the grains, Pot∣herbs and Fruits, and other usefull Plants; The Animals; Four-footed Beasts domes∣tick and wild, the Fouls, the Fishes, the Insects; The Metals and Minerals, the substances cast up by the Sea, the Mineral Waters; The Advantages by the Sea for Trade and Fishing; The great Rivers Forth, Clide and Tay, with their Firths, of each of which there are particular Maps, with full Descriptions of them; The Lochs and the rare properties of some of them. There is an Account of the Air of Scotland, where the Winds are treated of, and the Advantages and Disadvantages the Countrey hath by them. The Nature of the Countrey Hilly and and Mountainous; how these Hillsruns through the Countrey. Of the Woods and Forrests, Heaths or Moors, and Mosses. An Account of the ancient Inhabitants, their Diet, Drink; their Exercise, Cloath∣ing; their Arms, Discipline of War, their Valour, strict Justice, Learning and Arts; their Trade, nature of their Government before the Kings; Their Anci∣ent Religion; Of the Druides; Their Ancient Burials, and the Dignities in use a∣mongst them; The rise of their Property. The History of the Alliance betwixt the Scots and the French begun in the time of Charlemaigne and Achaius, and continued to our times. The Advantages and Priviledges the Scots got in France, The establishments of the Scots in other Coun∣treys. The many Scots Families setled abroad. The Nature and Qualities of the present Inhabitants. Their Diet, Exercises, Re∣creations and Games. Their Apparel, their Language, their Humour. Of their Trade; the Commodities exported. The Nobles, their several Degrees; the Names of them according to the Order of the Parliament-Rolls. The Clergy; the several Orders of them. the Archbishops and the Bishops their Dignity, their Chapters, their Jurisdiction; exent of their Dioceses; their Courts. The Gentry; the severall Ranks of them, Whereof the Ancient order of the Thistle. The Commons, and the several orders of them
The Royal Burroughs; the list of them, their Priviledges. The Religion of Scotland under the several Periods. Many of old famous for their Sanctity. The Universities and Colledges of Scotland; their Constitution. The Scots famous for all sort of Learning and Arts, for several new Inventions. Ma∣ny of the Nobility and Gentry educate abroad; many famous for their valour and Conduct; Many of them General Officers abroad. A List of the Bishops and Archbishops of Sanct-Anrews since the time of the Picts, An Account of sixty of the Pictish Kings out of a Manuscript. An account of the Kings of Scotland. The State of the Governement done by his Majestie's Advocate. Of the King and His Prerogative; the Succession to the Crown, Ancient Domi∣nion. The Revenue of the King of Scotland. The Power of the King of Scotland. Of the Officers of State. The Officers of the Crown. Of the Courts of Scotland and the Constitution of them. Of the High Court of Parliament: Where of the Electors, the Members, the So∣lemnity at the riding of the Parliament, the ranking of the Members. How they sit in Parliament; the manner of Procedure in Parliament. Of the Lords of the Arti∣cles. What the Parliament cognosceth. The Convention of Estates; the Nature of it. The Privy Council; the power of it. The Session: the number of the Lords and Clerks, their Habits. The Outerhouse, Inner-house Matters that come before them. The Law of Scot∣land. The time the Session sits. The Justice-Court; the Constitution of it. The Court of Exchequer; the Nature of it, The Court of Admirality; the Priviledges of the High Admiral. The High Constables Court; its Nature. The Court of Regality; its constitution. The Sherif-Court; the Constitution of it. The Stewart's Court; the Nature of it. The Baron's Court; the Nature of it. The Commissary Court; the Nature of it. The Lyon's Court; its Nature. The Royal-Burroughs their Constitution. The Burrough-Courts their constitution. Where of the Convention of Burroughs. its Nature. Of the Burghs of Regality their Nature. Of Burghs of Baronie their Nature. Of the Justices of Peace their power. The Forces, where of the Military Government. Of the Mint, where of the Money of Scotland. The Government of the Church. Where of the several Ecclesiastick courts; of their Nature. Of the Kirk Session. The Presbyteries, their Number; The Synods. The Highest court, the Convocation. The number of the Parishes in Scotland. Of the Commission for Teynds and Plantation of Churches. Of the Commission for the Fishery, These make up the first Part, viz. the Gene∣ral Description of Scotland. The Second part of the Scotia Moderna is the special, wherein the Shires and Coun∣ties, and the Islands are particularly described. Scotland is divided into the Continent and the Isles. The Continent most conveniently is divided into three Penninsulae by the three Isthmi or narrow Necks of Land. The first is the South-part, which towards the South is divided from Eng∣land by the River of Tweed, and, Where it faileth by a Line drawn from Solway-Firth; towards the North from the rest of the continent by the Firth and River of Forth, and a short Line from thence to Clide, by which and its Firth it is divided from the North-west-part of Scotland. Of this part there is a new Map, the Counties contained in this part (of all which there are Maps) are these.
Mers. Lauderdale. West-Lothian. Teviotdale. Mid-Lothian. East-Lothian Twadale. Lids-dale. Eus-dale and Esk-dale. Adnandale. Nides-dale. All Galloway. Sherifdome of Wigtoun. The countrey betwixt the Water of Dee and Cree. The Stewartrie of Kircudbright. South part of Carrick. North part of Carrick. Kyle. Cuninghame. The upper ward of Clids-dale. The Nether ward of Clids-dale. Renfrew. Sterling-Shire. The Middle part of the continent hath, to the South, the Firth and River of Forth, and the Line betwixt it and the River and Firth of Clide; to the west and East, the Sea; and, towards the North, it is parted from the rest of the continent of Scotland by the water and Loch of Lochty in Lochaber, and a line from the fore∣said Loch through a short Neck of Land to the Rise of the Loch and River of Ness. You may see it in a new Map thereof. It containeth these following Counties and Shires whereof there are particular Maps. All Fife. The West part of it. The East part of it. Angus. The south part of Perth-Shire, where are Strathearn, Bequhider, Strathallan and Menteith. The water of Earn is done in the Map of Tay, and with it there is a plan of the Roman camp at Airdoch. The North-part of Perth-Shire, where are Braid-Albin, Athole the Rannoch, Glen-Lyon, the Over and Lower Gourie. Calckmanan Shire. Lennox. The Sherifdome of Argyle, or Innerara, where are Knapdale, Kintyre. Cewal, Lorn. Knapdale. Lorn. Kintyre. Aberdeen and Bamf-Shire. Braid-Albin, Athol, Brae of Mar, Badenoch, Spey and Lochaber. Lochaber. Mernes. Murray. The Northern part of the Continent hath, to the South, the Water and Loch of Lochty, and a short Line from thence to Loch-Ness and the Water of Ness; to the West and East, it hath the Sea; and to the North, the Sea. It may be seen in the Map intituled Extima Scotiae Septentrionalis Ora, and containeth these Countreys, Ross, Sutherland, Strathnavern, Caithness; that part of Lochaber on the North side of Lochty Water, and Loch Edir, Chilis and Assin. The Countreys, of which there are Maps, are these; Ross. Sutherland. Strathnavern. Caithness. And this is for the Continent of Scotland. The Isles are divided into the West Isles, the North-Isles and the Isles lying to the East. The Islands lying to the East are these, which ly in the Firth of Forth, and may be seen in the Map of Forth and are described with it. The West-Isles are these called Hebrides and Aebudae, and of them there are these following Maps. Aebudae, or the West-Isles. Aran.
Boot. Lews and Harris. Lews, Harris and SKY in a Map together. Ila. Jura. Viste. Mulla. The lesser Islands Rumm, Canna, Egg, Muck. The North-Islands, as these of Orckney and Schetland; and the Maps of them are these. A Map of Orkney and Schetland. A new Map of Orkney, with the Roads and Harbours. A most exact new Map of Orkney, with the Forelands, Rocks and dangerous pla∣ces marked, done Mr. by James Wallace Minister of Kirckwall in Orkney. A new Map of Schetland. Besides these there is a Hydrographic Map of the Sea-Coast from the Island of Cocket to Orkney. THE SECOND PART OF The SCOTIA Moderna. IN this second Part, which containeth the Descriptions of each Shire and the Coun∣tries in it, and of the Islands, There is also an Account given of the names, situa∣tion, bounds of each Countrey; the nature of the Countrey, and these Products Nature hath formed in it are shewed. The Forrests, Woods, Parks; the Springs, Rivers, Lochs, with their various Properties. What Mountains, Valleys, Caves most remarbable, that it may be known what in every place abounds and may be commu∣nicate to other Countreys; and what is wanting, that it may be carried in to them in order to Trade. The Plants, Animals, Metals, Substances cast up by the Sea. As to Rivers, the Rise of them and their Emboucheurs are shewed, and in the ad∣jacent Sea the Roads, Bays, Ports and Harbours are described; the Roks and Sholes on the Coast, and the time of the Moon that causeth High Water is marked. The Ancient Monuments, Forts and Camps, Inscriptions, graved and figured Stones; the Singularites of Nature or Arte, that are there, or have been found there. The great Battels that have been there fought, and the memorable Actions or Ac∣cidents there. The Towns of Note in each Shire, especially Burroughs Royal; their Magistracy, the Trade of the Town. Their publick Buildings, their Iurisdiction, their Hospitals and Work-houses. The Market-Towns in each Shire. The Monasteries, Cathedral Churches, Ancient Churches, Colledges and Publick Schools. The Manners and Customes of the Inhabitants in each Shire, their Manufactures. The Government of each Shire and Countrey; in what Diocese it is; who is She∣rif, Stewart or Bailie there. Who commands the Militia there. The Castles, Forts, Woods, Forrests, Parks belonging to his Majesty there. What places give Title to Noblemen there; and the Seats of the Noblemen and most considerable Gentrey. There is ane Account likewise of the Temperature of each Countrey, the Ancient Inhabitants of it. And, for illustration of the Work, the Dignities and Priviledges of several Noble Families, and the Rise and Branches of them are shewed. The Constitution of the Royal Burghs, their Priviledges, and their Longitude and Latitude is shewed.
The Constitution of the Universities, their Priviledges, their Foundations, Biblio∣thecs and rare Instruments are recorded. And whatsoever of these occurreth in the Islands is shewed in the Description of them. Printed Books and Manuscripts not yet come to my hand, which I entreat may be sent to me: and after I have made use of them for the Work, they shall be restored. 1. The Navigation of King Iames the fifth around his Kingdom, with the Maps; whatever Language it be in, and Whether Manuscript or Printed. 2. Cornelius Hibernicus. 3. Veremundus. 4. Joannes à Campo bello, or Cambell. 5. Turgot. 6. Liber Sconae. 7. Liber Pasletensis. 8. Liber Pluscartensis. 9. William Elphinhstoun Bishop of Aberdeen his Treatise of the Scotish Antiquities. 10. The History of Scotland done by Dempster and mentioned in his Apparatus ad Historiam Scoticam. 11. Andersonus de Sanctis Scotis. 12. The History of the family of the Gordons. 13. The Government of Scotland, written by Straloch. 14. Remarques, done by one who travelled through most of the West-Isles. 15. The new Map of Shetland, with the exact Description thereof. And what else in Manuscript or Print may be for the further advancement and embel∣lishment of the Work, is humbly desired; And there shall be an honourable acknow∣ledgment of these persons, who transmit the Manuscripts or Printed Books with as∣surance that they shall be returned to them again. The Work being a publick Work and so much for the honour of the Nation, it is hoped, that all ingenious persons will contribute the necessary Information in Answer to the General Queries conjoined with the Proposal and there shall be a due commendation of them set down in the Work. It is earnestly desired, that the Informations anent the several Countreys, Towns and Universities may be sent to the Author betwixt and Martimass ensuing: for that it is resolved (if so be there be a sufficient number of Subscribers to encourage the Work) they shall begin God willing, to print the Atlas of Scotland in English once in January next 1684. Relations given in for the WORK. 1. ANe Account of the Governement and the Laws, done by Sir George Mackenzie his Majesties Advocate 2. Ane account of Rona and Hirta by the Lord Register, Sir George Mackenzie of Tarbat. 3. Observations by the same Noble Person. 4. Account of the Metals and Minerals in Scotland by Collonel Borthwick. 5. The Honours and Priviledges of the High Constable of Scotland. 6. Answers to the General Queries concerning Caithness, given by Mr. William Dun∣dass of Wester Kincavile Advocate. 7. Some Account of Sutherland, and of the Family of Suther land given in by Mr. Douglas. 8. A Relation of the most considerable things observable in Orknay by Mr. Mathew Mackaile, who stayed several years there. 9. Ane account of the Current of the Tydes there by the same. 10. Observations of several remarkable things in Caithness by the same. 11. Memorandum of the Minerals in Scotland, containing the places where they are found by Collonel Borthwick. 12. Ane description of Shetland, and of the fishing there made upon the place. 13. Ane account of the Burgh Royal of Hadingtoun from the Magistrates thereof. 14. Ane account of the Miraculous cure of mad people, at Saint Mackassac well in Stratherne, Extracted from the Tryal the Presbitery of Sterling made thereanent. 15. A description of the North East part of Aberdeen Shire, by the Right Honourable the present Countess of Erroll. 16. Ane account of the Leakies in the River of Forth by the Reverend Mr. Wright Mini∣ster at Alloway.
The PROPOSALS FOR The PRINTING the SCOTISH ATLAS. WHereas DAVID LINDSAY is to undertake the printing of this Description of Scotland, Ancient and Moderne, in the English and Latine Languages and is with all possible diligence to proceed thereto. And for many considerations is to make use of the Paper the Acts of Parliament were lately printed on, for the Description, the Lumbard paper amounting to a Greater expence then most of the Curious, will be at the charge of The said DAVID LINDSAY, will find sufficient Security to deliver to the Subscribers for the English Copy (which will consist of upwards of one hundred sheets, Folio, in a greater letter then that the Acts of Parliament are done upon) one Copy in sheets against the middle of January 1685. Which is to contain the Description without the Mapps, each Sub∣scriber paying for the said Copy twenty Shillings Sterling, whereof ten is to be advan∣ced presently, and the other ten to be payed at the delivery of the said Copy in En∣glish. And he likewise will find sufficient Security at the same time of January 1685. to deliver 69 Mapps General and particular of Scotland to each Subscriber who shall pay twenty five Shillings Sterling more, whereof twelve shillings and six pence is to be ad∣vanced at the subscribing; and the other half at the delivery of the said Book of Mapps, which is to be in the Ordinary Lumbard paper, without Descriptions. He likewise will find sufficient security to deliver against the middle of Janua∣ry 1686. a Copy of the Scotish ATLAS in Latine, (which will contain the Scotia Antiqua and Moderna in upwards of six score of sheets, and is without Mapps, Folio, in the Paper the Acts of Parliament were lately done upon, but a greater letter) to each Subscriber therefor, who shall pay twenty five Shillings Sterling, whereof twelve shillings and six pence is to be advanced at the subscribing, and the other half at the delivery of the Book. And he will find security to deliver against the same terme of January 1686 a Copy of the 69 Mapps (Lumbard paper as before) to each Subscriber, who shall pay twenty five Shillings Sterling, whereof twelve shillings and six pence at the subscribing, and the other Moyetie at the delivery of the Book, that is to be without Descriptions. These Volumes will be dearer to these who subscribe not: and the Subscribers will be first furnished with the Books, they calling timely for them. And because that this work will be very costly to the said DAVID LINDSAY (There being many Mapps to be graven new, such as were never done before, or not right done) He will find sufficient security to dedicate the said Maps to be insert in this ATLAS Scoticus to such who shall advance five pounds Sterling, and their name and Coat of Armes shall be Graven upon the Map condescended upon. The money is to be payed in to John Melvill Merchant in Edinburgh, who will find security for the performance of what is undertaken. The said John Melvill will be found at his Shop over against the Crosse upon the North-side of the Street: and he will depute some to receive the money and give security in other places. That the Work may be the sooner finished, it is humbly desired that the Subscribers may presently pay the money above-specified. FINIS.
The forme of the subscription for the Copies. We whose names are underwritten, well approving and Highly commending the De∣sign of DAVID LINDSAY, do for his encouragement Subscribe our selves for one or more Copies of the said Book, and do recommend so noble and useful a De∣sign to all ingenious persons throughout his Majesties Dominions.
APPENDIX To the former Account of the SCOTISH ATLAS. 1. THE Shires of Selkirk, Kinrosshire, Innerness, Nairn, Cromartie, Elgin, Bamf, Ross and the Shire of Tayne were done joyntly with other Mapps. But if the Sheriffs and others concerned in these several Shires desire that they may be done apart, they may be so drawn, they paying for each Shire five pounds Sterling to JOHN ADAIR (who is commissionat by the Right Honourable the Lords of His Majesties Privy Council for surveying the several Shires) and five pounds Sterling more to DAVID LINDSAY for the graving of them upon Copper Plates with their Coat of Arms and the Dedication to them. 2. The Right Worshipful Sir GEORGE MACKENZIE His Majestie's Ad∣vocate is pleased to grant his Manuscript-Treatise done by himself, wherein all the most considerable Families of the Nobility and Gentry in Scotland are digested in the order of the Alphabet, and the Stock of each Family, its Rise and the Branches of it are set down from the Original Records; the Registers of the Abbacies, and the Char∣ters of the said Families; the Coat of Arms they bear, as it is blazoned by the Lyon Herauld; and likewise the Plates with the Coats graven upon them. 3. The several Coins in Gold and Silver coined in Scotland done from the Copper-Plates, which Sir JOHN FALCONER Master of the Mint caused to be made for them. 4. As likewise the Plans of the ancient Monasteries done by direction of Master SLETCHER His Majestie's Engineer for the Kingdom of Scotland. All which are to be joined with the Description of Scotland in English. 5. In the Ancient Scotland in Latine are done the Plans of several ancient Camps, the Altars, Sepulchres and other ancient Monuments of the Copper-Plates made for them. 6. There is an Account of the Constitution of the Session, by the Right Worship∣ful the Lord PITMEDDEN. 7. An Account of the Admiralty-Court, by Sir PATRICK LYON Judge of the said Court of Admiralty. 8. A Manuscript and large Account of the noble and ancient Family of Seton. 9. A full Account of all that is observable in the Town of Aberdeen, given by Mr. SKEEN late Bailie there and delivered to me by Bailie WALTER ROBERTSON.
