S671 12401828 61269
A VINDICATION OF COLONELL SANDYS His Honour and Loyalty: from A DECLARATION pretended to be set forth by him at Worcester October 11. 1642. Which is here also republished with it. Printed Anno M. DC. XLII.
The Declaration of Col. EDWYN SANDYS, in Vindication of himselfe from those calumnious Aspersions cast upon him by the Lord Falkland, and Secretary Nicholas. Published and subscribed with his owne hand at the Randevouze at Worcester, Octob. 11. 1642. in the pre∣sence of Sergeant Major Berry, Thomas Cox, Doctor of Physick, Captain Walter Long; Captain Robert Long; Lyonell Copeley, Muster master Generall; Iohn Rushworth Clerke, Assistant to the Commons House of Parliament. IT pleaseth God yet to detaine mee in that condition, that my pen, and not my sword must vindicate mee from the aspersions, which the Letters of the Lord Falkland and Secretary Ni∣cholas have cast on my Reputation, and fidelity in that cause, in which I was lately, and still stand engaged. Both these persons charge mee that I should say, That death did not so much trouble mee, as that I had endeavour∣ed to defend so bad a cause, which I was driven unto, as well by my owne ambition, as by perswasion of other men; and that I wished that all the Actions of the Parliaments Forces might hereafter be unsuccessefull; and especially, that I should desire God and the King to forgive mee this great
sinne of Rebellion, &c. They that know mee well, know that I have not so much vanity, as to thinke any discourse necessary for my defence in this case; yet that I may stand cleere, as well in the thoughts of strangers as of my friends, I thought fit to render this account to the world. The ap∣prehension of death never hitherto so neerly toucht mee, but that if God shall once restore mee to my former strength, I shall by his help with as much alacity, and I hope courage, endeavour to defend, and maintaine with my dearest blood, this so good a cause, as ever I was at first engaged in it. Not my Ambition prompted mee unto it, but a legitimate and ardent desire of advancing that cause, which I conceive honours the meanest of them that are imployed therein; nor was I drawne into this businesse by any Per∣swasions, but such as were backed by the best of Arguments, the maintaining of the true Religion, the honour and secu∣rity of my Prince, the Rights and Priviledges of the Parlia∣ment; and the whole Kingdome; such a successe I pray for to the designes of the Parliament, and in particular to this Army under the Command of his Excellencie the Earle of Essex, as by the best of men can possibly be desired, both on His Majesties Person, and this whole Kingdome. And lastly, I professe to the whole World, that my conscience did when I was in the gieatest danger of death, and doth still cleare mee from the guilt of Rebellious or tumultuous thoughts, and that the most puissant motive which carried mee on to this Action, was loyalty to my Soveraign, & love to my Religion and Country: They certainly thought mee dead when they writ these Letters, and by this means ho∣ped to have served their ends, upon some feeble unresolved spirits. But I wonder they should write there are so ma∣ny hundreds of our men slain, when it is most apparant, that the number both of them that dyed in the place, and since, never amounted to thirty persons; & their losse no way in∣feriour to ours, considering their great advantage of place, and that they were at least double for number. There was indeed a Divine, who I thinke was the Deane of Worcester,
who came to mee to the house where I was first taken up, and accompanied mee to the place where I now lye, hee continually urged and pressed my conscience, how great a sinne I was guilty of in taking up armes against my Sove∣raigne, I was not then in case to entertain him in discourse, onely at last answered him, I never had, nor ever would take up Armes against my Soveraigne, but ever should be ready to lay my life, and whatsoever was deare unto mee at His feet: of this judgement and resolution I still am, and solemnely make this Protestation, in the same sence I have here already declared, and according to the sense of the Parliament in all their Declarations, of which I hope with Gods blessing upon my recovery to give further testimony to the World, by the continued engagement of my life and fortune, in this so just and honourable a cause. EDWYN SANDYS. At the Rendesvouze at Worcester, the 11. of Octob. 1642.
To Colonell Edwin Sandys. Sir, I have this very Octob to chanced upon a Printed Declaration, pretended to goe out under your name: the Title of it premising, A vindication of your selfe, from some calumnious aspersions of my Lord Falkland, and Mr. Secretary Nicholas. It will hardly obtaine credit with men of free, and dis∣ingaged understandings, that personages of so much trust and honour, should over-lightly adventure their owne fames, by imposing calumnies upon anothers. I therefore little doubt, but that these ho∣nourable personages had their grounds from some such good hands: as might either take up some part of the report from your owne mouth, or from some others whom they credited. Such as heard it (at first or second hand) from those that visited you upon your bed at Worcester, at such times as you felt more ease from your wounds, and more wounds from your Conscience. For I cannot thinke, but that a∣mong those many visitants, you might utter more of the same kind of remorses, then you did unto my selfe. But leaving those honourable personages to the vindication of such particulars as you charge upon them, in the generall, I am induced to answer thus much for them: for that to my selfe in pretence
of your cosin Mr Iohn Sandys, you were so free and ingenuous in your acknowledgements and Confes∣sion. The person of your Confessor, I perceive you have mistaken: by reason, perhaps, of that Canonicall coat, in which I visited your selfe, and such other dying men, before you, as I could come at in the field, and time of battell; but that mistake may be rectified at our next meeting. In the meane time, if your me∣mory were not then as weake as your body, and that you still continue in the same ingenuity which I left you, you will not, cannot deny the generalls, and scope of these passages to be true, which you here find asserted: and which upon my credit I will justi∣fie to the world; and if you please unto your selfe, at our next meeting. What you shall here find goes under the name of a Minister of Prince Ruperts: as the copie of it was at first given abroad. I had no time to alter it, or saw I any cause to change any thing I had written in it.
Some Notes of the Conference betwixt Colonell Sandys, and a Mini∣ster of Prince Ruperts. THe Minister being met in the field by my Lord Andover, was advised to visite Colonell Sandys, and to exhort him to repent of his sinnes; who find∣ing the wounded Colonell in a little house, presented unto him (among his other sinnes) the unhappinesse of his present condition, to suffer in so bad a cause; This with some expressions of re∣morse he acknowledged, and withall professed, that if it were to doe againe, he would never appeare in it. Then the Minister diswading the people of Wor∣cester from stripping him, contented one of them by taking off one of the Colonells spurres and giving them to him; but with this condition, that hee should carry up Master Sandys his legges: and upon this consideration, that if so hee did, the spurres would then hurt the bearer. But the Colonell feel∣ing the chayre uneasie, the Minister borrowed a sheet of the house to carry him into the Towne. At
all this was his Cozen, Master Iohn Sandys present, and with the Minister went all the way with the Co∣lonell, and housed him at the Green-Dragon in Worce∣ster. There the Minister left him for a while: Not long after came Serjeant Major Francklin to the Co∣lonell, and brought Master Catenby the Surgeon to dresse him. To whom the Colonell said, Woe, woe to evill Counsell, and happy are they that doe not take it; with other words to the like purpose, as the Serjeant Major told the Minister at first: since which time the Surgeon hath by word of mouth justified it to the Minister. The Minister now returning, first put the Colonell in minde of the haynousnesse of the sinne of Rebellion, that it was as the sinne of Witchcraft; and that God had commanded, Thou shalt not suffer a Witch to live, which doome was now likely to fall upon him, for God had found him out in his sinne: He acknowledged himselfe to have fallen into the sinne of Rebellion, and that God was just in his Judge∣ments; professing therewithall his sorrow and re∣morse for it. Upon which the Minister returned; That herhaps if ever he recovered the same argu∣ments from others, and inconsideratenesse in him∣selfe, might againe endanger to draw him to con∣tinue in his Rebellion: At which words, a little hea∣ving up his hand, he professed He would rather have it cut off, then ever againe lift it up against the King. Nor did he at this profession make any mention at all of the Parliament; or conjoyne their cause with the Kings. Indeed, said the Minister, you have no reason to appeare against the King, if you well con∣sidered
the cause; and that His Majestie was but in∣forced to take up defensive Armes for the Reformed Religion, His owne Crowne, the Lawes and Liber∣ty of the Subject; And therefore there was much difference betwixt the two causes of the warre: these that suffered on the Kings side, being a kinde of Martyrs. Whereupon the Colonell acknowledged the Justnesse of the Kings cause; and that he had ob∣served a speciall blessing of God to goe along with it, by the extraordinary successes of it: To this the Minister replyed, Sir, I am witnesse to all these words of yours; but doe you give me leave to testi∣fie this repentance of yours unto the world? This he freely desired him to testifie, and askt God for∣givenesse: withall praying for the King, and for a blessing upon his cause and proceedings. The Minister then added, Sir, I have one sinne more to presse your conscience with: Sir, you are descended from a Bishop, and your family hath beene raised from the Church, therefore the spoyle and outrage committed by you in Canterbury Church, was more abhominable in you then in ano∣ther man. To which with some quicknesse he re∣plyed, That it was much against his minde; and that so soone as he heard what his men were doing, he ranne among them with his Pole-Axe to beat them off; untill he had like to have beene hewen in pee∣ces by them. The Minister added, Sir, it uses to be required of men dying for their offences, to reveale something that may doe right to the party wronged: Where∣fore,
Sir, it would much ease your conscience, and make the King some part of satisfaction, to discover the secret of the great designe against him; Of which, when by one or two earnest denyalls, he professed himselfe ignorant; The Minister then desired him to discover what strength the Parliament Forces were of: He said, he could not tell. How strong, said the Minister, are their Foot? Not considera∣ble, sayes he; Why Sir, said the Minister, you were present lately at their Muster on Dunsmore-Heath, and could you neither by your owne observation, nor from the report of others, make judgement of their numbers? Were they 8000, or 10000, or 16000? Neither, said the Colonell: not above 6000, or 7000. How strong then are their Horse? Seventy Troopes, said the Colonell: At which the Minister making some doubt, and wonder. On my faith its true, said he, its no time now to dissemble; you meane Dragooners and all, said the Minister: No, onely Troopers, said the other, of my know∣ledge. Then the Minister renewed the motion before made in the little house by the field, concerning the perfecting of his Will; for which he desired him to come againe a day or two after. So the Minister perceiving him faint, unwilling therefore to speake much, and desirous to take rest, tooke his leave; his Cozen Sandys and a Servant remaining still with him in the Chamber. His Cozen can affirme all this; and since told the Minister, that the Colonell said much more to him
in testimony of his repentance. And among the rest, he bade me report this passage for one. That he ask∣ing him, Cozen, what meant you being a Gentle∣man of so faire estate, to ingage your selfe in this Treason: The Colonell replyed to him, That he was so farre drawne in before he was aware, that he knew not how to come off without the danger of his head. This will his Cozen justifie to him.
Sir, TO this Testimony of your Confession, some pas∣sages in your Vindication provoketh me to sub∣joyne this Postscript. And first to that (page 7.) of your Declaration, (yours if it be, which I much sus∣pect) where you seeme to excuse your selfe from taking up Armes against your Soveraigne: and that you thinke your understanding the cause in the sense of the Parliament Declarations, can justifie you. Plainly, Sir, I was more watchfull upon you then so, to be deceived by words of doubtfull, or double sence. Your expressions were cleare and explicite, such as best became a Penitent and dying man: nor did you ever so much as once referre your selfe to any sence of the Parliament Declarations. And if upon recovery you ever ingage your selfe against the King, in this cause and sense, let your owne hand, then lifted up, be witnesse with me against you. Take heed, (Master Sandys) of equivocating with God and his Annoynted; or of dallying with im∣precations. But I will hope you to be sincere and reall, and that this Declaration (if yours) was but forced from you. The other points that I finde my selfe provoked to give answer to, are first, concerning the numbers on both sides slaine in battaile at Worcester: Though truely Sir, with no delight (God knowes) doe I re∣member
(much lesse glory) in the numbers of slaine Countrey-men; yet Sir, whereas the Souldiers ordi∣nary phrase after a victory is, The more bloud, the more honour. I cannot but take notice of the dimi∣nution of honour, which those valiant Princes, Lords, Gentlemen and Souldiers, on the Kings party have received, by your affirming your losse never to have amounted to thirty persons; and that our losse was no way inferiour to yours, considering our great advan∣tage of place; and that we were at least double for num∣ber. In confutation of all which in one period, let the Reader (till a larger Narration can be published) be pleased to accept of this little: First, That (if we count right) there were more then that number of thirty found dead in the field after the victory. More then that number also chased into Worcester; and there either slaine, or (as our Souldiers supposed when they gave them over) deadly wounded. More also then so many Prisoners. All which woun∣ded and captived men, Prince Ruperts noble clemen∣cy gave free life and liberty unto. We heard also by Townesmen, and such as dwelt by the river and bridge, which your defeated Troopes fled over; that more then that number were taken up drown∣ed. As for the slaine on the Kings side, on my cre∣dit we could never heare of five, which is just so many as your side lost Colours. Secondly, for the plate, 'twas a plain field upon a hill; the place cho∣sen by your selves to charge in: where the difficulty of your little ascent to it was fully recompenced, by your having both Winde and Sunne of us. As
for inequality of numbers, you Sir, had ten Troopes, and the Prince had fourteene, but scarce halfe of them charged; as being sent to guard the Towne and Lane that led to it. Thus Sir, praying that by continuance in the same royall minde I left you, your selfe may confute this supposed Vindication, I remaine as ready, either to serve, or in∣forme you, as I then was; for I heare you are yet living. FINIS.
