T12 10804861 45977
Great News from OXFORD, Or an Exact ACCOUNT, Of the several Transactions of My Lord Lovelace, In a Letter to a Friend. Loving Friend, IN my last I acquainted you that one Thorp at the Mitre-Inn in Oxon, was taken up for saying these words, That he hoped by Christmas day to see Oxon laid in Ashes, and that if it lay in his power be would wash his hands in the Earl of Abbington's blood, or words to that effect: And now I shall let you know that the Mayor took Bail, one Kimber, and one Harding, two Papists; when the Rabble knew who was his Bail, there rose about three hundred all with Clubs and Staves, crying out, No Popery; and thenwent to all the Papists houses in the Town, and broke their windows, but especially Thorps, and his two Bail: That night these three went to London, and it's thought, to make com∣plaint. Yesterday being Wednesday, the 5th of De∣cember, there came in about eighty Horse, stout Men, well Armed, commanded by Captain Winch and Captain Flyer, going, as 'tis reported, into the West, but Lodged at the Angel-Inn that night, who came out of Herefordshire. About four of the Clock in the Afternoon came in my Lord Lovelace, with about five hun∣dren Horse, the greatest part Gentlemen, and at the East-gate there met him the Mayor and his Brethren all in their Formalities; the Recorder made a Speech to him, and marched up the Street in order as thus: First went my Lord's Sumpter Horses at a good distance, then went the Mayor with the Mace, and his Brethren all a-foot, just before my Lord, and next to his Lordship there were four Priests or Jesuits, which he brought from Gloucester, all pinioned, and the rest rode in or∣der six a-breast up to my Lord's Quarters, which was the Cross-Inn, with a multitude of Specta∣tors; but about Eight of the Clock at night there came News that at a place called Benson, and at Wallingford there was about 1500 Dragoons, and both places not above ten Miles from Oxon; so the Mayor raised all the Trained-Bands that live in this place, but I suppose it was by order of my Lord, and so ordered about twenty to be upon Magdalen Bridge, and blockt up the said Bridge with Waggons and Carts; and it is reported, this day being Thursday, they will pull up part of the Bridge. That night they pulled up a Bridge called Osney, likewise kept a mighty strong Guard all the night, but all was in safety as yet. This day being Friday, about two of the Clock in the night the Trumpets sounded, and there was cryed, Arms, Arms; my Lord Riding up and down the Street, encouraged all peo∣ple to Arms, which I think there could not be less in number than four hundred Musketeers, and about three hundred of the Rabble with Clubs and Staves. At the same time Magdalen Bridge was bro∣ken down, and besides, the Waggons and Carts still remain upon the Bridge, and about ten in the morning my Lord dismissed all the Foot, to be ready at the beat of Drum. I should have told you that upon Thursday the Prince of Orange's Manifesto was proclaimed at Carfax by one Mr. Mordant, my Lord Mor∣dant's Brother. This day being Saturday, Counsellor Pudsey brought into this place about twenty Men with Horse and Arms, and in the Afternoon there came in thirty Gentlemen with their Sumpter Horses, supposed to come from the Prince, but I cannot learn who they are: And in the Afternoon the Lord Lovelace caused the Horse and Foot to be drawn up, and the foresaid Mr. Mordant pro∣claimed and her Declaration, for all Papists to lay down their Arm, and the like. This day being Sunday, the 9th of December, nothing happened as yet; but I am willing to let you know, I am yours, H. T. Published by Richard Janeway in Queens Head Alley in Pater-Noster Row. 1688.
