T1685A 99832094 36563
To the Right Honourable, the Lords and Common Assembled in PARLIAMENT: The Humble Petition of the Inhabitants in the County of LINCOLN. Sheweth, THat as it cannot but make a people miserable to be over-powred with a Potent, Vigilant, and mercilesse enemie; so can it not but compleate their miseries to have their own Souldiers (for want of good Discipline and order) to make up the burthen Intolerable. As we have been ex∣treamely miserable in the one, so were we ex∣ceeding unhappy in the other, untill by Gods Providence and the care of the Right Honou∣rable the Earle of Manchester, we have found redresse by the Government of Colonell Edward King, of whose fidelity, justice and valour (together with his indefatigable labours and zeale for the good of his Country,) we have had such experience, and the dayly care he tooke to protect us (aswell from the violence of our Souldiers, as the out-rage of the Enemie;) that we cannot but with much thankful∣nesse acknowledge it: But now (to our great griefe) he is taken away from his charge, by whose meanes or for what cause we know not. We therefore desire that this Honourable House will be pleased to accept of our humble addresse for the said Co∣lonell King, that under the Earle of Manchester we may still be governed by him, through whose meanes by Gods assistance we doubt not but to be put again into a condition to serve the King and Parliament in the defence and main∣tenance of the true Protestant Religion, the Priviledges of Parliament, and the rights and Liberties of our selves and Country, against all opposition. And your Petitio∣ners shall dayly pray, &c. With many hundred Names of men of quality of the said County. Die Lunae 27. Maij. 1644. VPon the Humble Petition of the Inhabitants of the County of Lincoln, de∣siring Colonell Edward King to be restored to the Government of th County, under the Earle of Manchester, was this day read, and the Gentleme that preferred it were called in, and did avow the Petition; And it is this d Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, That this Petition be referre to the Earle of Manchester, and that the Gentlemen of Lincolnshire that a Members of this House, and Sir Francis Popham do write a letter to the Ear of Manchester, to acquaint him that the said Petition is referred from th House unto his Lordships consideration. H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Co
