T2335C 11952329 51458
A TRUE ACCOUNT Of his Highness the Prince of Oranges Coming to St. James's, on Tuesday the 18th. of December 1688. about three of the Clock in the Afternoon. THE Sheriffs of London and Middlesex in a Coach and six Horses (with their Attendants) went as far as Hide-Park Corner, to meet the Prince. They drew up their Men in the upper side of Saint James's Park, in readiness to receive him. A considerable number of the Prince's Souldiers, were drawn up on each side of the Road, for a Mile or two beyond Knights-Bridge to the Park Corner. His Highness the Prince was attended through Knights Bridge with a great number of Persons of Quality in their Coaches and six Horses, and a great Train of Gentlemen on Horseback; the People huzzaing, and loudly rejoycing all along as he came. The first that entered Saint James's Park, were four Regiments of Foot, two of which Regiments were Commanded by Major-General Makoy, and — Bellefond. Then came the Right Honourable the Earl of Macklesfield, and the Lord Brandon Gerad in a Coach and six Horses. After them the Earl of Sussex, with a great many Persons of Quality. And they were succeeded by a Coach with six white Horses, (which was immediately before the Prince) in which were the Count of Nassau, the young Count Schomberg, and an English Commander. Then came his Highness the Prince of Orange, in a small Callash, drawn by four Bay Horses, the two foremost having such long Har∣ness, that they were at a considerable distance from the other. His Highness had a white Cloak thrown over his shoulders. Marshal Schomberg sate on his left hand. His Highness the Prince was surrounded by his Body of Horse∣Guards; after them came a Regiment of Dragoons, and a Body of Foot. At the Prince's Entrance into the Park, the Sheriffs left their Coach, and mounted on Horseback (accompany'd with four or five hundred Horse) and rid before the Prince with a white Wand in his hand, and an Officer of His Highnesses on each side, to Saint James's, which he enter'd with loud Acclamations. All the Houses from Saint James's to the Park corner were filled with People looking out at the Windows, expecting the Prince would have come that way; and the Road was so crouded, that many were forced to run through the Dirt up to the mid-leg. But they were disappointed by his Highnesses going through the Park. Printed in the Year 1688.
