T250 15070026 103159
Advertisement About the ENGLISH ATLAS now Printing at the Theatre in Oxford by Moses Pitt Bookseller in London. THat the First Volum of the said ATLAS, which con∣tains the North Pole, the principal Countries of which are, Muscovy or Russia, Poland, Sweden, and Denmark; will be finished, and ready to be delivered to the Subscribers about Christmass next: And therefore it is desired, that those tha have Subscribed and not Paid their Money, as also others that desre to Subscribe, do immediately pay their Subscription Money, viz. Forty Shillings, to Dr. Thomas Yate, Principal of Brazen Nose College Oxon, or to Moses Pitt at the Angel in S. Paul's Churchyard Lon∣don; where they shall have a Receipt. And all those that have a mind to have their Coat of Arms engra∣ven on any of the Plates, shall have it done for Twenty Shillings if they please to send their Coat to either of the two Persons above men∣tioned in time. If any desire to satisfie themselves as to the well-doing of the aid Book, let them inquire at the Theatre in Oxon, or at the Shop of the said Moses Pitt in London, where they may be fully satisfied by seeing of the Sheets of the said Book as they are wrought off at the Press. It's desired, that if any Gentleman has any Curiosities of any Cou∣trey whatsoever, if he please to communicate them to the said Moses Pitt, and they are approved of and judg'd fit to be Printed by those Learned men, whose Judgments are consulted, they shall have Satisfa∣ction for them to their own content.
A COLLECTION OF SEVERAL Relations & Treatises Singular and Curious, OF JOHN BAPTISTA TAVERNIER, Baron of Aubonne. Not Printed among his first Six Voyages. Divided into Five Parts, viz. I. A new and singular Relation of the Kingdom of Tunquin, with se∣veral Figures, and a Map of the Countrey. II. How the Hollanders manage their Affairs in Asia. III. A Relation of Japon, and the Cause of the Persecution of the Christians in those Islands; with a Map of the Countrey. IV. A Relation of what passed in the Negotiation of the Deputies which were at Persia and the Indies, as well on the French King's as the Company's behalf, for the Establishment of Trade. V. Observations upon the East India Trade, and the Frauds there sub∣ject to be committed. Published by EDMUND EVERARD, Esquire. IMPRIMATUR hic Liber, cui Titulus, A Collection of several Relations and Treatises, &c. Anth. Spinedge, Rev. in Christo Patri & Dom. Domino Gulielmo Archiep. Cant. à Sacris Domesticis. LONDON, Printed by A. Godbid and J. Playford, for Moses Pitt at the Angel in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1680.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE Sir Robert Clayton, LORD MAYOR ELECT OF THE CITY of LONDON. MY LORD, THE Encouragement the City-Trade and Forein Discoveries is like to find under Your Lordship's Ma∣gistracy, ought to be the chief Encourage∣ment of any Publick-spirited Person to render unto You all due Acknowledgments and Testimonies of Honour in this kind. The City of LONDON is doubtless the Head and Promotress of all English Trade,
and Your Lordship is the designed Head and Representative of the City: That Obli∣gation Forein Traffique hath to London, Lon∣don oweth partly to the wise Councils and Government of its Chief Magistrate, and it scarce ever had any, of whose Prudence Courage, and Moderation, it ought to con∣ceive greater hopes than of Your Lord∣ship's. Hard Weather needs Resolute Pi∣lots, and Good Magistrates are ordinarily sent by God against bad Times: And far be it from us that we should make Times worse than they are. But as it hath been my bad more than my good Fortune to be some years ago the first Avant Courier, who from the Enemies Camp brought the Tidings of these Hellish Attempts, that now cause our Domestic Troubles; so I in this Book present to Your Lordship, and all Eng∣land, an unavoidable and impartial Argu∣ment, to shew that our Fears from Jesuitical Practices are much less magnified, than they are by them beyond measure extenua∣ted, by a new Popish Device of Creating Security: For herein Your Lordship may see what the Jesuits are, where ever they get Footing and Credit, in the furthest part of Japon, as well as in Venice, Paris, Ireland, and England. Coelum non Animum mutant, cùm trans mare currunt. You shall observe (I say) how these Igna∣tians Covetousness and State-undermining,
brought the greatest Rebellion, Bloudshed, and Massacre upon about 60000 Christians at one blow, that ever was seen in those Ea∣stern Parts of the World; and how thereby some Hundred Thousands in after Persecu∣tions were destroyed; may, and the whole Christian Name quite extirpated (in hatred of their Practices) by Heathen Monarchs, who could not think their Heads, Crowns, nor Estates, to be otherwise safe from the Fa∣ctious Disciples of this Loyola. Yet all theirs, and their secret Factors Devices, will (I hope) come to nought, if we follow those moderate, peaceable, and judicious Coun∣sels, Your Lordship's Eloquent Speech hath set out unto us; begetting a sober and hearty Harmony 'twixt Prince and People. If the Ship be kept in good order within, there's little to be fear'd from Storms with∣out. I remark, That it depended much on the Tribunus Plebis, or Lord Mayor of the old Rome, (most like to our London in Policy and Magistracy) to keep it and the whole Government in an even temper, and to maintain a Lovely Correspondency be∣twixt the Senat and the People; and it was by him that the Enemies or Friends of the Commonwealth ordinarily wrought their ends of Peace or Disturbance. Therefore as Your Lordship hath always appeared, as well in your Actions as in your Words, a Sincere and Brave-spirited Patriot, a Mode∣rate and Reconciling Subject, it is not to be
doubted but that Your Lordship will give that Satisfaction to the Court, City, and Country, and even to all Forein Traffiquers themselves, that is justly expected and con∣ceived of you. So that Quiet, Peace, Trade, and Forein Discoveries, being encouraged and promoted in your Times, your Name shall be not onely respected and honoured among your Countreymen, but also in those remotest parts of the World, where this small Work (most necessary for all East India Merchants and Travellers) will sound it out, and testifie with all the due Respects and Obligations on the Public Accompt of, Your most Humble and Dutiful Servant, EDMUND EVERARD.
THE PREFACE. THE World being an ample Volum, in whose Extent and Varieties the Framer's Wisdom and Attributes are manifestly read and set out, it seems that great Travel∣lers are the best Scholars and Proficients in this Book; since on's Native Countrey is but as a single Leaf, where all the Singularities are not to be seen which are found in the other. —Non omnis fert omnia Tellus. And the truth of it is, those Ancient Philosophers, who have first laid the Foundations of Arts, Sciences, and Commonwealths in the World, were Travellers in∣to these very Eastern Parts, (partly described by us here) whence they brought home all their Knowledge; it being here that Man and Knowledge it self had their first beginning. So that wise Travellers are not un∣like
those rich laden Vessels which through many dangers bring wholesom and profitable Cargo's, Drugs, and other Conveniences, to be dispers'd among the several Societies of their own Countrey: They are like those di∣ligent Master-Bees, who run divers miles to extract out of many bitter Herbs that sweet Liquor, which they afterwards kindly refund to be enjoyed at home in com∣mon, in the hardest Seasons of the Year, by their Fel∣lows. What costs them dear, others have it cheap: And there's scarce any Private Persons in the Common∣wealth, to whom we owe greater Honour and Thanks▪ than to Worthy Travellers and Discoverers of For Countries. Yet it may be truly said, That Ancient Travellers and Geographers have but as course Limners and Coast-Drivers, drawn a very rough Draught in their Relations of those Countries they describ'd unto us, in comparison of some later Writers, who also sometimes do but copy their Predecessors Stories; and Merchants, with most other Travellers, are weather-driven by their private Occasions or Misfortunes, to take but a Cur∣sory Survey of Places, and so give but an answerable account of the same to the World. But among all the Ancient and Modern Travellers, none had such fair Opportunities and Advantages as the Illustrious Monsieur Tavernier had, to make a true, profitable, and exact Relation of the Singularities of those Remote Parts of Asia, where he past so many
Years in great Splendour, as shall appear by the ensu∣ing Considerations and Qualifications of a good Tra∣veller. 1. He from his Youth had a strong Inclination to Travel, which secret Instinct is certainly a Preordina∣tion of God for an Undertaking; and this unseen Impul∣sion carries such extraordinary Instruments chearfully and prosperously through all the Difficulties, others of a contrary disposition would never wade thorough, for whom it would be in vain to strive against the current of Nature. 2. This Travelling Genius made him begin early to fit himself for his design, and soon to go about it. He was therefore sufficiently imbued in his Intellectuals with all due knowledge of Sciences, Language, and Geogra∣phy, and precedent Travellers Maps and Books, with∣out all which common Travellers cannot conceive so soon and so orderly, nor reap so much benefit for themselves or others. 3. But Speculations without Experience are but un∣profitable Notions; and the Experiments of this kind are not to be had without great Means and Ex∣pence, for want of which many a good Undertaking is Still-born. Haud facilè emergunt, quorum virtu∣tibus obstat Res angusta domi—
is an old and true Saying. But our noble Tavernier had an ample Estate, drove a great Trade, had Money in abundance, and a Prince's or Embassador-like Reti∣nue, without which and great Presents none is scarce look'd upon in Luxurious Asia, fit for admittance in∣to great and worthy Companies, where Knowledge may be attained; so that he thereby soon got into the Pre∣sence, Familiarity, and Closets of the Emperours, the Ministers of State, and the Philosophers of Persia, Mogol, &c. and got into the Acquaintance and Con∣versations of the leading and common Merchants, Traf∣fiquers, and People; and knew their Languages very well: for it is in vain to have Eyes, if one have not also a Tongue in such cases. 4. And whereas Learning and Riches do sometimes render narrow Souls of a more proud and unsociable temper, Monsieur Tavernier is by Nature and Edu∣cation, an obliging, cheerful, and insinuating Travel∣ler, and of a graceful Countenance. Comely Personages are beloved almost as soon as they are seen; and those that have but fair Souls, are not so till after they are known. Now Monsieur Tavernier having both these Advantages, had a free entrance into the Friendship and Notions the Indians (great or small) had con∣cerning the Natural, Mechanical, Political, Religi∣ous, and Trading State of their own Countrey; which he made more his business to know, than to grow more rich.
And at some times he would reckon Thousands of Pounds as nothing to attain his ends in this point of Knowledge and further Experience; as the perusal of this his own Work, and Persons now in London, that knew him in and after his Travels, can fully testifie. 5. Moreover, Mutual Help of Persons equally un∣derstanding and curious, is a great advantage in such Researches and Observations as these. Now John Baptista Tavernier, besides many other Heads and Hands, had herein the Assistance of a Brother, as com∣plete a Traveller as himself in those furthest Parts of Asia, and had no less the foregoing Qualifications in Person and Estate than this his Brother John Bap∣tista had, as the Reader may well perceive by this Vo∣lum of Travels. 6. And as for the Time; Six Voyages, and about Forty Years Abode in those Countries they do describe, did render these Brethrens Knowledge vast, their Ex∣periments tried over and over, and this their Account more sure and exact (as I said) than that of any other Traveller heretofore. 7. And finally, to confirm the undoubted Credit that's to be given to this Nobleman and his Relation, (who is above all design of Flattering or Deceiving the Reader) you may meet with several Worthy Persons in this City and the Court of England; and I my self, who was at Paris some few years ago at Monsieur
Tavernier's Arrival, and who can witness the grand Esteem, the solemn Honours and Thanks, that were then given him by Persons of all Ranks and Degrees, the French East India Company's Admiration and Recommendation of him, that he had done his King and Countrey more Credit in those proud Eastern Courts than ever any did before him; the French King's imploying of him there; the Rarities he brought home to the Learned; the vast Riches and Memoirs he gained for himself, and the incomparable Jewels and Singularities he brought to the French King; the Titles of Lord and Baron conferred upon him extraordinarily, though he were a Merchant and a strict Protestant. These (I say) Public and Private Testimonials do shew what Credit other Nations and his own (which is Singular) had given to him. But in a word his own Observations herein gathered will prove it better. But if any desire to have some Account of the Work it self, the Newness, Profit, and Satisfaction the very Subject must needs yield to all Persons and Professions cannot but be acceptable. The Naturalist shall have Plants, Minerals, Ani∣mals, and Phoenomena's never seen in our Climate. And about Physic, the Law, Music, and Poetry, more
Time and Tryals are required in those Countries than here; and you shall accordingly read of Cures done that draw near to natural Miracles. The Divine will see things worth his Observation in their Religion and Morals, wherein they may confound the very Christians; whereof I'le onely touch but thus much: That by the Light of Nature those Heathens own a Supreme Deity, and a Future State of Happi∣ness and Torments; and do in view of the same most strictly keep the Civil and the Ten Moral Command∣ments, much answerable to ours, which their Prophets have left to them. So that they punish Murther and Adultery even inTunquin ch. 7. p. 18. Princes and Princesses; terrible Examples whereof you may here read at large. And the Church and State Government are subservient in a Subordination, the one being a Prop to the other. Even Statesmen may find Subject of weighty conside∣ration, in the Antiquity, Model, and Exactness of their Government. As for instance: Though they have a special regard to Monarchy, so as to keep the Succession within the same Line; yet theTunquin c. 11. p. 35. Great Constable, and the King's Council have Power left them to propose and chuse the fittest Person among the Royal Children, or Col∣lateral Successors, who is nominated in the King's Life-time, to prevent after Disturbances. They have
also on the other side very singular and unimitable ways to prevent the Insurrections, Divisions, and Rebellions of the Militia and the People. But above all, the Traveller and Traffiquer into those Parts will be like to run into a thousand Inconve∣niences, and Losses of Health, Life, and Estate, with∣out being guided by such Directions as he carefully gives herein, which others cannot possibly so soon and so well know. It is in fine herein declared, by what means the French, Holland, and Portugal East India Companies were Settled, Improved, and Worsted in those Countries; also the Coinage, and the Reduction thereof to ours; the particular places where all sorts of East India Commodities are best and cheapest had; the Rates and Exchange Returns are here to be found; the manner how to know their Falsifications in Gold, Sil∣ver, Jewels, Drugs, Silks, Linen, and all the other Merchandizes which are brought from those Nations are here set down: It being otherwise hard or impossible to escape the Cheats of the Persians, Chineses, and Japoners, without such Instructions. I'le say no more, but that in this Work was imployed the Help of another Worthy Gentleman, who labour'd
in the first Volum of Tavernier's Translation; but it was brought to an end and perfection by me, who had the occasion to be more particularly acquainted with Monsieur Tavernier himself, his Native Tongue, and other Particularities abroad. Edmund Everard.
The TABLE to Tavernier's Volum of Japon, China, and Tunquin, &c. A Relation of Japon, and of the cause of the Persecution of the Christians in those Islands. pag. 1. A Relation of what pass'd in the Negotiation of the Depu∣ties which were sent to Persia and the Indies, as well on the behalf of the French King, as of the French Company, for the settling of Trade. 26 Observations upon the Trade of the East Indies. 51 Of the Commodities which are brought as well out of the Dominions of the Great Mogul, as out of the Kingdoms of Golconda and Visapour, and other neighbouring Territories. And also of the Weights and Measures of the said Commodities. 57 Chap. 1. A discourse in general concerning the City of Tunquin, and of the manner how the Author came to have knowledge thereof. 1 Chap. 2. Of the Situation and Extent of the Kingdom of Tun∣quin. 5 Chap. 3. Of the Quality of the Kingdom of Tunquin 7 Chap. 4. Of the Riches, Trade, and Money of the Kingdom of Tun∣quin. 13 Chap. 5. Of the Strength of the Kingdom of Tunquin by Sea and Land 14 Chap. 6. Of the Manners and Customs of the People of the King∣dom of Tunquin. 16 Chap. 7. Of the Marriages of the Tunquineses, and their Severity toward Adulteresses. 18 Chap. 8. Of the Visits, Feasts, and Pastimes of the Tunquineses. 21 Chap. 9. Of the Learned Men in the Kingdom of Tunquin. 24 Chap. 10. Of their Physicians, and the Diseases of the Tunqui∣neses. 28 Chap. 11. Of the original Government and Policy of the Kingdom of Tunquin. 31 Chap. 12. Of the Court of the King of Tunquin. 38 Chap. 13. Of the Ceremonies observ'd when the Kings of Tunquin are advanced to the Throne. 40 Chap. 14. Of the Funeral Pomp of the Kings of Tunquin, and of their manners of burying their Dead. 46 Chap. 15. Of the Religion and Superstition of the Tunquineses. 49
Of the Government of the Hollanders in Asia. Chap. 1. Of the Island of Formosa, and how the Hollanders pos∣sessed themselves of it, and how it was taken from them by the Chineses. 57 Chap. 2. Of Maurice Island, where they cut Ebony. 61 Chap. 3. Of the Grandeur of the General at Batavia, and what be∣fell his Wife and his Niece. 65 Chap. 4. Of General Vanderbroug, and of the Original of the City of Batavia. 69 Chap. 5. Of the Countrey about Cochin, and how the Holland General crown'd one of the Indian Princes. 74 Chap. 6. Of the Sieur Hollebrand Glins, President of the Factory at Ormus. 77 Chap. 7. Touching the Islands of the Prince. 79 Chap. 8. How the Hollanders sent to declare War against the Per∣sians, and of the ill success of their Fleet. 80 Chap. 9. Of the Severity of the Holland Commanders in the In∣dies. 83 Chap. 10. Touching the Women. 85
A MAPP OF THE ISLES OF IAPON ORIENTALL OCEAN THE SEA OF COREER THE SOUTH SEA MAPP OF TUNQUIN
An Alphabetical Index to the Map of Tunquin, made on the place by B. Tavernier. The first Figures are Longitude, the second Latitude. BOdego, whence they embarque the King's Bo∣dy: as also the Huts for those that attend the King's Body 144-21 Bonten, an excellent Haven 151-9 Camelee, a great River, but bad Port 146-13 Chancon, an Isle where S. Xavier died February 4. 1552. 155-21 Checo, the Capital City of Tunquin, and King's Seat 144-21 Colaure 146-14 Cuaci, the Bounds between Tunquin and Cochin∣china 142-16 Cuadag, a Lake 140-22 Cuadg, the Port where all the great Ships lie, not able to enter the great River of Cheche, being stopped up 142-20 Dinphoan, a good Port, but difficult entrance 149-10 Haifo, this Isle is a Forest of Orange and Pomgra∣nat Trees 145-14 Hainanen, an Island wherein is two Rivers, one is very hot and smells of Sulphur, and the sick come from all the adjacent parts to bath in it 148-19 Island of Fishes 146-19 Pulociampelio Isle 146-15 Sansoo, one of the greatest Cities of Cochinchina, and greatest Trade, but the Port failing, it now decays 143-15 Tacan, an Isle where the Fowls retire during the heat 148-12 Tortose Islands 152-11 Tulatan Isle 147-14 An Alphabetical Index of all the Towns in the Map of Japon. A AChas 175-34 Acosaqui 177-34 Aizu 184-38 Akas 174-34 Amessima 171-34 Amusana 175-34 Anai 174-34 Anzuqui 176-35 Aqui 173-34 Aquita 182-40 Arcy 177-34 Ava 174-33 Ava 181-34 Autua 170-33 Axicanga 182-36 Aximot 181-36 B Bandel 179-34 Bigen 174-35 Bingo 173-34 Bipchu 173-34 Bugen 172-34 Bungo 171-33 C Camba 179-34 Cango 177-36 Cansula 182-35 Cataizu 175-33 Caucani 175-34 Cochite 170-33 Coreer Isles 169-34 The Sea 171-34 Coyssina 171-34 D Daura 180-34 Deva 182-38 Dongo 172-33 F Facoua 180-34 Fairma 174-34 Favissida 178-34 Fintsautwa 177-34 Firanda 170-33 Firazima 172-34 Fitaqui 182-37 Flagway 177-34 Foncorai 178-34 Foqui 174-35 Forissauva 180-35 Fucha 179-36 Fumay 172-33 Fuximi 176-35 G Ganamisaqui 171-34 Ganomi 172-34 Ginkay 171-34 Gold Mines 184-38 I Jaai 178-34 Jamman 171-34 Idiumo 173-35 Idzumi 175-34 Jedo or Jendo 181-35 Jesse 184-40 Jesare 179-34 Inaba 174-35 Ingo 176-34 Jobeco 170-33 Jokeits 176-34 Josinda 177-34 Isakuts 176-34 Juani 172-35 Jussimara 179-34 K Kakinkw 179-34 Kakingaren 178-34 Karaye 178-34 Kisma 170-33 M Maicazima Isle 183-36 Marganni 174-34 Mia 177-34 Miaco or Meaco 175-34 Micava 177-35 Mimalaea 173-35 Mino 177-34 Mirico 179-34 Mulaxi 181-35 Muro 174-34 N Nanastgamma 170-33 Namba 184-39 Nangati 171-34 Nangisaqui 171-33 Nayma 178-37 Nibarascq 178-34 Niborasaca 178-34 Nivata 181-37 Noto 178-37 O Ocambe 179-34 Ocasaqui 177-34 Okais 179-34 Omodo Key 170-33 Oquayama 174-34 Ormeda 176-34 Oseaca 175-34 Ova 176-34 Owaeri 177-35 Q Quano 176-34 Quinocuni 175-33 Quirenoxo 176-36 R Roches 171-33 S Sacca 178-34 Saccaiia 175-34 Sace 176-34 Saikock 171-33 Samma 176-34 Sando 180-37 Sangani 180-35 Sanuqui 173-34 Saquio 171-34 Sapui 175-34 Sateuma 170-32 Sateque 183-37 Savola 174-34 Scabarei 179-34 Silver Mines 179-37 Simanda 178-34 Simissima 170-33 Sinagawa 181-35 Sincubi 170-33 Sintsi 176-34 Sino Sima 171-34 Sirion 177-34 Sirack 178-34 Stintgo 175-34 Surunga 179-34 Suva 180-36 Suvo 172-34 T Tambo 175-35 Tanegaxima 172-32 Tango 175-35 Tatomi 178-35 Tauma 175-35 Tucnocuni 175-34 Tenri River 178-34 Toia 172-33 Tokoesi 173-33 Toi Isle 183-34 Tomo 173-34 Tondozima Isle 180-38 Tottori 174-35 Tsumgaer 184-40 V Vacosa 176-35 Vasumi 171-32 Ubama 176-35 Vitchu 178-36 Vomi 176-35 Vouri 177-35 Voxu 183-37 W Waka 176-34 X Xendai 183-38 Xidaibama 182-37 Xikoso 173-33 Ximo 171-32 Ximosakock 170-33 Ximolu 182-36 Ximomaxoqui 171-34 Xinan 178-35 Xio 173-33 Xiva 177-36 Y Yamamguela 172-34 Yamato 176-34 Yamaxico 175-34 Yazuqui 174-35 Yechigen 177-36 Yechingo 180-36 Yhe 176-34 Yonazaua 183-38 Yynoxima Isle 183-33 Z Zetta 170-33 Zima 176-34 FINIS.
A New and Particular RELATION Of the KINGDOM of TUNQUIN: With a MAP of the COUNTRY and several FIGURES. CHAP. I. A Discourse in general concerning the City of Tun∣quin, and of the Manner how the Author came to have knowledge thereof. THE Kingdom of Tunquin has been long unknown to the People of Europe; nei∣ther have they, who have given us Rela∣tions thereof, well understood the Coun∣try, as having trusted too much to defective and fabulous Descriptions and Observations. Not that I am willing to be over severe in censuring; but submissively I am bold to af∣firm, That this which I here make Public was extracted out of my Brother's Writings, of which I had the overlooking in
my second Voyage that I made to the Indies; and of which I was the more confident, for that the Author had been one who had made Eleven or Twelve Voyages from Batavia, Bantam, and Achem, to Tunquin: Other Observa∣tions I collected from the Tunquinesi themselves, with whom I have had several Discourses, during the time that I was at Batavia and Bantam, where they principally trade. And that which gave me the more light was this, That those Merchants several times bring along with them some of their Bonze's or Priests, as also some of their Learned Men to teach their Children to Write and Read. For these Mer∣chants when they make a Voyage by Sea, carry all their Families along with them. And from these Bonze's and other Learned Men I had several Observations and Memoirs in Writing, as being desirous to be inform'd by me of the Government and Situation of our France. And as I was never without an Atlas and some other particular Maps, they were ravish'd with admiration, when I shew'd them the Structure and Composure of the whole World, and the Situation of its several Kingdoms and Estates. Therefore may the Reader with the more pleasure and delight peruse these Relations, when he has so much reason to be persuaded that they are cordially done, and that they are made public by a person whose sincerity has no design to abuse him. My Brother, who was a person both cun∣ning and couragious, and one that lov'd to Travel as well as my self, having heard much talk in the Indies of the Grandeur of the Kingdom of Tunquin, resolv'd to go thither, and as he had a particular gift to learn a Language in a little time, he soon grew familiar with the Malaye, which is the Language of the Learned in those quarters of Asia, as Latin is among Us in Europe. He understood that Silk, Musk, and other Commodities of the like nature, were much cheaper there then in other places adjoyning, and that the People dealt with more fairness and honesty. Upon the encourage∣ment of which Information he prepar'd a Ship, and made his Voyages with good success. He always carri'd with him a good Sum of Money; and more then that, he stor'd himself with a considerable number of small Curiosities, to present the King and his Nobility, according to the general Custom of all the Eastern Countries:
Thus he came to be well receiv'd the first time that he set foot in the Country; so that the Customer being by him oblig'd with a small Clock; a pair of small Pistols, and two Pictures, which were the Pictures of two Curtesans, imme∣diately gave notice to the King of his arrival. Thereupon having order to attend the Court, and coming to kiss the King's hands, the whole Assembly was surpris'd to hear a Stranger, born in a Country so far distant, speak the Malaye Language so fluently. The King gave him a favourable reception, and kindly receiv'd the Present which he brought along with him. It was a very noble Sword, of which the Handle and Hilt were all over enchac'd with Rubies and Emraulds, with a Backsword Blade. To this he added a pair of Pistols, adorn'd and inlaid with Silver, a Persian Saddle and Bridle, embroider'd with Gold and Silver, a Bow and Quiver full of Arrows, and six Pictures, like those which he had given the Customer. These things highly pleas'd the King, who presently drew forth the Sword out of the Scabbard, the better to look upon and consider it. At length one of his Sons took it up, to try whether it would fit his hand as well as those of his own Country, and offer'd to make a blow. My Brother, seeing the young Prince handle the Weapon gracefully enough, after the manner of the Country, told the King, that if he pleas'd, he would show the King how they handled that Weapon in France, of which the King readily consented to be a Spectatour. This was my Brother's first Reception at Court; for he made several Voyages to Tunquin, and every time that he return'd, they still the more and more obligingly entertain'd him. But that which fix'd him more in the good opinion and favour of the King and Lords of the Court, was his olic and gentile behaviour in playing with them for several large Sums, insomuch that being one that ventur'd deep; he lost above 20000 Crowns in one Voyage. However the King, who was a generous Prince, would not suffer him to be a loser, but gave him those considerable Presents that suppli'd his losses. By means of my Brother's thus long sojourning in Tunquin, and the familiar acquaintance which he had at Court, together with the Trade which he drove in the Kingdom, as he was diligent to inform himself of all the Curiosities of the Country, it was easie for me upon
the same foundation to lay the Structure of these Memoirs. Though I may safely say, I was no less laborious in my own particular, and by the frequent Discourses which I had with a great number of the Tunquineses, with whom I met both at Bantam and Batavia that came thither to Trade, and whom I often treated at my own Expences, to inform my self of the particular Ceremonies and Customs of their Country. Thus you see the Grounds and Foundations of this Rela∣tion, which is both faithful and exact, and by which that noble Country, of which the Descriptions hitherto have been so obscure and uncertain, shall be truly discover'd and set forth, such as it is; declaring withal, that no other Con∣sideration or Interest, then that of speaking truth, has incited me to undertake this Description. For the better observation of a right Method in pursuance of this Relation, and to conduct the Reader gradatim to the more perfect knowledge of this Kingdom, I will speak first of its Situation, its Extent, and its Climate. Next I shall come to discourse of its Qualities, its Riches, and its Trade, which are the three Springs and Sources of the Strength and Force of a Nation. Next I shall give an Ac∣count of the Customs and Manners of the People as well in their particular OEconomy and Civil Society, as in relation to their Marriages, their Visits and Festivals. Next to this we shall give a brief Account of the Learning, and learned Men, and among them of their Physicians, and the Subject of their Art, that is to say, of the Diseases particular to the Country. We shall also give a Relation of the Original of the Government and Policy of the Kingdom of Tunquin, of the Condition of the Court, of the Inauguration and Fune∣rals of their Kings, and in the last place of the Original of the Inhabitants. And I dare ingage, that the Map of the Country, and the Cuts which were drawn upon the place, will no less contri∣bute to the Divertisement of the Reader, then to the Expla∣nation of the Matter which they contain.
CHAP. II. Of the Situation and Extent of the Kingdom of Tunquin. WE shall have the less reason to admire where∣fore our Predecessors had so little knowledge of this Kingdom, when we consider that having formerly been a considerable part of China, the In∣habitants in the same manner as the Chineses did, kept them∣selves close within their own bounds, never minding to have any Commerce with other People, whom they con∣temn'd and lookt upon as Barbarians come from the other part of the World. But now that they find that Strangers come to find them out in their own Territories, they begin to see that other People have as good Government as them∣selves; which has bred in them a desire to Converse and Trade with Foreigners; so that now they associate them∣selves in friendly manner with all other People, as I have observ'd them to do both at Batavia and Bantam. Most people believe this Country to lye in a very hot Climate; nevertheless it is now known to be very temperate, by reason of the great number of Rivers that water it; which, together with the Rains that fall in their Seasons, cause a brisk freshness of the Air; which indeed happ'ns most usually over all the Torrid-zone, as I have observ'd in my Indian Travels. From whence we may also have reason to believe the Country to be very fruitful and thick inha∣bited. To the East this Kingdom lies upon the Province of Cau∣ton, one of the best of China. To the West it is bounded by the Kingdom of Brama. To the North it borders upon two other Provinces of China, Junnan and Quansi. To the South it lies upon Cochinchina, and the great Gulph of the same name. To return to the Climate, the Air is so mild and tem∣perate, that all the year long seems to be but one continual Spring; Frost and Snow are never there to be seen; and
besides, the Pestilence, the Gout, the Stone, and other Diseases so frequent in Europe, there are never known. There are but two Winds, which divide the whole Year between them; the one blowing from the North, the other from the South, and both continuing the same for six months together. The first refreshes the Earth in that manner, that there is nothing so delightful as the Country of Tunquin. The other begins to blow from the end of January to the end of July; and the two last months are their months of rain. The greatest inconvenience is, that there arise once in seaven years, as well in this Country as in other parts of the Indies, those hideous and terrible Tempests, that blow down Houses, tear up Trees by the roots, and make strange Desolations. They seldom last above four and twenty hours, nor are their sad Effects to be felt but only upon the Seas of China, Japon, Cochin∣china, Tunquin, and the Manilles, being rarely known in any other Seas. The Astrologers of those parts believe that these terrible Tempests proceed from the Exhalations that rise out of the Mines of Japon. It comes with that suddain force that when it surprizes a Vessel out at Sea, the Pilots have no other remedy then to cut down all the Masts, that the storm may have the less force upon the Ship. In this fair extent of Land, almost equal to that of France, are several Provinces, whose limmits are not well known; the Tunquineses being no great Geographers, nor having bin over curious to write the Annals of the Nation. But the most understanding and knowing among them assur'd me at Batavia, that the whole Kingdom contain'd above twenty thousand Cities and Towns. They also affirm'd that there might be many more, but after the manner of their Neigh∣bours the Cochinchineses, many of the People choose rather to upon the Water then upon the Land; so that you shall see live the greatest part of their Rivers covered with Boates, which serve them instead of Houses; and which are very neat, though they also keep their Cattel in them.
CHAP. III. Of the Quality of the Kingdom of Tunquin. THis Country for the most part is a level Extent, which rises up and down into pleasant Hillocks; the greatest Hills which it has lying to the North. It is water'd by several Rivers which inter-cut and glide through the Country: some of which carry Galleys of good burthen, and large Shallps, very commodious for trade. Yet in all the Country there grows neither Corn nor Wine, by reason of the want of rain, which never falls but in the Months of June and July. But it bears an infinite quantity of Rice, which is the chief sustenance of the People. Of this Rice also they make their Drink, besides which they have good Aqua Vitae or Strong-water. Their Fruits are excellent, but much different from ours, as are also the Trees that bear them. The chiefest of these Trees are the Palm-tree, which bears a Fruit bigger then in any part of Asia. The Nut is about the bigness of a Man's Head, in shape like a Coco-nut; the Shell is very hard, and being open'd, the Pulp within is as white as Snow, having a tast like our Almonds, and every one of the Fruits contains about two glassfuls of Liquor, very refreshing and pleasing to the Palate. The Gogavier, very much resembles our Lawrel, of which there are two sorts; the one bears a Plum, green without and red within: but the Fruit of the other Tree, which is in much more esteem, is yellowish without and white within, the top of the Fruit being like a small Nosegay: the Pulp is full of small Kernels, less then those of a Pomegranate; and if they be eaten before they are ripe they bind the belly, whereas being eaten when they are come to full maturity they work a contrary effect. Formerly this Fruit was not known in the Kingdom of Tun∣quin, but after the Portugals seated themselves at Macao, they carri'd several Plants thither, so that now the Fruit is grown very common. The Papager bears a Fruit which very much resembles a small Melon, the tast whereof is very delicious. The Arager grows upright and streight, like the Mast of a
Ship, bearing no Branches but at the top; which makes it appear like a Crown. The Fruit which it produces is like a Nutmeg, but a little more round. The People break this Nut, and bruising it together with Betlè leaves, mix both with a little Chalk, and make use of the Powder to keep their Teeth clean, to dye their Lips of a Vermilion colour, and to keep their Breath sweet. They have but two sorts of Figs, the one like ours, and the other like those which are call'd Adam's Figs, as long as a Man's finger. There is also another Tree, very like our Willow, which they call the Powder Tree, because that of the Wood they make Charcoal, and of the Coal a Powder which they make use of in their Wars. The Jambager is another Tree, that grows very high, which bears a Fruit about the bigness of a Citrul-Cucum∣ber, the Pulp whereof is full of Kernels like a Granate, very cooling and pleasant, and very frequently eaten in the Season of heat. The High-ways are also planted with Trees on both sides for the convenience of Travellers: And there are some of these Trees so big that two or three thousand men may stand under them, like that at Ormus, or Bandar Abassi, by me describ'd in my Relations of Persia, and of which many other Travellers have made mention. When the Branches of these Trees are about ten or twelve foot long, there issue forth other little Branches which turn downward, and by little and little descending to the ground, take root and afterwards become as it were so many Pillars to support the Master-Branches. There are some of the Master-Branches three hundred Paces long, which are supported by these out∣growing Branches at the distance of every ten or twelve foot. The Fruit is of the bigness of one of our great Nuts, the Shell whereof is red, containing within nothing but a Kernel like a grain of Millet. The Rere Mice feed upon 'em, and also make their Nests in the trees. These Rere-mice are as big as a good Pullet, insomuch that their Wings are above a foot and a half long. They never light upon the tree like other Birds, but you shall see them all the day long hanging at the branches of the trees, fasten'd by their Claws to the tree with their heads downward. Upon every Wing
they have seven as it were little Hooks or Claws, so that being shot, they never fall to the ground, but remain fixed to the branches, that at a distance you would take them to be some great Pears that hung upon the tree. They are ac∣counted a great dainty among the Portugals, who leave their Pullets to eat them. 'Tis true that their Flesh is very white, and when they are young they are a delicate sort of Diet. I happen'd to eat of them two or three times with the Por∣tugals, who thought they had oblig'd me with a great dainty; and had I not known what they were, I should have taken them for Pullets. And now I am talking of the Delicacies of the Country, I will tell you of one sort of Dyet which is very singular. This Food is the Nest of a certain Bird which is no where to be found, but in the four Islands that lie upon the Coast of Cochinchina, and of which you have the Figures in the Table A, B, C, D. These Birds are about the bigness of a Swallow, and build their Nests in such a manner, that they are neither too close compacted, nor alto∣gether transparent; they are like an Onion compos'd of several rings and envelopings; that compose a Nest of a cer∣tain sort of Gunim, which is steep'd in warm water, and mix'd with all the Sawces which are made both for Fish and Flesh. It is transported all over India and into Holland for Curiositie's sake. You would believe in eating those Meats which are season'd therewith, that those Nests were compos'd of all the Spices in the Orient. I have not only brought this Diet into France, and presented of it to several Persons of Quality, but I have also my Vouchers for the truth of what I relate, several of my Friends who have brought it from Holland, among the rest M. de Villermont, whose Name is famous for his Travels into the East-Indies. He and all those that have eat thereof agree with me, that all the Spices of the East put together, do not give that effectual relish and savour as these Nests do, to the Meats and Dishes wherein they are us'd. Near to these four Islands, where these Birds Nests are found, are five others mark'd in the Map 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. In these five Islands are such infinite number of Tortoises, and such excellent Food, that the Tunquineses and Cochinchineses do not believe they have entertain'd their Friends at a Banquet as they ought to do, till the Tortoises are brought in. Those
two Nations pickle up great quantities of them, and send them abroad, which is a vast trade among them; and indeed the chiefest occasion of the Wars between them is, because the Cochinchineses do all they can to hinder the Tunquineses to fish for them, alledging that those Seas and Islands belong to them. Neither is the Meat but the Shell also of great esteem, and one of the greatest Commodities for Trade in Asia. Tunquin also affords great store of Anana's and Orange trees, of which there are of two sorts: the one that bears a Fruit no bigger then an Abricot; the other bigger then those of Portugal: both alike in tast, and being to be gather'd from the tree for six months together. They have also two sorts of Citrons, the one yellow, the other green; but both the one and the other so tart and sow'r, that they cannot be eaten without offence to the Stomach. Nevertheless, the Juyce is made use of as we do here of Aqua fortis, to cleanse Copper, Tin, and Iron, before we gild those Metals, as also for Tinctures, especially those of Silk. They are also made use of for Lyes to whiten Linnen, and to take out Spots. Through all the Territories of the Great Mogul they make use of this Juyce of Citrons to whiten their Calicuts; whereby they make them sometimes so white that they dazle the sight. They make great quantities of Silk in the Kingdom of Tunquin, of which both rich and poor make themselves Garments. The Hollanders, who thrust themselves in every where, where there is any hope of gain, carry off such a quantity every year, that it is now become the chiefest part of that Commodity which they carry to Japon; whereas before they fetch'd their Commodities from Persia, Bengala, or China. As for sweet smelling Flow'rs, the Tunquineses have but one sort, which they call the Flow'r of Bague. It grows like a large Nosegay, and the Branches of the Shrub that bear it, spread themselves crawlingly upon the ground. As they have great store of Sugar, so they eat very much, while it is yet in the Cane, not having the true Art to refine it: and that which they do grosly refine, they make into little Loaves weighing about half a pound. They eat very much, making use of it always after Meals to help digestion.
Through the whole Kingdom are neither Lions, Asses, nor Sheep; but the Forests are full of Tigers, Harts, and Apes, and the Fields are full of Beeves, Cows, and Hogs. As for Hens, Ducks, and Turtles, they are not to be num∣ber'd, which is the general Provision for their Festivals. Their Horses are very well shap'd; of which there are always five or six hunder'd in the King's Stables; He also keeps the same number of Elephants, of which some are for the Service of his House, the rest bred for the Wars. These Elephants are of a prodigious bigness, neither are there any so tall nor so nimble in any part of Asia; for they will bow themselves, and stoop so low, that you may get upon their backs without help. They have no Cats, but they have Dogs that serve for the same purpose, and will watch all night to kill the Rats and Mice, which are very large and very troublesom. Very few Birds are to be seen in the Air, which toward the evening grows duskish, by reason of those vast number of Gnats that get into the Houses in the night time and hinder people from sleeping, not only by the noise which they make, but with their con∣tinual stinging; which is one of the greatest inconveniencies of the Country. For remedy whereof in some measure, an hour before they go to sleep they take the Husk or Chaff of the Rice, which flies from the Rice when it is beaten, and strew it upon a small Fire in a Fire-shovel, and so let it smoak, and by that means they kill or drive those Flies away. Be∣sides this, they cover the Bed with a Pavilion or Tent that trails upon the ground, made like a Net with very small holes to let in the Air. But notwithstanding all the pre∣vention can be us'd, they will be about a man when he rises i' the morning. But there is yet a far greater inconvenience in this Country, which proceeds from the infinite numbers of white Emmets, which though they are but little, have teeth so sharp, that they will eat down a wooden Post in a short time. And if great care be not taken in the place where you lock up your Bales of Silk, in four and twenty hours they will eat through a Bale, as if it had been saw'd in two in the middle. Several of them have fallen from the Ciel∣ing into my Neck, where they rais'd Blisters upon the Skin, which presently fall again being wash'd with cold Water.
I have told you that Hens and Ducks are infinitely nume∣rous in Tunquin; I will now tell you how they preserve the Eggs of these Creatures, which they will keep for two or three years together without being spoil'd. They salt them, and to make them take salt, they fill a Vessel full of Water, and throw a good quantity of Salt into it. If the Egg sink to the bottom, the Pickle is not good; then they throw in more Salt, till they find that the Eggs swim. The Pickle being thus made, they take Ashes, and make them up into a Past with this Pickle: and in this Past they enclose every Egg by it self, and then wrap it up in a leaf of an Herb, not unlike one of our Pear-tree leaves, but much larger, and then put the Eggs into Earthen Pots close cover'd: after which manner they keep their Eggs for two or three years together. In other parts of the Indies where there is great store of Oyl, as in the Dominions of the Great Mogul, the Kingdoms of Pegu, and Arochan, they put their Eggs into great Earthen Pots well varnish'd, and then fill the Vessel with an Oyl which is made of a small Seed like Rape-seed. For as for Sallad Oyl, after you are once pass'd Aleppo, you see no more Olive-trees over all Asia, but only in one place of Persia near Casbin, where between the Mountains lies a little Valley, about a League long and half a League broad, full of Olive-trees, but they make but very little Oyl, preserving the Olives only to eat. But to return to the Eggs; they are the chief Provision which they eat a Ship-board. But the Eggs which are preserv'd in Salt are preferr'd much before those that are kept in Oyl; because that in using the first, there is no need of carrying Salt to Sea, or of boiling Salt with their Rice. When they eat them, they boil them till they are hard, and with every mouthful of Rice they eat a Pea's bigness of Egg, which is as good and better then Salt with their Rice. As to what remains, there are neither Mines of Gold nor Silver in the Kingdom of Tunquin, neither do they Coin any Money.
CHAP. IV. Of the Riches, Trade, and Money of the Kingdom of Tunquin. THE chief Riches of the Country of Tunquin consist in the great quantity of Silks which they sell to the Hollanders, and other Foreigners, and in their Lig∣num Aloes. Of which there is some worth a thousand Crowns the Pound, according to its goodness and oyliness. There is some that is not worth above three Crowns, but it is dry and good for nothing but to make Cabinets, or Beads to hang about Womens Necks. All the Mahumetans, especially such as let their Beards grow, make great account of this Wood; and when they give a Visit, they presently bring a little Chafing-dish, and cast a small piece of this Wood upon the Coals, which yields a smoak and pleasing mist; with which they perfume their Beards, at the same time lifting up their hands to Heaven, and crying, Elhemed Illah, or God be thanked. If the Wood be oily, the bigness of a Pea will serve to throw upon the fire, which being a little moisten'd in Water, will yield as much smoak as a dry piece as big as a Man's fist. Which is the reason, that if it be oily and good it wants no price. One of the chief Presents, as I have observ'd in another part of this Book, which the Portugals of Goa sent to the Emperor of Japon, was a piece of Lignum Aloes, six foot long, and two round. It cost 40000 Pardo's or 54000 Livres. It is so much the more pleasure and profit to trade with the People of Tunquin, by how much the more faithful and frank they are in their dealing then the Chineses, who will deceive you if they can; so that it is a hard thing to be too cunning for them, as I have often found by experience. When you have sold them any Commodity, and they find that their Bargain is not very advantageous, their general way of getting off is this: As they have generally three sorts of Reals, one sort that is full weight, others which are light, four, others eight per Cent if they have no mind to stand to their bargain, they offer to pay you for your Goods
in light Reals, which they have clipt themselves, and so you are deceiv'd. There are no such People for Trade in the World: they refuse to deal in nothing, even in old Shoes, and if you will sell them but one of them too, they'l buy it, without ever enquiring why you will not sell the other. But for those of Tunquin they are more blunt and plain in their dealing, so that it is a pleasure to have to deal with them. I have told you, there are neither Mines of Gold or Silver in Tunquin, neither do they Coin Money there. So that in Trade they make use of certain Lingots of Gold, as they are brought out of China, some of which amount to 300 Livers of our Money, others to six hun∣der'd. They also make use of Bars of Silver as they are brought from Japon. As for small Payments they either cut the large Bars into small pieces, to which purpose they have their Scales, like our Stelleers; or else they pay in Foreign Coin, which are the Reals of Spain generally. This Gold and Silver is brought from China, and Japon, in lieu of those vast quantities of Silk which are exported out of the Country, which with Musk and Lignum Aloes are the chief Riches of the Kingdom. CHAP. V. Of the Strength of the Kingdom of Tunquin by Sea and Land. THey who have written before me concerning the Kingdom of Tunquin, have spoken largely of its Forces both by Sea and Land, and allow it a pro∣digious number both of Souldiers and Galleys. They write that the Forces which were usually wont to meet at the Ren∣devouz were 12000 Horse, 2000 Elephants, as well to carry the King's and the Nobilities Tents and Baggage, as for the Service of the War, 300000 Foot, and 300 Galleys. And in regard the Kingdom is well stor'd with Provision and Ammunition, that in time of War the whole Army ex∣ceeds 500000 Men. But the number which my Brother
The King of Tunquin's Setting out for the War. 1. The King going out of his Palace is carried in his Palan∣quin or Chair by the Chief Officers of his Houshold. 2. The Order of the King's March when he goes to the War. 3. The Musicians and Trumpeters who follow his Chair. 4. An Officer who carries a Bason full of Water, on which doth float a Brass Boul with a hole in the bottom of it; so that exactly in an hour this Boul becomes full of Water, and suddenly sinks to the bottom. 5. Then presently two other Officers do strike the Hour upon two great Brass Platters, N. 5. of about a Yard Diameter, and much after the Form of our Burning Glasses, yet of the Metall that Bells are made of, which causes that they are heard a very far off. Afterwards he that carries the Bason of Water takes up the Cup from the bottom, and sets it again a swimming atop of the Water, just as it was before. When it is full and sinks, they after the same manner strike on the said Platters. And this is their way of reckon∣ing the Hour and Times in Tunquin, as well as in the Indies, and almost throughout the Eastern Parts betwixt the Tropicks; for that the Clocks which are made in Europe become useless in those Countries during the Rainy Season, the Air being there so heavy and damp, that all Iron and Steel, nay the very Knives and Watches in peoples Pockets do grow rusty, though you wrap them up never so well in Cotton or Leather, and take all the care imaginable to keep them dry; yet it will be impossible otherwise to preserve them from Rust, than by letting them lie in Oyl while that Weather lasts. This Foggy Dampness of the Air is predominant as soon as you are past Persia, in all the Mogol's Countrey, from the Fifteenth of June to the end of September. The further one goes on toward the East, the later these Rains do begin and are met withall.
It's good likewise to observe, that in the Empire of the Great Mogul, in Tunquin, and in other Easterly Parts between the Tro∣picks, they do as we divide the Day and Night into 24 Hours, ma∣king the Day of 12, and the Night to be of as much; so to proportion equally the Times of Working and of Rest. But they do subdivide both the Day and the Night into 4 equal parts, and this Division is made known by the Strokes given upon those Platters. As for Ex∣ample: The first Hour of the first Watch of the Night is mark'd by one Blow, the second by another, and the third likewise by another. In the second Watch of the Night the first Hour is made known by two Blows one after another, and so of the rest untill the third Watch; then at the first Hour of that they give three Strokes. And this Or∣der is observed till the last Hour of the fourth Watch, which is mark'd by four Knocks. In this manner they continue to marck the first Hour of the day with the same Regularity. All Persons of Quality do keep Eight Officers on purpose for this Imploy; who likewise are to have a care of keeping the Palace Gates. This Engine for the marking of the Hours is ordinarily hung up at the Entry of great Palaces near the Porter's Lodge. Place this Page 14.
Order Of The March Of The king Of Tunquin When he goes Out Of his Pallice. The Order & March Of The king Of Tunquin When He goes To Warr:
The Order of the March of the Queen Mother and Reigning Queen of Tunquin when they goe abroad out of ye Palace▪
The Order of the March of the Queens of Tunquin, when they go abroad out of the Palace. A. Six Elephants go in the Front, drawing a kind of a Sedan close shut up, with Grate-like Windows. B. Fifteen Captains or Officers walk next, Armed with Fire∣locks. C. The Sedan wherein the Queen is. D. Six of the Queens Gentlemen do carry Parasols, for to guard the Queens Chair from the Scorching of the Sun. E. Six Ladies of Honour of the Queens go next. The first hath the Command of the Queens Eunuchs: these Eunuchs, though throughly Spaded, yet are never admitted into the Queens Apart∣ment; the Kings of Tunquin being in that particular more jealous than other Kings and Mahometan Princes, who allow this sort of Eu∣nuchs to serve their Queens within the Palace. The next in Office of these Ladies presents the Queen with Sweet Meats when she is about to drink; for they usually eat some before they drink, they alleag∣ing that this keeps them from having the Cholic, to which they are very subject in Tunquin. The third in rank carries a Box of Perfumes and Betel. The others usher the Queen when she gets into the Sedan, or alights. G. Here is a Chariot drawn by Eight Maids of Quality, when she gets out of the Sedan; but before she appears, all the Men and Eunuchs do withdraw into such places, whence they cannot have the sight of her, it being a Crime to look upon her: then the Ladies help her out of the Sedan, and the Maids draw her along to whatever place she has a mind to go in unto. Place this next to, The King of Tunquin setting out for the War.
saw in the year 1649, when the King was preparing to make War against the King of Cochinchina, for certain Ships which the Cochinchineses had taken from the Tunquineses: though the Quarrel was taken up by certain Embassadors which the King of Cochinchina sent to the King of Tunquin, to whom the former made satisfaction. The Army that was then prepar'd to march upon this Expedition was compos'd of 8000 Horse, 94 thousand Foot, and 722 Elephants; 130 for the War, and the rest to carry the Tents and Baggage of the King and the Nobility; and 318 Galleys and Barks, very long and narrow, with Oars and Sails; and this was that which my Brother saw. The Con∣dition of the Souldiery is very toilsom and laborious, and of little advantage in the Kingdom of Tunquin. For they are all their life time so ti'd and engag'd to the Service of the Wars, that though they are capable of other Labours for the support of their Families, they are not permitted to undertake it. Those days that they are not upon the Guard, they are oblig'd to attend their Captains where-ever they go, and two days in a week they are compell'd to Exercise with their Bows and Arrows in their presence. Their Com∣panies consist of a hundred or a hundred and thirty Men; and they of each Company that have made the best shot, have one of them two Months Wages, the other one, which is paid them in Rice. He that makes the worst shot, next time he mounts the Guard, is oblig'd to stand Centinel double his time. All the Captains look upon it as a great piece of glory to have their Souldiers Arms and Weapons neat and bright. If they find any rust upon them, they sconce them eight days Wages for the first fault, and for the second they are very severely chastis'd. As for those that serve in the Galleys, they are entertain'd and listed propor∣tionably. And sometimes the Captains send their Souldiers aboard for some days, that they may learn to row. For it is one of the chiefest Pastimes of the Kings of Tunquin to see the Mock-fights of the Galleys. When he has a mind to delight himself with this Divertisment, the King, with some part of his Court, removes to one of his fair Palaces, that stands upon one of the largest Rivers in his Country; and it is a great Honour for any of the Captains whose Souldiers carry the Victory. Now as the Victory is only got by the
force of the Oars, it happens sometimes that there are some Souldiers who strain themselves so hard, that they fall down dead with the Oar in their hands: for the King is the only Judge of the Combat. Wherein the pleasure that he takes is such, that he sends an Elephant to the Captain that obtains the Victory, and gives him three Months Wages besides. If any Souldier chance to die in this Exercise, his Widow or his Heirs have two years Pay. But notwithstanding all their pain and labour, their Wages are so small, that they are not able to maintain their Wives and Children. But in regard they Marry very young in this Country, the Wives as well of the Souldiers as of all the meaner sort of people, take care to learn some Trade besides, that they may be able to maintain their Families. The Captains also have their work prepar'd for them. For they are oblig'd to look after the King's Elephants, and to manage them for the Wars, and so to breed them, that they may not be afraid of Wild-fire, or any other Artificial Fires: as also to build places all along the Rivers, for the Galleys to ride shelter'd in, when they can no longer live out at Sea. All these Offi∣cers and Captains, and Lords of the Court, which are gene∣rally call'd Mandarins, have but four days in a Month to divert themselves, two at the first change of the Moon, and two at the full. CHAP. VI. Of the Manners and Customs of the People of the Kingdom of Tunquin. THe People of Tunquin are naturally mild and peace∣ful, submitting easily to reason, and condemning the Transports of Choler. They esteem the Ma∣nufactures of strange Countries far beyond those of their own; though they are not very curious of seeing any other Countries but those where they were born; and where, as they say, they always desire to live, to honour the Memory of their Ancestors. They have a tone in speaking, natu∣rally
soft and pleasing; happy memories, and in their Lan∣guage, which is very florid, they use several apposite Com∣parisons. They have good Poets among them, and People that love Learning; in which respect they are no way infe∣riour to the Chineses, their Neighbours. The Tunquineses, as well Men as Women, are for the most part well proportion'd, of an Olive Complexion, very much admiring the whiteness of the Europeans. Their Noses and Faces are not so flat as those of the Chineses, as being generally better made. Their Hair is very black, which they usually wear as long as it will grow, being very care∣ful in combing it. The Common People plait it in tresses; and tie it like a great Roll upon the top of their Heads. But the Nobility, Men of Law, and Souldiers, tie their Locks about their Necks, that they may not flutter in their Faces. They do not believe their Teeth to be handsom, till they have made them as black as jet; and they suffer their Nails to grow; the longest being accounted the fairest. Their Habit is grave and modest, being a long Robe that reaches down to their heels, much like that of the Japonneses, without any distinction of Sex. This Habit is bound about at the wast with a Girdle of Silk, interwoven with Gold and Silver, the Workmanship whereof is alike on both sides. As for the Souldiers, their upper Garments reach no farther then their Knees; only their Breeches reach down to the mid Leg, without either Hose or Shoes. The vulger sort of People are altogether slaves for one part of the year. For unless they be the Citizens of the Capital City, where the King keeps his Court, all the other Handicrafts of what Trade soever, as Joyners, Carpenters, Locksmiths, Masons, and the like, are oblig'd every year to work three Months at the King's Palace; and two Months; or Moons more (For the Tunquineses reckon their Months by the Moon) for the Mandarins, or great Lords. The rest of the year is for themselves, all which time they have liberty to work for the support of their own Family. This Service in their Language is calld Viecquan, or the Condition of a Slave. But they are liable to other drudgeries worse then those before mention'd; as to lop Trees, with which they chiefly feed their Elephants. This is a severe days work, to which they were condemn'd by the great Grandfather of
the King that now reigns, after he had put an end to the Civil Wars that turmoil'd his Kingdom, and that he had brought his rebellious Subjects to submit themselves. They had occasion'd him a great deal of trouble, and in regard he could not subdue them without a great hazard of his Army, his Council advis'd him to famish them; but he ra∣ther chose to give them their Lives, and to condemn them and their Posterity to this laborious Service, of which he might in time reap the benefit. I have told you elsewhere that the Tunquineses take great delight to live upon the Rivers, which are there free from Crocodiles and all other dangerous Animals, which haunt the Waters of Nile and Ganges. Where we are to observe, that these Rivers overflow their Banks every year, after the Rains are fall'n, with that terrible violence, that many times they carry away whole Towns and Villages, at what time a good part of the Kingdom looks like a Sea, resembling the lower Egypt under Water upon the Inundation of Nile. CHAP. VII. Of the Marriages of the Tunquineses, and their severity toward Adulteresses. THE Tunquineses cannot Marry without the consent of the Father and Mother, or if they be dead, with∣out the allowance of their nearest Kindred. They must also have the permission of the Judge or Governour of the place where the Marriage is to be made, for the obtain∣ing of which they must give him some Present. But in regard they were wont to exact upon the poor people more then they were able to give them, so that many Marriages were disappointed, to the great damage of the Public; the King, who reign'd in the year 1639, being inform'd of these Extor∣tions, and their ill Consequences, set forth a Law to regu∣late those Abuses, and to curb the Authority of the Gover∣nours. He order'd that the young Man who was desirous to Marry, should pay no more then such a Sum, according
to the proportion of his Estate, amounting to one or two fourths per Cent. and that they were not worth above a hundred Crowns should pay nothing. Now in regard the Common People, both Men and Women, are naturally laborious, all that the Maids can get they preserve for their Portions, and to buy them two or three handsom Garments, with a Neck-lace of Coral or yellow Amber, and a certain number of Beads, to garnish their Locks; which they suffer to hang down upon their Backs, accounting the beauty of their Hair to consist in the length. There is no Wedding kept without a great Feast; and they must be very poor when the Feast lasts not above three days; for sometimes they junket for nine days together. The next day after the Wedding the Bridgroom calls the Bride his Sister, and she calls the Bridegroom Brother. The Law of the Land permits the Man to divorce his wife when he pleases, which they do many times for very slight causes. But the Woman has not the same Priviledge: or at least, if she desire a separation, it is much more difficult to obtain; and the occasion must be very notorious. The Tunquineses say that this Law was made to keep the Women in sub∣jection, and to oblige them to be respectful to their Husbands. When the Husband desires this separation, the Ceremony is this. You must know that many of the Eastern People never touch their Victuals with their hands, but make use of two little sticks about six inches long, gilt and varnish'd, which serve them instead of Forks. The Husband then, when he goes about to repudiate his Wife, takes one of his own sticks, and one of his Wife's, and having broken them, they take each one half, and sow it up in a piece of Silk, in which they keep it. Then the Man is bound to restore the Woman what she brought with her, and to keep the Chil∣dren which they had between them. But these Divorces are not half so frequent as formerly. The Laws are also very rigorous against Adulteresses. So that if a woman accus'd of this crime be convicted thereof, she is cast to an Elephant bred up to this purpose, who pre∣sently throws her up into the Air with his Trunk, and when she comes to the ground, tramples her under his feet, till he can perceive no life in her. While my Brother was at the Court at Tunquin, he was a
witness of the severe Punishment, to which a Princess was condemn'd, for being taken in the Act with a certain Prince. It is the Custom in the East, when a Prince dies, to shut up in the most private and retir'd part of all his Palace all the women which he made use of in his life time. There they are allow'd two Maids to attend them, they eat alone, and see no person living any more to the very day of their deaths. I cannot tell by what means one of the Princes of the blood had got a view of one of the deceased King his Uncle's wives; but being desirous to see her again, and to overcome all difficulties that oppos'd him, and to deceive the Guards that watch'd the Dores, he made use of a slight not easily dis∣cover'd. For you must know, that in the Kingdom Tunquin, as in all the Kingdoms of Asia, in the Houses of the Kings and other great Lords, the Kitchin is usually separated from the House, and that the Garden is between them; so that for the better carrying the Meat from one place to another, the Servants make use of a kind of Flasket, or rather Iron Chest. And to keep the Meat warm, the Dishes are sup∣ported by little sticks laid athwart, about an inch distant one from another, under which is an Iron Plate with holes pierc'd quite through, about half a foot above another, which makes the bottom of the Chest; between which Plates they put lighted Coals, to keep the Meat warm. These Chests being to be carri'd by two men, the Tunquinese Prince plaid his game so well, that he was put into one of these Chests wherein the Princesses Meat was wont to be carri'd up into her Apartment. But he was not there many days before the thing was discover'd. He was presently brought before the King, who caus'd him to have several weighty Chains to be put about his Neck and Wast, and upon his Hands and Leggs; and thus chain'd and manacled, he order'd him to be led about for five Months together, to be seen by the People. After that he was shut up in a close Prison, where he remain'd seven years, till the death of the King, whose Son coming to the Throne, set him at liberty, upon condition he should serve as a private Souldier upon the Frontiers of the Kingdom. As for the Princess she was shut up in a little Chamber upon the top of a Tow'r, where she remain'd twelve days without having any thing given her to eat or drink; after that the Chamber
was all uncover'd at the top, that the sun might come at her, and scorch her to death, and so she di'd in three days. The two Maids that serv'd her had a little more favour, for they were thrown to the Elephants, who presently trod them to death. The two Porters of the Chest, or Flasket, were ti'd to four small Galleys, by the two Hands, and two Leggs, and as they Row'd several ways were pre∣sently dismembred. Being at Daca, in the Kingdom of Bengala, I saw the same Justice done to a Bramerè, who would have betraid Cha-Est-Can to the King of Arachan. CHAP. VIII. Of the Visits, Feasts, and Pastimes of the Tunquineses. AMong all the Eastern People the Tunquineses are the most sociable, and most frequently visit one ano∣ther. Generally they make their Visits about Noon, in the hottest time of the day, and then every one walks with a Train suitable to his Condition. The Princes and Mandarines ride upon their Elephants, or else they are carri'd in a kind of Litter, where they may either sit or lie. Six Men carry it, and behind them follow six more to ease them by times. Their Train consists generally of fifty or sixty Persons; neither are they permitted to exceed that number. As for the ordinary Gentry, and Officers of the Court, they ride a Horse-back, not being allow'd above seven or eight Servants to attend them. They chew, Betlè continually, as all the other Asiaticks do in such places where it is to be had. And when any one comes to visit another, it would be taken for a great affront, if at his taking leave, he should not be presented with a Box of Betlè, to take what he pleas'd. The richer that Box is, the more Honour is given to the Person to whom the Betlè is presented: Insomuch that when a Prince is about to be marri'd, he usually sends three of these Boxes to his Spouse, of which I have seen some at
the Apartments of some of the Princes that came to the Court of the Great Mogul, which were worth above 4 or 500000 Livres: One shall be cover'd with Diamonds, ano∣ther with Rubies and Pearls, another with Emraulds and Pearls, or else with other Jewels. The Tunquineses take it for a great dishonour to have their Heads bare, which is only for Criminals, whom they cause to be shav'd so soon as they are taken. So that it is a diffi∣cult thing for a Criminal to escape the hands of Justice, for wherever they go, when they find that a man has no Hair, he is taken and carri'd to the Governour, who causes him to be nail'd to a Cross immediately. They sit cross legg'd, after the manner of the Asiatic People. At great mens Houses, in the Halls, where they receive their Visits, there is as it were an Alcove, with a kind of a Bedsted rais'd about a foot from the ground. It is cover'd with a very fine Mat, made of little Reeds bound together, as it were with fine thread. For it is not the Custom to spread Carpets upon the Floors, as in other Countries of Asia. Not that the deerness hinders them from making use of them, for these Mats cost them more then a fine Persian or Indian Carpet would do, but because they are cooler to sit upon, and because the Punies do not get so easily into them. Being at Bantam I bought one of these Mats of a Tunquinese, which was admir'd for its fineness. It was nine Ells square, and as even and as soft as Velvet. With these Mats they cover the Beds or Couches, upon which the Man∣darins, or Princes, and the Nobilty which accompany them, seat themselves round the Chamber, every one having one Cushion under him, and another at his Back. As for their Diet the Tunquineses are not very curious. The Common People are contented with Rice boil'd in water, and dri'd Fish, or salted Eggs. For as for Flesh they eat none but at their Festivals. The great Lords are serv'd every day with Flesh and Fish, but their Cooks know not what belongs to bak'd Meats. Otherwise they are more neat in their Kitchins and Chambers then we, only they make no use either of Napkins or Table-cloaths. Whatever is set before them to eat, is serv'd in little Plates, not so big as our Trenchers, being made of wood lacker'd with all sorts of Flow'rs, like the Cabinets which are brought from Japan.
All these Plates are brought up, rang'd in order, in a large Voyder, lacker'd like the Plates. Usually the Voyder holds ten or twelve Plates, and the Meat is cut in little pieces, about the bigness of a Hazle Nut. They make use neither of Spoons, nor Knives, nor Forks, but only of those little Sticks, of which I have made mention in the foregoing Chapter, never touching their Meat with their fingers. When there are several sitting at the Table, either at their ordinary Meals, or upon some Festival, they account it a great piece of Manners to be silent; or if they have a desire to Discourse, they alway allow the Eldest the honour of beginning, bearing a great respect to them that are aged. But the Youngest, at the Table, is never permitted to begin the Discourse. They wash their Hands, their Mouths, and Faces before they sit down, but never after Meals. And when they desire to know whether every one has had his fill, they ask him whether he have eaten his Rice, according to the Custom of the Ancient Fathers in Scripture, who, by Bread, meant the whole Repast. Neither is it a Custom among them to ask one another how they do? but how many Measures of Rice he eat for his Dinner, and whether he eat with an Appetite. This is a general Custom among all the Idolatrous Indians, unless in the Dominions of the Great Mogul, where they eat not Rice only, but Bread, and there they ask in civility how much Rice they boil'd, and how much Meal they bak'd for Bread; for the more he eats, the better in health they think a man is. Among all the Pastimes of the Tunquineses there are none wherein they take so much delight as in Comedies, which are only Acted in the Night-time; but those which are pre∣sented the day that they first behold the new Moon are the best. They last from Sun-setting to Sun-rising, and they are set out with beautiful Decorations and Machines, very pleasing to behold. They are excellently well skill'd in representing the Sea and Rivers, and making a shew of Sea-fights, and Combats between Galleys and Barks, though they have seldom more then eight Actors, Men and Women. The places appointed for these sights, are great Halls, the third part whereof the Theater takes up, the rest being fill'd with Benches for the Spectators. Upon each side of the Theater is a Box very sumptuously set out, reserv'd for the
King when he pleases to come. The Actors and Actresses are very magnificently clad. The dress for the Womens heads being a kind of Miter or Diadem, which exceedingly becomes them, from the hinder part whereof two Ribonds, three fingers broad, hang down below their wasts. Both the one and the other Act their parts very perfectly, and, according to their manner, observe an exact time in their Dancing. At one of the corners of the Hall sit the two Judges of the Comedy, one of whom beats time upon a Brass Drum. Their other ordinary Pastimes, especially for the Lords and Mandarins, are Fishing and Hunting, though they take more pleasure in the former, by reason of the plenty of Fish which their Rivers afford them. But, as I said before, they follow these sports only upon the days that are permit∣ted them, as being better husbands of their time then we, not sparing any part of it from business. So that they who at the beginning of that little knowledge which we had of these People, wrote that their Manners and Customs were wild and barbarous, were misinform'd. For as there is no reason to doubt of the truth of what I affirm, and what others have confirm'd by other Relations, we may well conculde from what I have said, That all the Duties of Civil Society and Politeness are not confin'd within our Europe; but that the Kingdom of Tun∣quin, anciently a part of China, still retains the good Govern∣ment and Civility of the Chineses themselves. CHAP. IX. Of the Learned Men in the Kingdom of Tunquin. CErtain it is, that the Tunquineses have a very great inclination for Learning, and that they apply them∣selves to their Studies with diligence and success: for that they cannot be advanc'd without it to the Offices and Dignities in the Kingdom. I do not here, by Learning, mean the understanding of the Languages of our Learned
Men of Europe, which are altogether unknown to the Eastern People, and much less the Philosophy of Aristotle, of which they never so much as heard. But we mean the knowledge of the Laws of their Country, by means whereof they obtain the charges of Judicature; the Mathe∣maticks, and particularly Astronomy, to which all the Ori∣entals have a great inclination, as being great observers of the Stars, by whose assistance they flatter themselves to be able to foretel things to come. The Tunquineses are also passio∣nate lovers of Music and Poetry, as being great admirers of Comedy and Tragedy, of which those two Sciences are the main Composition; so that the Musicians and Actors of Tunquin are accounted the best in the whole Eastern part of the World. That you may acquire Nobility by Learning, in your Youth, you must pass through three degrees, of the Synde, the Doucan, and the Tansi, from which degree you may ascend to that of the Nobility. To attain the first degree, it behoves the Youth of Tunquin to apply themselves for eight years together to their Studies, and that very close, to enable themselves for the Office of a Notary, Proctor, and Advocate, to which there is nothing more conducing then to speak Eloquently in public. At the end of eight years, they are examin'd concerning the duty of those Employments; and if any one fail to give an Answer to the Questions propounded, he is sent back again as incapable to obtain any Employment for the future, or to study any longer. For those that acquit themselves well of their Examination, which is very rigorous, their Names are set down in a Register, and presented to the King, who first grants them the liberty to take upon them the Title of Synde, and then if it be their aim to enjoy the Quality of Doucan, they are com∣manded by the Tansi's to study Music, Astrology, and Poesie, not only to be able to be judge of it, but also to perform themselves upon occasion. For to be good judges of Co∣medy, which is a great Honour among them, it behoves them to be both good Comedians and Musicians. Nor in∣deed is there any Pastime more frequent then that of the Theater in this Country; for there is never any solemn Festival among them, which is not accompany'd and set
forth with Artificial Fire-works, in making whereof these People are exquisite; after which they have their Come∣dies, with Machines, and change of Scenes in every Act. Besides this, their Actors have a prodigious memory, so that let the part be never so long, they never make use of Prompters to assist them, as we do in Europe. They that will learn the Mathematicks, must make their own Instruments themselves, and spend five years in this study. They are examin'd every year, and if they fail to answer such Questions as are ask'd them, for the first four they are pardon'd; but at the end of the five years, if upon the grand Examination, they fail to answer the Questions demanded them by the Tansis, they are utterly degraded; whereas if they satisfie their Examinors, they are permitted the Name and Dignity of Doucan. After thirteen years thus spent, before they can arrive to the degree of a Tansi, they must spend four years more in learning to write and read the Chinese Character to such a certain number of Words. For the life of a Man would not suffice to learn to write and read the Chinese quite through. The reason is, because that as to this particu∣lar, it is not in China as in other Nations, where one Word is compos'd of several Letters. The Chineses for every Word have a different Figure, all which Figures are very numerous, as you may easily conjecture. By the by let me tell you, that these Figures are made with small Pen∣cils, and that the Chineses make use of a certain Ink, which is made up into a Paste, and so moisten'd in Water as you make use of it. They have also another sort of Colour for certain Words. But they cannot make use of Pens, as our Euro∣peans, which are made of Quils; nor of those of other Eastern People, which are made of small redish brown Reeds, the best of which grow in certain Mershes in the Kingdom of Pegu and Arachan. But to return to the Students of Tunquin, they are also oblig'd to understand the Laws and Customs of the Chineses, as well as their own; and the last four years being at an end, the last and great Examination is made in the great place, within the Enclosure of the Palace of Tunquin, which is a stately Marble structure. There the King is present, with the Princes and great Lords of the Court, the Mande∣rins
for Learning, and all the Tansis; and many also come on purpose from distant Provinces to the Solemnity. Some Relations of Tunquin have been a little too ridiculous in this particular, asserting extravagantly; that some∣times there are above 30 or 40000 Students present at these Examinations; but by what I could learn from my Brother, or gather by that discourse which I have had with the Natives, the number of Students never exceeds three thousand. There are in the place nine Scaffolds set up; of which the one is for the King and Princes, the other for the Examiners, and those that are to be Examin'd: And for the better hearing what is said, the Scaffolds are built like an Amphitheater. But whereas there are eight days spent in this Examination, the King and the Mandarins are never there but only the two first days. The last day all the Names of them who have been Examin'd, as well they who have answer'd well, as of them that have falter'd, are left in the Hands of the sixteen chief Manderins, who are as it were sixteen Counsellors of State, and then it is at the King's pleasure to favour whom he thinks fit, of those who have not given full satisfaction to the Questions propounded to them. As for those who were found very ignorant, they are degraded with shame, and there is no more said of them. All those Names are usually written upon large Tables, set up at the Gate of the King's Palace for eight days together, to the end, that all the People may know who are receiv'd into the Rank of Nobility, and who not. The eight days being pass'd, they are all to appear again upon the same Scaffolds, where in the view of all the World, they who have had the misfortune to have falter'd in their Examinations, are dismiss'd as unworthy of any Employment: while they who have behav'd themselves worthy of approbation, are honour'd with a Vest of Vio∣let Satin, which they presently put on, and then take upon them the Name of Tansi's. Then they have given them a List of the Towns and Villages, where they are to receive the Rents which the King allows them; wherein however they have not an equal share; some being allow'd more, some less, according to their merit, or the favour of the Prince. Presently they send notice to the places assign'd them of the
time, at which they intend to be there: and then all the Inhabitants come forth to meet them, in Honour of their Dignity, with all sorts of Music, and a Guilded Branquar, carried by eight Men. There they are permitted to stay three Months to divertize themselves, and for their own recreation. After that they return to Court, to instruct themselves in the affairs of the Kingdom, and the King's House, and to perfect themselves in the knowledge of those things, which is the way to obtain the Dignity of a Man∣darin. All Embassadours who are sent to the Princes ad∣joyning, especially to the Chineses, are chosen out of these Tansi's, among whom they always make choice of the ablest, and not of the richest, the King allowing them sufficient to maintain their Port, and defray the expences of the Embassy. CHAP. X. Of their Physicians, and the Diseases of the Tunquineses. THe Physicians belonging to the Kingdom of Tunquin do not make it their business much to study Books; spending their Youth in searching after the nature and qualities of the Roots and Simples, and how to apply them according to the nature of the Distemper. But more particularly they apply themselves to the beating of the Pulse, and its diversity of Measure, by which they chiefly pretend to understand the cause of the Disease, and what Remedy to make use of for cure. And therefore when they go to feel a Pulse, they feel it in several parts of the Body; and according to the diversity of the part, and the beating, they judge of the quality of the Distemper. Therefore upon their first coming, they feel the Patient in three places, first upon their right sides, and secondly upon their left. By the Pulse which they feel upon the wrist of the right hand, they guess of the condition of the Lungs; by that which they feel upon the Vein of the Arms, where
generally People are let Blood, they guess at the Distem∣pers of the Stomach, and the Region of the Kidneys. The Pulse of the left Wrist discovers to them the condition of the Heart: By that in the Veins of the left Arm, where usually they let Blood, they are inform'd of the estate of the Liver. By the Pulses of the Temples, both right and left, they give a more exquisite judgment of the Kid∣neys. They are very careful to count how many times a Pulse of a sick Person beats in the time of one Respiration; and according to these several Pulses, they tell you which part of the Body is particularly distemper'd, whether the Heart; the Liver, or the Lungs; or whether the Distem∣per proceed from any outward cause, as from Cold, Sadness, or any other disorderly Passion. They never make use of any other Remedies but of Herbs and Roots, which they choose themselves; there being no distinction among them of Apothecary and Physician. These Herbs they mingle sometimes with a little Ginger, which they boyl in Water, and give the Decoction, being strain'd, to the Patient. They have very good Receipts for the Purples, Epilepsie, and several other Diseases which are accounted incurable in Europe. They make use of China Ink to stop a Dysentery, and for the cure of Wounds. When the Sea Ebbs from the shoar upon these Coasts, they find upon the Sand a little small kind of Crabs, which dye immediately, and by the heat of the Sun, which is there extraordinary, become as hard as a Stone in a short time; these the Tunquinese Physicians beat to Powder, and give to their Patients in Dysenteries, and Feavers, sometimes in Aqua Vitae, sometimes in plain Water. They mightily ad∣mire the Herb Tea, which comes from China and Japan; which latter Country produces the best. It is brought to them in Tin Pots close stop'd, to keep out the Air. When they would use it, they boyl a quantity of Water, accor∣ding to the proportion they intend to use, and when the Water seeths, throw a small quantity into it, allowing as much as they can nip between their Thumb and fore Finger to a Glass. This they prescribe to be drank as hot as they can endure it, as being an excellent Remedy against the Headach, for the Gravel, and for those that are subject to the Griping of the Guts; but then they order a little Ginger
to be put into the Water when it boyls. At Goa, Batavia, and in all the Indian Factories, there are none of the Euro∣peans who do not spend above four or five Leaves a day; and they are careful to preserve the boyl'd Leaf for an Evening Sallad, with Sugar, Vinegar, and Oyl. That is accounted the best Tea which colours the Water greenest; but that which makes the Water look Red, is little accounted of. In Japan. The King and great Lords, who drink Tea, drink only the Flower, which is much more wholsom, and of a tast much more pleasing. But the Price is much different; for one of our ordinary Beer Glasses is there worth a French Crown. The most dangeroug Distempers that befall the Tunqui∣neses, most usually happen when the bad Air surprizes the People; for of a sudden it deprives them of their Speech, and then Death suddenly follows without a speedy Remedy. The best Remedy for this sudden Distemper is to mix some Counterpoison with Aqua Vitae instead of Wine, and to let the Patient drink it as hot as he can. The Patient also, must at the same time be rub'd with a Cloth dip'd in Aqua Vitae, where Ginger has been boyl'd. This takes away the pains caus'd by cold Winds, and unwholsom Airs. Though some for the more speedy cure of these pains, lay the Patient upon a Bed made only of Girts, four Fingers distant one from the other; and then setting a Chasing-dish underneath, cause the sick Person to sweat in a Cloud of Frankincense, till the pain is gone, repeating the same thing Morning and Evening. As for Blood-letting, it is by no means us'd in that Coun∣try. They make use of Fire, especially for the Purple-Feaver, a Disease so dangerous in France. For the cure of this, the Physitians of Tunquin take the Pith of a Reed, which they dry very well; dip it in Oyl, and set it on Fire: and then apply to every Purple Spot one of these lighted Wicks. The Spot will give a whif like a small Squib, and that's an infallible sign that the Venom is gone out of the body. This Remedy is seldom apply'd but in the night time, because the Spot does not appear so well in the day time. And the Physician must be very careful, that when this Venom flies out of the Patient's Body, it does not find a way into his own; for then there is no Remedy
but Death. There are some Physicians that will prick the Purple Spot with a Needle, and let out the Pestilential Blood; after which they burn the part so prick'd, and then rub it with Ginger, not permitting their Patient to take the Air in 20 days after they are cur'd. While they are under cure, they drink nothing but Water, with Citron∣peel boyl'd in it, and abstain from Flesh and Butter. They give them to eat Rice boyl'd in Water, and salt Fish; but the more they abstain from eating and drinking, the sooner they are cur'd. And indeed it is a wonderful thing to see the excellent effects of their Remedies in so short a time; for they have no lingring Distempers to hold them years together, as they do among us. CHAP. XI. Of the Original, Government, and Policy, of the Kingdom of Tunquin. IT is not above six hundred years since Tunquin was first govern'd by particular Kings, in regard it was anciently a part of the Dominion of the Chineses. What is re∣ported of the first Tunquineses, That they were without Governours, and without Kings, is altogether fabulous, like to that which is related of a certain Infant of three years of Age, who appearing before a great Assembly of the People, exhorted them to free themselves from the power of the Chineses, who were their Oppressors. Upon which a lovely Horse miraculously appearing to the said infant, he mounted the Horse, and immediately setting for∣ward with those that were gather'd after him, as also others that appear'd as wonderfully to assist him, he set upon the Chineses, and defeated them in such manner, that they never durst venture after that to return any more to reconquer what they had lost. But the most certain truth of Tun∣quin History assures us, That for these six Centuries last past, it has been govern'd by six various Families. The first that assum'd the Title of King was a famous Robber, whose
Name was Din, who having gather'd together a great Number of Malecontents, and Vagabonds, became so powerful and formidable through his own Valour, that after several bloody Battels gain'd, it was no difficult thing for him to seize upon the Throne. But he did not reign long in peace, for the most part of the People rebell'd against him; and in the first Battel that he fought, he lost his Life. However his own Party won the day; and having left two Sons, his eldest reigned three years; after whose death, the younger Brother rul'd in his stead, but dy'd soon after, neither of the Brothers leaving any issue behind them. After that the Kingdom was miserably distracted by several Civil Wars, till the weaker Party calling in the Chineses to their Assistance, became the most puissant. Then it was that a certain Mandarin, of the Family of Lelequel, was advanc'd to the Throne, who being a valiant and prudent Prince, restor'd tranquillity to the whole Kingdom. Who, when he saw himself Establish'd in peace, built that large Palace, which they, who have seen it, admire, as well for it's Circuit, as for its magnificent Structure, being all of Marble of divers Colours, both within and without. This King had but one Daughter, who soon after her Father's death, the better to secure her self, marry'd one of the most powerful Mandarins in the Country, of the House of Tran. But soon after, one of her Subjects rebelling against her, gave her battel, took her Prisoner, and put her to death. Having thus got the Power into his hands, the Rebel usurp'd the Throne; but nine years after, he was also slain in Battel by his own Subjects, who had call'd the Chineses to their Assistance. They being thus Masters of the Kingdom, held it for twenty years, and set Governours over every Province. But at length the Mandarins grew weary of their Oppression, because of the heavy Tributes which they laid upon the Tunquineses; so that a valiant Captain of the House of Le, having assembled a numerous Power together, gave the Chineses three Battels, and in every one overcame them. The Chineses thus expell'd out of Tunquin, the Conquerour seiz'd the Crown, and in his Family the Regal Government continu'd for above four∣score years. After which time, a great Lord, of the Family of Marr, which had formerly enjoy'd the Scepter,
to Revenge himself of an affront which the King had put upon him at Court, found a way to escape his hands, and being assisted by a great Number of discontented Per∣sons, of which the best regulated Kingdoms are always full, and the Chineses, who always sought an opportunity to regain what they had lost, after a bloody Battel, he possess'd himself of the Kingdom, it being never known what became of his Predecessor. But this new King en∣joy'd the Fruits of his Victory but a small while. For two years afterwards, a Mandarin, of the House of Trin, having espous'd the Daughter of another great Lord, openly declar'd War against his Soveraign, with a design utterly to extirpate the House of Marr. Unhappily for him, death put a stop to his designs, though he left two Sons behind him, able enough to have pursu'd his undertakings. But the eldest, naturally timorous, and fearing to engage himself in a dangerous War, voluntarily submitted himself to the King, who gave him the Government of a Province, and marry'd him to one of his Sister's Daughters. The younger Brother being a valiant Prince, and having his deceased Father's Army at his Devotion, though the King propos'd him great advantages, would give ear to nothing, but out of his ambition to Reign himself continu'd and successfully ac∣complish'd what his Father had begun. In the second Battel which he gave the King, who was there in person, he took him Prisoner, together with his Brother, who had submitted to him, and some few days after he put them both publicly to death at the head of his Army; the one as an unjust usurper of the Throne; the ether as a desertor, who had abandon'd his Father's Army, and so ill follow'd his intentions. Now though as Victor he might easily have ascended the Throne, and tak'n upon him the Name and Title of King, yet he would not accept of any higher Title then that of General of the Army; and the better to Establish himself in his Authority, and to gain the affection of the People, he caus'd Proclamation to be made through all the Provinces of the Kingdom, that if there were any Prince of the House of Le yet remaining alive, he should shew himself, with full assurance that upon his appearing, he should be put into possession of the Kingdom. There was but one to be found,
who had been so closely pursu'd by the House or Marr, while it rul'd, that to save his Life he was forc'd to abscond himself in the Frontiers of the Kingdom, under the Habit of a private Soldier. The General was overjoy'd to find that there was yet a lawful Heir of the House of Le to be found, that he might place him upon the Throne. So that so soon as he was known to be of the Legitimate Race, all the Equipage and Attendance of a King was sent to him, with Order to all the Provinces as he pass'd along, to receive him as if he were already crown'd. The whole Army march'd two days march to meet the King, and brought him to Checo, the capital City of the Kingdom, where he was plac'd in the Throne of his Father, and with great Pomp proclaim'd King of Tunquin. But General Trin, who car'd not so much for the Royal Title, as the Royal Power, so order'd his business, that leaving to Le all the outward shew and Pomp of Royal Authority, he reserv'd to himself the whole command of the Army, and the greatest part of the Revenues of the Kingdom absolutely to dispose of at his own pleasure. So that from that time to this hour, we may affirm that there has been, and still are, two Kings of Tunquin, of which the first has only the Name and Title of King, and is call'd Boüa, and the second Choüa, who has all the Authority, disposing of all things at his pleasure, while the other remains shut up in his Palace like a Slave, not permitted to stir abroad but upon certain days: and then he is carry'd through the Streets of Checo, like an Image, though with a magnificent Train and Royal Equipage. He has generally 2000 Soldiers for his Guard; and sometimes 20000 which are quarter'd upon the Frontiers, chiefly to∣ward Cochinchina. He also has ready upon the Frontiers 50 Elephants for War. And upon the Rivers of the Kingdom where the Enemy can come to damage him, he usually keeps 100 great Galleys, with a vast company of small Galliots, to which the Soldiers and Rowers that belong, have more pay then the others at Land. And these, that they may row with more strength, row standing, with their Faces toward the Prow, quite contrary to our Row∣ers, who turn their backs. The King gives public Audience almost every day; but he makes no Edict, or public Decree, that is of any effect,
if it be not also Sign'd by the Choüa. At these Audiences he has with him thirty two Councellors of State, and besides these, a hundred others to judge of all Appeals of the Kingdom. The Eunuchs have a very great Power at Court, as in all other Courts of Asia, and the King, as to his most important affairs, confides more in them then in his own Children. The eldest Children do not always succeed their Father; for the Choüa, or General, with all the Coun∣cellors, which are generally his Creatures, thought it con∣venient, that when the King should have more Sons then one, he should make choice of whom he pleas'd to succeed him. So that so soon as he has nam'd him, the Choüa, attended by the principal Officers of the Army, Councellors of State, and Eunuchs, come to congratulate him, and to give him their Oaths to set him upon the Throne after the death of his Father; and for the other Brothers they are always shut up in the Palace, as in a Prison, without medling with any affairs of State. They never stir out of the Palace but four times a year, and they never stay abroad above six days at a time, the Officers that attend them being put upon them by the Choüa, who is as it were Lord high Constable of the Kingdom. The first of these six days of liberty they go to visit the Temples, and the Priests, to whom they give large Alms; the two next days they take their pleasure in hunting; and the three last days they spend their time upon the Rivers, in Galleys sumptuously trimm'd and adorn'd. The Kingdom of Tunquin is divided into eight large Pro∣vinces, every one of which has its Governour, and its Ma∣gistrates, from whose sentence there lies an Appeal to the Court. We should wrong this Country to say that there were no Nobility therein; as indeed there are none in most Kingdoms of Asia. But they must all attain to this degree their merit; some by the Warrs, and some by their Learning. They who attain their Nobility by Arms, have wherewithall to live handsomly at home; and they begin to learn their Exercises betimes, at farthest by eleven or twelve years of Age. The first thing they are to understand, is how to handle their Swords; the Blades of which are streight, long, and broad, like those of the Switzers, having but one Edge. They are also taught to aim with their Bows,
and to fire a Musket with Matches, (for they know not the use of Fire-Locks) to ride the great Horse, to shoot running, and to manage their Zagay's, which are a sort of Staves, cheek'd with Iron, like a Half-Pike. When they are ready in all these Exercises, then they learn to make all sorts of Artificial Fire-works; as also how to in∣vent new ones, to make use of them against the Elephants. By the way I must needs tell you, there are some of these Ele∣phants as I have seen several times, that are so accustom'd to these Artificial Fires, that they regard them not at all, neither are any way disturb'd at the Squibs that are thrown, and go off under their very Noses and Bellies. Neverthe∣less of 200 of these Creatures which the Eastern Kings carry to their Wars at a time, you shall have hardly fifteen that are so hardy and valiant. So that unless their Gover∣nours take not great care, instead of running upon the Enemy, they turn upon their Friends, and put the whole Army into a most dismal confusion; as you shall hear by the following Story. For Aurenge-Zebe, the present Great Mogul, being then a young Prince, obtain'd of Cha-gehan, his Father, to let him have the command of an Army of threescore thousand Men, and fourscore Ele∣phants; and with this force, out of his Antipathy to the Christians, he laid Siege to Daman, a Town belonging to the Portugals, fourteen Leagues from Surat. The Gover∣nour was a person of great Valour, and had also two Sons with him, who, together with himself, had both serv'd the King of France. He had also in the Town eight hun∣dred Gentlemen, who voluntarily put themselves into the Garrison for its defence, from all parts of India where the Portugueses had to do, and were all excellently well mounted. For the Portugals at that time made use of none but Arabian Horses, the worst of which cost a thousand Crowns at least. The Governour finding that the Indian Prince began to press hard upon him, having already made two Assaults, resolv'd with all his Cavalry and Infantry to make a Salley upon Sun∣day Morning, causing them to fix at the ends of their Spears and Lances certain Artificial Fire-works, to which they were order'd suddenly to give fire, as soon as they should gain the Elephants Quarter. This design was so successful, that when it came to be executed, the Elephants were so suddenly
terrifi'd, that running impetuously through the Indian Army, they trod to the ground, and cut in pieces with the Swords and Scithes which were fasten'd to their Trunks, what ever stood in their way. The Portugals taking advantage of this confusion, made no less havock among the amazed Multi∣tude, whom they had surpriz'd securely and profoundly asleep. For they had an opinion, that the Portugals would never attack them upon the Sabboth day, believing they had the same veneration for that day which the Jews had. But they were utterly deceiv'd, in so much that the Portu∣gals, by virtue of this Stratagem so closely pursu'd, obtain'd a notable Victory, to the utter destruction of 20000 of Aurenge-Zebe's Army, the spoils whereof are reported to have amounted to above twelve Millions. But to return to the Kingdom of Tunquin, I must tell you, that the Tunquineses have often wag'd War against the Chineses, because the first would not pay the latter the Tribute which was accorded them by a Treaty made by one of their Kings, of the House of Le. But in the year 1667, the Chineses, seeing that the Tartars had made themselves Masters of their Country, made a Peace with the Tunquineses, wherein it was agreed, that the said Tribute should be no longer paid; but that they should every year send an Embassador only to Pequin, to do homage to the Emperour of China. As for their Justice and Policy, they observe a very exact Order and Regulation over all the Kingdom of Tunquin, as well in their Cities, as in the Country. So that few of the best regulated Kingdoms exceed them. More especially they have a great care, for the public good, to repair the Bridges and High-ways; and every quarter of a League there is such Provision made, that any Traveller may there meet not only with Water, but Fire also to light his Pipe, being generally great smoakers of Tobacco. As for Murder, they are very exact in punishing that crime. For they carry the Person apprehended before the Judge; and then he must hold to his Mouth a little wisp of Grass, to shew, that by his disorderly life he had made himself a Beast. Not much unlike this is the custom in Persia, where the King and his Council condemn or pardon all but such as have murder'd a Man that has any Kindred. For then all the favour that the King can shew him is, to
deliver him into the hands of the next of kin to the Person kill'd, who has power to agree with the Criminal for a Sum of Money, which is rarely done, as being accounted an Act both infamous and ignominious. So that if there be no agreement made, then it behoves the next of kin to be the Executioner himself, and put the Criminal to that death to which he is before condemn'd. CHAP. XII. Of the Court of the Kings of Tunquin. ALthough the King, as I have already said, have not much Authority in his Kingdom, which is govern'd altogether by the General, who has the whole Militia at his Devotion, yet he is highly honour'd by his Subjects, and he keeps a very splendid Court. The first and fifteenth day of every Month, all the Mandarins who are the Grandees of the Kingdom, are bound to come in their Chinese Habits to kiss the King's hands. The Con∣stable, or General, was formerly wont to perform the same Office, but by degrees he has obtain'd a dispensation, and only sends another Prince in his stead. As for all the other Mandarins, Governours of Provinces, Justiciaries, and Military Officers, every year they go to kiss the Choüa's hands, and to congratulate him upon the first day of the year, which is the fifteenth of the fifth Month; as also when he has obtain'd any great Victory over his Enemies. So that the General has more Honour done him then the King himself. 'Tis also the custom of the Tunquineses, among the Men, that when they meet any Person higher in condi∣tion then themselves, they make four profound obeysances to the very Earth. But for the Women, what ever their condition be among themselves, they never make but one. They who are desirous to be admitted into the Palace to see the King, are oblig'd to put on Violet Robes, and their Servants must be clad in the same colour. They that ap∣proach the King's presence to obtain any favour, must
carry a Present along with him. For though the Constable be the person that disposes of all Offices and Commands over all the Court and Kingdom, yet every year upon the fifteenth day of the seventh Month, the King distributes several considerable Gifts and Largesses to his Courtiers; as also to the Children of such Fathers who have perform'd any important Service for the good of his Kingdom. He gives them Pains of Gold, every one worth six hundred Livres; and Bars of Silver, amounting each to forty six Livres. The same day he also releases all Prisoners, both Criminal and Debtors, provided the crime do not deserve death; and that the debt do not exceed two Bars of Silver. Also every year, the three last days of the last Month, the 40 Mandarins, who are the chief Councellors of State, take the Oaths of all the Lords and Officers of the Court, and of their Wives; causing them to swear to be faithful to the King, and if they know of any thing that concerns the King's person, or his Kingdom, to discover it. All Go∣vernours of Provinces give the same Oaths to the Lords and Gentlemen under their Jurisdictions; and the Governours of Cities to the Citizens, and other Inhabitants. They that discover any Treason never fail of any reward; only with this distinction, in reference to the quality of the Per∣sons that reveal it. For as for the Mandarins and Gentle∣men, the King rewards them according to his own plea∣sure: But as for the meaner sort, whether Men or Women, they are ennobl'd, and gratifi'd with a reward of 50 Pains of Gold, and 500 Bars of Silver, which in all amounts to 53000 Livres. But they esteem their Nobility far beyond their Money. At certain times of the year, there is a Muster of the Youth of the several Provinces; and all those who are found not to be either of the Nobility, or not to have learnt any Trade, are presently enroll'd for the Service of the King, who every five years make choice of such as he in∣tends for his Guard, and sends them to the Frontier Garri∣sons. There are some who endeavour to get off by Money; but if they be discover'd, both the Officers and the Soldier are punish'd without redemption. For they hang a little Bell about his Neck, Fetter his Arms, and in that posture send him to the Constable, who presently orders his Head
to be struck off. But in regard the Tunquineses are very averse from seeing any Blood shed, the Kindred or Friends of the condemn'd Person, intercede that he may be hang'd, be∣lieving that death to be most honourable which is not defil'd with Blood-shed; wherein they seem to be of the Opinion of the Turks. CHAP. XIII. Of the Ceremonies observ'd when the Kings of Tunquin are advanc'd to the Throne. BEfore we speak of the Enthroning the Kings of Tunquin, and of the Ceremonies that attend it, it behoves us to relate the manner of their setting out of the Palace, when they go at any time to take their plea∣sure. The King is seated upon a most magnificent Palan∣quin, carry'd by eight Men, where he may be beheld by all the People; the Lords and Officers of the Court attend∣ing him on foot, provided he do not go out of the City: for when he goes into the Country he rides upon an Ele∣phant, and the Lords follow him on Horse-back. When the Queen Mother, or his first Wife go abroad, they are likewise carry'd upon a close Palanquin, with Lattice-Win∣dows, to the end, they may see and not be seen; and behind the Palanquin follow the Maids of Honour on foot. The Mandarins, and great Princes, solemnize their Birth∣days every year, with great Feasting, Pastimes, Come∣dies, and Fire-works, and all their Friends and Kindred fail not to attend them to honour the Solemnities. In the year 1645, the eldest Son of the King, who was by his Father appointed for his Successor, upon one of his Birth∣days shew'd the Court all the divertizements he could imagin, and the King who had a great affection for him, sent him a thousand Pains of Gold, and five hundred Bars of Silver, to the value of 120000 Livres. At which time, large Alms are distributed, especially to poor Widows and Prisoners.
When the King dies, and leaves several Sons, they set up him whom (when alive) he chose for his Successor. The third day after the Decease of the King, the Constable with all the Military Mandarins, the Lords of the Council, and all the Governours of Provinces, repair to the Prince's Ap∣partment, where they present him with a Chinese Habit, af∣ter which having mounted him upon an Elephant, they bring him into one of the great Courts of his Palace, which is all covered with Cloth of Gold and Silver as with a Tent. There it is, that being placed upon a Throne magnifi∣cently enrich'd, all the Mandarins prostrate themselves up∣on the Earth with their Heads downward; in which po∣sture having lain for some time, they rise, and closing their Hands together, with their Arms and Eyes lifted up to Hea∣ven, they swear to the new King to be faithful to him till death. This first Ceremony being over, the new King, to shew himself liberal upon his first coming to the Crown, causes four Panes of Gold, and six Bars of Silver, to be gi∣ven to every one. But to distinguish the Constable from the rest, he gives him twenty Panes of Gold, and forty Bars of Silver: and to the President of the Council or Chancel∣lour ten of Gold and twenty of Silver. These Presents be∣ing thus made, several Pieces of Artillery are fired round the Palace, accompanied with several Volleys of small Shot, there being then in Arms above 30000 Horse and Foot; and then the King is set upon a magnificent Palan∣quin, and the Constable and chief of the Council ride before upon lovely Horses. Sixteen of the principal Officers of the Court carry the King, viz. eight Military Mandarins, and eight of the Council. And in this manner they set forward to the Apartment of the deceased King, from whence all the Lords retire for two hours, except the Eunuchs; and then it is, that the Princesses, Ladies of the Court, and chief Wives of the Mandarins, come to kiss the King's Hand, and congratulate his Advancement to the Throne. Which done, all the Lords return again to a noble Feast after the manner of the Countrey ready prepar'd. Their Viands are not so delicate, nor so deliciously dress'd as ours, neither have they so much variety. 'Tis true, they have those Birds-nests, already mention'd, which they mix in the most part of their Dishes, which gives the Meat a tast of
almost all sorts of Spices. Of all the Meats which they eat Colts Flesh is in most esteem, and Dogs Flesh, neither of which agree with our Palates. The Festival is concluded with Comedies and Fireworks, which la allst the night. The next day the 30000 Men that gave their Volleys of small Shot the day before, are drawn up in good order in a Field next, and all the principal Officers of War, Colonels, Captains, and Lieutenants, leave the Frontiers to be at the same place. Then the King mounted upon his Palanquin, and carried by sixteen of his principal Officers, the Consta∣ble and grand Squire riding before, and attended by several other Commanders on foot, with several Mummers that play and dance before the Pallanquin, goes forth of his Pa∣lace, the Drums, Trumpets, Cornets, and other Warlike In∣struments, filling the Air with their Martial Sounds. In this Pomp, and with this Equipage, the King being come to the Camp, quits his Palanquin, and mounts one of his great Elephants of War, which are us'd to the noise of the Guns and sight of the Fireworks. Being thus mounted, he rides into the middle of all his Troops, in which place all the Officers swear Fidelity to him; after which he bestows his Gifts upon them, to every Colonel two Panes of Gold, and forty Bars of Silver; to every Captain the half of what he gives a Colonel, and to every Lieutenant the half of what he gives a Captain: and as for the Souldiers, they have every one a Moneths Pay. These Presents being made, the whole Army discharges three Volleys, and then every Com∣pany retreats into a large Hutt, where they have Meat and Drink prepar'd for them, enough to serve them a whole day and a night. In the same Field is also set up a fair woo∣den Palace, sumptuously enriched within with Paintings and several pieces of Workmanship in Gold. There the King spends all the night, some part in Feasting, some part in Plays and seeing the Mummers dance, and the rest in be∣holding the Fireworks. The next day the King leaves his wooden Palace, which is afterwards fir'd by the Souldiers, as well as their own Hutts, and so returns to the City. Be∣ing arrived at his Palace with the same pomp that he went forth, he seats himself upon his Throne, and there shews his Liberality to those that made the Fireworks, to the Come∣dians and Dancers, and all the rest that were any way con∣tributory
to the setting forth the Pomp of the Ceremony. Then he gives Access to all the People, and two Commissi∣oners, one for the Merchants, and the other for the Handi∣crafts, make a Speech to the King, the substance whereof is; that all the Burgesses and Inhabitants of the good City of Checo do acknowledge him for their King, and that they will be faithful to him till death. The Speech being ended, the King presents the Body of the Merchants with 50 Panes of Gold, and 300 Bars of Silver; and the Body of the Trades∣men with 20 Panes of Gold, and 100 Bars of Silver. The People gone home, every one strives who shall spend most in Feasting and Comedies, adding of their own to the Kings Bounty; so that every Quarter of the City is full of Jollity and Rejoycing for a week together. Some days after come the Commissioners for the Commonalty, from all parts of the Kingdom, who in the behalf of their Cities and Towns make known to His Majesty the universal Joy of the People for their lawful Prince, assuring him of their Fidelity, and of their Service against the Chineses. They name particularly the Chineses, because the Tunquineses have no greater Ene∣mies then they, and for that the Hatred between them is ir∣reconcileable. The King observing the good will of his Peo∣ple, testifies his Acknowledgment in this manner: All that have not time out of mind been Rebels to their lawful Sovereigns, but have constantly taken up Arms for their Defence, are discharged for a year from all Taxes and Im∣positions; and for the rest, who have at any time formerly assisted the Enemy, they are onely exempted for six moneths. All Prisoners for Debt partake also of the King's Bounty, so that after the President of the Council has made a Compo∣sition with the Creditors for half the Summe, the King pays the rest. It is a thing almost incredible, what a vast number of Sa∣crifices the King sends to the Temples of his false Gods, to be there offer'd to the Idols. The number of Beasts is said to exceed an hundred thou∣sand, besides the value of a million in Panes of Gold, Tissues, and Silks, to adorn the Idols, and Orange-coloured Calicuts for the Bonzes, and those that attend the Service of the Pa∣gods. Among the rest of these Presents he sends a vast num∣ber of Pieces of blue Calicuts for the poor people that are
kept in the Pagods, as our Poor are kept in Hospitals. The Idolatrous Princes also consume incredible Summes to adorn the Pagods and Images of their false Gods. There are some of them three foot high, all of massy Gold; others of Silver bigger than the Life. The new King after all these Ceremonies are over, takes his time to go and give thanks to his false Deities for his co∣ming to the Crown when the Moon first changes, shutting himself up for the first week with the Bonzes, and living in common with them with a great deal of Frugality. During this time he visits the principal Hospitals, to see how the poor people are us'd, especially the old Folks, whom they have in great Veneration, to whom he distri∣butes new Alms; for naturally the Tunquineses are very charitable. To conclude, he makes choice of some fair Situation, where he orders the building of a new Pagod, which he devotes to some of his Idols. Thus his Devotion being ended, upon the first day of the second Quarter, he mounts one of his Elephants of War, attended by all the Officers of his Court on Horse-back, and ten or twelve thousand men on foot, chosen out of the whole Army to attend him. All the second Quarter the whole Court says in a certain Plain, where are three Houses set up, one for the King, one for the Constable, and one for the President of the Council; with a world of Huts for the rest. There are also several small Cabins set up, which are not covered and closed but upon one side, which they turn as the Wind blows; and these are the places where they dress their Vi∣ctuals: For at that time the King allows two meals a day to all his Attendants. Through this Plain runs the River of—which is very broad in that place. Upon this River are several Galleys richly gilded and painted, but especially the Ad∣miral, which exceeds all the rest in Maginificence. The Prow, the Poop, the Ropes, the Oars, but onely that part which goes into the water, glitter all with Gold; the Ben∣ches very ingeniously painte the Rowers well clad. For there the Rowers are all Souldiers and Freemen, contrary to the Custom in Europe. The Souldiers in their youth are taught to handle their Oars, and have somewhat better Pay than the Land-Souldiers. The Galleys are not so big as
ours, but they are longer, and cut the water better. While the King stays in this place, he diverts himself with seeing these Galleys row one against another. In the Evening the Rowers come ashoar with their Captains to kiss the King's Hand, and they that have behav'd themselves most stoutly and nimbly, carry off the Marks of his Bounty. The seven days being past, the King calls before him all the Souldiers of the Galleys with their Officers, and gives them two moneths Wages extraordinary, as he does to his Land-Souldiers. 'Tis a wonderful thing to behold the vast num∣ber of Fireworks which they throw about, as well upon the Land as upon the Water. For my Brother, who has been present at all these Shews, has told me, that for these seven days together you would think the Air and Water all on fire. Being at Bantam I once saw one of these artificial Firework-Shews which the Tunquineses that were there plaid off before the King, and I must confess it was quite another thing from what we make in Europe. The seven days being past, the King returns to the City in the same order, and with the same pomp, as he went forth; and being come to his Palace, he goes directly to the Apartment of his Princesses, where none but his Eu∣nuchs accompany him, where he stays all the rest of the moneth. Every Evening he diverts himself with new Fire-works, which are plaid off before the Womens Lodgings; where also the Eunuchs, together with the Comedians and Mummers, contribute to divertise the Ladies.
CHAP. XIV. Of the Funeral Pomp of the Kings of Tunquin, and of their manner of Burying their Dead. WHen the King of Tunquin dies, he is presently Embalm'd and laid in a Bed of State, where for sixty five days the People have liberty to come and see him. All that time he is serv'd as he was when he was alive; and when the Meat is taken from be∣fore the Body, one half is given to the Bonzes, and the other half to the Poor. So soon as the King hath breath'd his last gasp, the Constable gives notice thereof to the Go∣vernours of Provinces, and orders them how long they shall Mourn. All the Military Mandarins and Judges wear Mourning generally three years, the King's Houshold nine moneths, the Nobility six, and the meaner sort three moneths. Du∣ring these three years there is a Cessation from all Diver∣tisements, except those that attend the Ceremony of the King's Advance or Elevation to the Throne. All the Vi∣ands which are serv'd up to the King are vernish'd with Black. The King cuts his Hair, and covers his Head with a Bonnet of Straw, as do likewise all the Princes and Coun∣sellors of State; neither do they leave off that Habit till the King's Body be in the Galley which is to carry him to his Enterment. Three Bells which hang in one of the Tow∣ers of the Palace, never leave tolling from the King's ex∣piring till the Corps be put into the Galley. The third day after his Decease all the Mandarins repair to Court, to testi∣fie their sorrow which they have for the Death of the de∣ceased King, and ten days after that the People are allow∣ed to see the Body lie in State, till it be put into the Galley. During the sixty five days that the Body is thus expos'd, the Constable is busie in preparing for the Funeral Pomp. From the Palace to the place where the Galleys wait for the Body, it is about two days Journey, and all the way
The Order observ'd in the March of the Fu∣neral Pomp at the Interment of the Kings of Tunquin. 1. Two Messengers of the Chamber proclaim the deceased King's Name; each of them bears a Mace, the Head whereof is full of combustible stuff for Artificial Fire or Fusées. 2. Next proceed Twelve Elephants; on each of the four fore∣most is one bearing the King's Standard. Then follow four other Elephants, with Wooden Turrets on their Backs, and in every one of these are Six Men, some being armed with Musquets, others with Fire Lances. The four last Elephants do severally carry a kind of Cage; some of which are on all sides shut up with Glass Windows, the other with a sort of Grates; the first being of a Square, the other having six sides and facing. 3. Then rides the Master of the Horse, attended with two Pages on Horse-back. 4. Twelve Horses are led by the Bridle two and two, by as many Captains of the Guard. The Harness of the first Six Horses is very rich, the Bit, and all the Furniture of the Bridle and Saddle are of pure Gold, the Saddles are embroydered likewise with Gold: But the Six other Horses Harness is all cover'd over with Gold Plates. 5. The Chariot which bears the Mausolee, wherein is the King's Corps, is dragged by Eight Stags trained to this Service. Each of these Stags is led by a Captain of the Life Guard. 6. Then follows the new King afoot clad in White Satten, with a Straw Cap on his Head. If he hath any Brothers, they attend on him in the like Attire; and they are surrounded with Musicians and Players on the Hoboys, and other Instruments. 7. There proceeds afterwards Six Princesses in White Satten, who carry Meat and Drink for the deceased King. These are at∣tended
by two Ladies of Honour in Purple Garments; and about these Ladies are several Musicians. 8. Eight Princes of the Royal Bloud go in Purple Garments with Straw Hats. 9. Four Governours of the four chief Provinces of the King∣dom, each bearing a Stick on his Shoulder, on which hangs a Bag full of Gold and several Perfumes; and these Bags contain the Presents which the several Provinces make unto the deceased King, for to be buried with his Corps, that he may make use of the same in the other World. 10. Two Chariots go next, each drawn by Eight Horses, and every Couple being led by Two Men. In each Chariot is a Coffer or Trunk full of Bars of Gold and other Riches, for the deceased King's use in the Life to come. 11. A great Crowd of the King's Officers, and of the Nobility, do follow this Funeral Pomp, some afoot and some on horse-back, ac∣cording to their Offices and Qualities. Place this Page 46.
Representation of the Waggons and Boates which in forme of a Convoy carry the Beasts and provision necessarry for the sustenance of those end the Funeral Pompe at the interrment of ye Kings of Iuquin from Choco to Bodlego where the body is put in a Galley to be conveyd to ye Sepul
A Continuation of the Order observed at the Funeral Pomp of the Kings of Tunquin, setting out from the City of Bodlego. The King's Body is put into a Galley, which is drawn up the Ri∣ver. This River is increased by several Brooks that come down from the Mountains, and it runs through barren and Desart Coun∣tries. In some of these places they are wont to bury the Corps very privately; for six onely of the chief Eunuchs of the Court are to know where the King hath been buried. An Oath is tendered to them ne∣ver to reveal the place. And this is done perhaps on some Religious Motive, and likewise through Fear, that the Treasures which are buried by him should be digged up. These Riches are ordinarily some Massy Bars of Gold and Silver, as likewise some Pieces of Cloth of Gold and Silver, and such kinds of other rich Furnitures, which he is to make use of (as they say) when he hath need of them in the other World. Many Lords and Ladies of the Court will needs be buried Alive with him, for to serve him in the places where he is to go. I have observed in passing through the Estates of the Raja or Prince of Velouche, which border on the Easterly parts of the Kingdom of Visapour, that the Wives suffer themselves to be buried Alive near their deceased Husbands, instead of being burned, as they practise in other Provinces of the Indies. A. Here you see the Prospect of the City of Bodlego. B. The Galley where the King's Corps is. C. Two Galleys do carry the Lords who go to be buried Alive with the King. That which is grated about is full of Ladies, who likewise offer themselves to be interred Alive with him. D. Other Galleys, wherein are the Treasures which are to be buried with the Corps. Place this next to, The Order in the March of the Funeral Pomp, &c.
spread with Violet-colour'd Calicut, which is the King's Colour. But in regard the King and all the Court march afoot both going and coming, they make it seventeen days Journey. At every quarter of a Leagues end are set up Huts, where is ready prepar'd Water to drink, and Fire to light their Tobacco. After the Pomp is over, and that the King is returned home, the Cloth is taken up and given to the Bonzes. As to the order of their March it is thus: The two men that go formost of all, are the two Ushers of the Door of the King's Chamber, who go repeating aloud the Name of the deceased King, carrying each of them a Mace of Arms, the bole whereof is full of artificial Fireworks. The twelve that follow, are the twelve chief Officers of the Galley, which draw the Tomb whereon the King's Name is written. Then follows the grand Squire on Horseback, attended by two others. Next appear twelve led Horses, which are led two by two, six of which have their Bridles enrich'd with thin Plates of Gold, and their Saddles embroydered. The other six with Bridles of Gold, and Housses embroidered, and fring'd about with a Gold and Silver Fringe; every Horse being led by two men. Next to them follow twelve Elephants, four which carry each of them a man carrying a Standard; four others which carry each of them a Tower with six men apiece, some with Mus∣quets, others with Fire Lances; the four last carry each of them a kind of a Cage, of which one is made with Glass Windows before and upon each side; the other like a kind of a Lattice, and the other with four kinds of Ruffs: and these are the King's Elephants which he rode upon when he went to the Wars. Behind them follow eight Horses, eve∣ry one of them led by a Captain of the Guard, who draw the Herse. The new King, and his Brothers if he have any, or the Princes of the Bloud, follow the Herse, clad in Robes of White Satten, which is their Mourning Colour. Lastly follow two Chariots, each one drawn by eight Hor∣ses, and carrying two Coffers, wherein are the Panes of Gold, Bars of Silver, rich Tissues and Habits, which are to be buried with the Body of the deceased King.
The Funerals of the Tunquineses. AS fer the ordinary Funerals of the Tunquineses, they are more or less pompous, according to the Quality of the Persons. At their Enterments they use great store of artificial Fire∣works, which are the Companions as well of their Sorrow as their Joy. They set upon the Tomb of the deceased good store of Victuals and Comfitures, out of a belief that the dead are the better for them. For their Priests keep them in that blind Error for their own advantage, and so well order their business, that there is nothing left by morn∣ing. The same thing is practised by the Chineses at Bata∣via, where they have a place without the Town to bury their dead, which puts me in mind of this Story: Every evening the Guard is relieved as well in the City as in the Fortress. At the same time also they put forth eight Souldi∣ers and a Corporal at each Gate of the City, who go the Rounds about the Walls of the City, and as far as within Ca∣non-shot of the Walls, being fearful of being surprised by the King of Mataran, or Bontam, their Capital Enemies. Now because the Chineses burying place lay in the Walk of these Souldiers, when they saw the Provant upon one of the Tombs, took it away to their Guard, and there feasted them∣selves. The Chinese Priests, that usually came about mid∣night to take away the Victuals, finding themselves several times bereaved of their Expectations, and suspecting the Souldiers belonging to the Holland Garrison, first complain∣ed to the General and Council; but that not taking effect, they resolved to poison both the Meat and the Drink, to prevent the like Fraud for the future. This took so good effect, that afterwards many of the Dutch Souldiers being poisoned, deterr'd the rest from any more such Licorish At∣tempts.
CHAP. XV. Of the Religion and Superstition of the Tunquineses THe Tunquineses as to matters of Religion are divided into three Sects: The first takes its original from an ancient Philosopher called Confutius, whose Me∣mory is very famous over all China, and the neighbouring Countries. Their Doctrine asserts that Man is compos'd of two parts, the one fine and subtil, the other material and gross; and that when Man dies, the subtiler part goes into the Air, and the grosser part stays in the Earth. This Sect maintains the use of Sacrifices, and adores the seven Planets. But among all their Gods and Idols they have four in parti∣cular veneration; the Names of these Gods are Rauma, Be∣tolo, Ramonu, and Brama. They have a Goddess also, whose Name is Satisbana, which is she whom the Women adore; but for the King and the Mandarins, especially the more stu∣dious sort, they adore the Heavens. The second Sect had for its Founder a certain Hermite called Chacabout, and is followed by the most part of the meaner people. He has taught them the Transmigration of Souls, and has enjoyn'd his Followers to observe 10 Commandments. The first is, That they shall not kill. 2. That they shall not steal. 3. That they shall not defile their Bodies- 4. That they shall not lye. 5. That they shall not be un∣faithful in their words. 6. That they shall restrain their in∣ordinate Desires. 7. That they shall do injury to no man. 8. That they shall not be great Talkers. 9. That they shall not give way to their Anger. 10. That they shall labour to their utmost to get Knowledge. As for them that design to live a Religious Life, they must renounce the Delights of this Life, be charitable to the poor, overcome their Passions, and give themselves up to Medita∣tion. He taught moreover, that after this Life there were ten distinct places of Joy and Torment: and that the Con∣temners of this Law should feel Torments proportionable
to their Offences, without any end of their Torments. That they that endeavour'd to fulfill his Law, and had fail'd in any point, they should wander in divers Bodies for 3000 years before they entered into happiness. But that they who had perfectly obeyed his Law, should be rewarded without suffering any change of Body. And that he himself had been born ten times, before he enjoyed the Bliss which he possessed, not having in his first Youth been illuminated with that Knowledge which he afterwards attained. This Chacabout was one of the greatest Impostors that ever was in Asia, having spread his Opinions over all the Kingdom of Siam, over a great part of the Provinces of Japon, and from thence into Tunquin, where he died. The third Sect is that of Lanthu, to whose Fables the Ja∣ponneses and Chineses give great credence, but the Tunquineses more. He was a Chinese by Nation, and one of the great∣est Magicians in the East. He made a great many Disciples, who to authorize this black Impostor, and the more to im∣pose upon the people, made them believe that the Birth of Lanthu was miraculous, and that his Mother carried him in her Womb, without losing her Virginity, seventy years. He taught much of Chacabout's Doctrine; but that which won the Hearts of the people was, that he still exhorted the Grandees to build Hospitals in all Cities where there had been none before. Insomuch that several of the Nobility betook themselves to those places to look after the Sick, as did also a great number of the Bonzes for the same reason. While my Brother was there, the Choüa, a great Enemy to these Vagabonds, sent for a great number of Bonzes and Says, or idle Fellows, and picking out the strongest and best proportion'd, sent them away to the Frontiers for Soul∣diers. 'Tis the Custom of the Tunquineses to adore three things in their Houses: The first is the Hearth of their Chimney made of three Stones The second is an Idol which they call Tiensa, which is the Patroness of Handicrafts, as Sculp∣ture, Painting, Goldsmith's work, &c. So that when they put forth a Child to learn any of those Trades, before they let him work they set up an Altar, and sacrifice to this Idol, to the end he may infuse into the Lad wit and aptness to learn. The third is the Idol Buabin, which they implore
when they design to build an House. For then they erect an Altar, and send for the Bonzes and Says to sacrifice to this Idol. To this purpose they make great preparation of all sorts of Viands, and then present him with several gilt Papers, wherein are written several Magic words, endea∣vouring by that means that he may not suffer any misfortune to befall the House they are going to build. There are some Tunquineses that adore the Heaven, others the Moon, and others the Stars. There are also some that adore five parts of the Earth, making a fifth part in the middle of that which is known to us, and to them also, but confusedly. When they worship them, they have for each of the parts a particular Colour. When they adore the Northern part, they clothe themselves in black; and the Dishes and Table whereon they lay their Sacrifices are like∣wise black. When they worship the South their Habit is red; when the East, green; when the West, white; and when they adore the middle of the World, they wear Yellow. They offer Offerings likewise to Trees, Elephants, Horses, Cows, and almost to all other sorts of Animals. They that stu∣dy the Chinese Characters are accustomed every fifth moneth of the year, to sacrifice for the Souls of the dead who were never buried. They believe that by so doing their Under∣standings shall be more enlightned for the apprehending of all things. Every year, at the beginning of the year, they have a great Solemnity, to honour after their death those who in their life-time have done any noble action, and were re∣nowned for their Valour, reckoning in that number those that have been so hardy as to rebel against their Princes, as being men of Courage. Three days before this great So∣lemnity, which is perform'd in a large Field, they set up several Altars, some for the Sacrifices, others for the Names of the Illustrious Men whom they design to honour. The Eve before above 40000 Souldiers spend the night in this Plain, where all the Princes and Mandarins are ordered to meet with their Elephants and led Horses, and the King himself goes thither in person. After they have finished all their Sacrifices, and burnt good store of Incense to the Honour of the dead, the King and all the Mandarins make three pro∣found
Reverences where the Altars are; then the King shoots with his Bow and Arrows five times against the Al∣tars, where lie the Names of those that were so rash as to rebel against their Sovereigns. After that the great Guns go off, and the Souldiers give three Volleys of small Shot, to put all the Souls to flight. Then they burn all the Al∣tars, and a great number of gilt Papers, which were made use of at the Sacrifices; concluding all with a most hideous shout of all the Souldiery. Which done, the Bonzes, Says, and such like people, come and devour the Meat that was made use of for the Sacrifices. The first and fifteenth days of the Moneth 'tis a wonder∣ful thing to hear the Chiming Din of their great Bells. For those are the more especial Holydays set apart for the Wor∣ship of their Gods, and all the Bonzes and Says give them more than ordinary Worship upon those days, redoubling their Prayers, and repeating upon those days every one of them a strange kind of Charm six times over. At these times several people bring Meat and Drink to the Sepul∣chres of their Kindred, to sacrifice for the good of their Souls to eat. The Bonzes fail not to be there, and when the others have paid their Devoirs the Bonzes fall to, and what they cannot eat they give to the poor. But for all the au∣stere Lives of these Bonzes and Says, neither the King nor the Mandarins make any account of them, so that they are in credit onely with the common people. In the Kingdom of Tunquin, where the great Cities have several Pagods, there is hardly a Town or Village that has not one, and for every Pagod at least two Bonzes and two Says. But there are some Pagods that maintain forty Bonzes and as many Says, who live in common under a Superiour, they keep to the Doctrine of Chacabout, and a Goat is the Idol which they adore. They wear about their Necks a kind of Necklace, consisting of 100 Beads, very big and made of Wood. In their Hands they carry a Staff, which is headed with a Bird of varnish'd Wood. They beg for their living, and are not like the Bonzes in other Kingdoms, who beg Alms as it were their due; these on the contrary use all the modesty and humility that may be, never taking more than is needful for them: and if they have any thing to spare, they give it to the poor Widows or Orphans that cannot get
he Representation Of The Pagods Or Temples Of The Idolators In Tunquin, With The Figures Of Their Dieties, & Their Different s;turs Which They Ʋse When They Doe Penance, And Accomplish Their Superstitiuos Ʋowes▪ Or When They Practise Their agic Imposturs Which They Are Much Addicted Nj. Thaibout. 2. Thaiphou Thoui. 3. Bagoti, Magitians, And Witches
their living. Their Orders permit them to marry, provi∣ded they leave their Monastery. They assist at the Funerals of great men, where they say a kind of Orizon, sounding their Trumpets and Cornets, while the Bells in their Pagods go at the same time. The Tunquineses also have a great veneration for two Magicians, and one Magicianess. The first of their Magi∣cians, whom they call Tay-bou, makes them believe that he knows the Events of things to come; so that when they have any occasion to marry their Children, build a House, buy Land, or undertake any business of Consequence, they consult this Oracle to know what shall happen to them. The Magician courteously receives them, and with a coun∣terfeit modesty demands of them (for Example) the Age of the person concerned. Then taking into his hands a great Book about three fingers thick, wherein are the Figures of Men, half Men, and several sorts of Land and Water Ani∣mals, of Circles, Triangles, and Squares, he goes to work, and at the same time puts into a Goblet three Pieces of Cop∣per, whereon are engraven several Characters onely up∣on one side. After he has shaken the Pieces in the Cup, he throws them upon the ground as at Cross and Pile; if all the Characters lie undermost he looks no further in his Book, but looks upon it as an unfortunate sign; but if one or two Characters come up, he looks in his Book, and makes the person believe what he pleases. But if all the Characters happen to turn uppermost, then the Magician cries out, that the Party is the most fortunate in the world. The second Magician is called Thay-Phou-Thouy, to whom they have recourse in all their Sicknesses. When any sick person comes to him, he takes a Book full of Figures like the former; onely the Form of the Book is different, for this is not above an inch thick, and about four fingers long, with eight Panes full of Cyphers. If after several Apish tricks which he acts before the sick person to amuse him, he affirms that the Distemper comes from the Devil, he him∣self, together with the sick party and they that brought him, do Homage to the evil spirit: this Homage consists of se∣veral Sacrifices, and the Friends of the sick party present to the Devil, or rather to the Magician, a Table furnish'd with Rice and other Viands. But if after all these Offerings the
sick party do not recover his health, all the Friends and Kindred of the sick party, with as many Souldiers as they can get, surround the sick persons House, and shoot off their Musquets three times, to drive away the Devil. Some∣times the Magician makes the sick party and his Friends be∣lieve, that the God of the Waters is the cause of the Distem∣per, especially if the sick person belongs to the Water, as being a Mariner, Boatman, or Fisherman. And to the end he may be cur'd, and that the appeas'd God may return to his watry Habitation, he orders that all the way from the sick parties House to the next River may be spread with all the Pieces of Stuff which all the Kindred have, and that they set up Huts at such and such distances, and keep in eve∣ry one a several Table furnish'd with all sorts of Viands for 3 days. And all this to oblige the Deity to retire, and to en∣tertain him till he gets home. But the better to know the rise of the Disease, Thay-Phou-Thouy makes them believe, that they must go and consult Thay-Bou, who is the chief Magician, and if he answer that the Souls of the dead have caused the Distemper, the Magician imploys all his tricks and devices to draw to him those mischievous Souls; and when he has got into his Clutches, as he pretends, the Soul that is the Author of the Disease, he shuts him up in a Bottle full of Water till the party be cured; and then breaking the Bottle he sets the Soul at liberty to go about his business. When the party recovers, he makes him and his Friends be∣lieve, that if the Bottle had not been well stopp'd to keep in the Soul, their Kinsman would have died infallibly. The Magicianess, which the Tunquineses also consult, is called Bacoti, and she keeps a great Correspondence with the Devil, to whom, if she has a Daughter, she offers her as soon as she is born, the more to oblige him. If any Mo∣ther bewail the death of her Child, and be desirous to know in what condition the Soul of the Child is in, in the other world, she goes to Bacoti, who to satisfie the Mother pre∣sently falls a beating her Drum, to summon the Soul to come to her, who presently appears, as she pretends, and tells her its Condition whether good or bad. But most commonly she makes the silly Mothers believe that the Soul is happy, and bids them be of good cheer.
The Superstitions of these people are very numerous, but the most remarkable are these: The studious sort of people are very diligent to learn, how by looking in a Mirrour to foretell things to come. There are some that present Aqua Vitae to the dead, and sprinkle their Ashes with it; but this onely upon the Ashes of their Ancestors, from whom at the same time they beg for Health; Honour, and Riches. Others there are, that upon the first day of their year take a piece of Chalk, and make several Figures round, square, and triangular, upon the Threshold and Steps of their Doors. They say those Figures fright away the evil spirits. Some there are that make great Observations upon the Feet of their Hens, and draw strange Conclusions of bad or ill fortune from thence. Others travelling into the Countrey, if they sneeze but once by the way, return to the place from whence they parted in the morning, saying, That had they gone on, some mischief would have certainly befallen them: but if they sneeze twice, they pursue their Journey, never fear∣ing any danger for that day. There are some so superstitious, that going out of their Houses, if they meet a Woman, they return home again for two or three hours; but if they meet a Man, 'tis a good Omen. The first Fruit which they gather at the beginning of the year, is that which the Araguer bears, spoken of in the third Chapter. And this is the first which they eat with great Ceremony, during the first Quarter of their second Moneth. To which purpose they are so possess'd with the Devil, that they poyson one of these Fruits, and give it to a Child to eat, believing that by taking away the life of the poor innocent Child, they shall thrive the better all the year after. When the Moon is eclipsed, they say there is a certain Dragon that assails her, and endeavours with all his might to overcome her, with an intention to devour her. Then to assist the Moon, and to put the Dragon to flight, they discharge their Musquets, ring their Bells, beat up their Drums, and make a hideous noise till the Eclipse be over: and then they believe that they have rescued the Moon, for which they make as great a rejoycing, as if they had ob∣tain'd some eminent Victory over their Enemies.
They are also very superstitious in reference to the hours of the day. They divide the natural day into twelve hours, and to every one they give the name of some Beast, as of a Tiger, a Lion, a Bear, a Horse, a Dragon, an Ape, &c. The Moneths also and Days have their particular Names: and when a Child is born, presently the Father and Kindred go to see the name of the Beast by which the Hour was call'd wherein the Child was born; believing that Animal will prove fatal to it. At the time that my Brother was at the Court at Tunquin, the King then reigning being born in the hour of the Horse, would never give Audience, nor ever stir out of his Palace at that hour, for fear some mischief should befall him at that time. That Prince was so superstitious, that one of his Children dying in the fifth moneth, which bears the name of the Horse, he would never permit him to be enterr'd, but caus'd him to be burnt, and scatter'd his ashes in the Air. This is that which I could gather of most remarkable and most considerable matters concerning the State of the King∣dom of Tunquin, either out of the Manuscripts which my Brother (who died in the Indies) left me, or from the Dis∣course which I have had with the Tunquineses themselves both at Bantam and Batavia.
OF THE ISLAND OF FORMOSA. CHAP. I. How the Hollanders possessed themselves of it, and how it was taken from them by the Chineses. THE Island of Formosa is about Eighty Leagues in compass; so that the Holland∣ers were never in possession of the whole Island, but were onely Masters of four Fortresses, and two and fifty Villages, wherein they could number about four∣teen or fifteen thousand Inhabitants. As for that part which is under the Indians, the best discovery that we can give, is onely such as was made by a young Hollander upon this occasion.
There was in the chief Fort belonging to the Hollanders a young man, imployed there as an under-Factor, who being wild and extravagant, was put out of his place and made a Souldier. He not able to undergo that miserable course of life, resolved with himself rather to die, than live in that mean condition. Thereupon having at several opportuni∣ties made a shift to make up a little Pack of what he thought was most fit for the Mountainiers of the Island, he watch'd his time and stole out of the Fort, and took his way directly toward the Mountains. With these Highlanders he liv'd four years, in which time having learnt the Trade and Lan∣guage of the Countrey, he ventur'd to return to the Holland∣ers again, who received him kindly, as being willing to understand the Government of the People, and by what means they might traffick with them. Whereupon the young man made them this Relation. As for the Government of the People he said, that over every six Villages there was an Overseer with four Counsel∣lors, who administer Justice, and punish the smallest Theft with Death. The Men are crucified; the Women are laid along upon a thick Beam of Wood, and then with a Scimi∣tar their Bodies are divided into three parts. The Men are so punish'd for Theft or Murder, and the Women for Theft or Adultery. If it be a Pety Larceny, not above the value of a Shilling, they give them an hundred Lashes with a Whip, and burn them in the Cheek. They that believe themselves to be unjustly dealt with, whether in Civil or Criminal Causes, enter their Appeal to go to the North East part of the Island, in which division of the Island there stands a City by the Sea-side, where he that commands all the Highlanders resides. At the end of our Moneth of March several of these Highlanders resort to this City, especially the Merchants, who carry along with them all their whole Stock that they had hoarded together the year before in Horns of Oxen, Harts, Bufulo's, and Raw Hides; and then return again at the end of April, bringing back in return of their Commodities Japon and China Stuffs, Clothes, and Linen of the same Countrey, and Gold and Silver Japonese Money, of various Coyns and Value. He told them also, that he believed that in the Mountains near the Sea, there are certain Mines of Gold and Silver, or some River where
they find it in Powder, and that the Japoneses fetch it in their Vessels. He did all he could to discover the truth, but after he had travelled two or three days Journey, the People would let him go no further. For at the end of every three or four hours travel there are Guards set, who examine all Travellers whither they go; neither will they let their own Countrymen pass, but such as go about their Law or to trade. Moreover he told them, that if they would give him Goods to trade withall, as Amber, Coral, Looking Glasses; but chiefly some Skins of the Sea Fish, which is rougher than Seal-skin, he would endeavour to get to the very City it self where the Ships ride. These Skins are greatly esteemed by the Natives to adorn the Scabbards of their Cutlasses and Swords. For usually upon the back of this Fish you shall find nine little Stones, which make a kind of a Rose, eight in a Circle and one in the middle, as you see these nine disposed in their exact order. When the Portuguezes traded onely to Japon, it is incredible how dear they sold these Skins. For if Na∣ture had well set these Stones at an equal distance, and even in bigness, one of these Skins would yield above ten thou∣sand Piasters, and more. This Fish is caught in the Persian Gulph, where I have seen of them, but I saw but very few so perfect as that which I have describ'd, which would in those Countries yield ten thousand Crowns. But to return to the Story; the Governour gave the young man what he desired, and sent him going: but the Chineses soon after expelling the Hollanders out of the Island, it was never known what became of the young man. It may be wondered why Formosa was taken so soon: but here were two Reasons, first the faint-heartedness of the Governour, and secondly his breach of word to a French Souldier of Rouen, call'd Abraham du Puys; for he having served out his time of seven years, desir'd leave to be gone, but the Governour, after he had promis'd him fair at first, at length absolutely refused him. Soon after the Chineses came to besiege the place. The Souldier thus disappointed, and seeing himself coop'd up who might have been free, had the Governour so pleased, studied a fatal revenge upon all his Countrymen; for being by this means grown desperate,
watch'd his opportunity, and flinging himself from the Fort into the Sea, swam directly to the Enemy. The Gover∣nour offered 200 Pieces of Eight to any person that would venture after him, and bring him back dead or alive. A Serjeant accepted his offer, but it was to get loose as the other had done; and so they got both safe into the Enemies Quarters. The Chineses presently carried them to the Ge∣neral Coxima; and he being a person of Valour and Discre∣tion, made very much of them, whereupon they readily and willingly inform'd him of the strength and condition of the Fortress. They also advised him to remove his Batte∣ries to the weakest part of the Town, whereas he was then assailing it where it was most strongly fortified: which if he would do, they assur'd him he should be soon Master of the Fort. The General was thinking a little before they came to have raised his Siege, but upon their encouragement he fell on again according to their direction; and as he was preparing for a general Assault, the Holland Commander, fearful of losing his Life and his Estate, beat a Parley, and surrender'd the place upon Articles. During the Siege the Hollanders made a Salley, but were beaten in again, and fourteen of their men were taken Pri∣soners. The Chineses finding those fourteen men in their power, and remembering how cruel the Hollanders had been to their Nation when they took any of them at Sea, brought the fourteen men all together, put out one eye of each, cut off their Noses, Ears, and one hand, and so sent them back to the Fort, with order to tell the Commander, that the Dutch had taught them that kind of Mercy.
CHAP. II. Of Maurice Island, where they cut Ebony. THE Island call'd Maurice Island lies almost in 84 degrees of Longitude, and 21 degrees of Southern Latitude, being but 2 degrees and 30 minutes from the Tropick of Capricorn, right over against the middle of the great Island of Madagascar, which it has upon the West, from whence it lies 140 Leagues, and is in compass about 60 Leagues. It bears great quantities of Ebony: and here it was that the Hollanders did formerly send their Slaves, their banish'd and condemn'd Persons, to cut that sort of Wood, which is Labour much more severe and cruel than that of Rowing in the Galleys. The whole Island is subject to those violent and outrageous Tempests call'd Ouragans, which nothing can withstand, so that the People are forc'd to dig themselves Holes in the ground, not being able to keep their Huts standing. Neither had the poor Creatures any other Food than a little boil'd Rice, and about a Farthings worth of Salt-fish among four for a whole day. Since that the Price of Ebony being brought very low, the Dutch have forsaken the Island, the Profit not bearing the sorry Expen∣ces which those poor Creatures put them to. So soon as this Tree is cut down it must be sawed into Planks, and then buried seven or eight foot deep in the Earth, which ought to be somewhat moist. There those Planks must lie two years, and sometimes three, if the Wood be very thick. After that the Wood is fit to be wrought up∣on, neither will it splinter or split, and will the sooner ad∣mit of a glittering Polishment. This Maurice Island puts me in mind of a Story, that the Sieur Loocker told me, concerning what befell him in his Voyage from Holland to Batavia in the Year 1643. Cha Abbas the second of that Name, King of Persia, having a great desire to learn to paint, signified to the Hollanders at Hispahan, that he desired them to send into Holland for some
person who was excellent both in Designing and Painting. Thereupon the Chief of the Factory wrote into Holland, and upon his Letters the Company sent away Loocker, to oblige the King; and to do him the greater honour, gave him the charge of Merchant of the Vessel, who is equal with the Captain, during the Voyage; to whom the Wind and Sea∣son was very favourable till they came to the Cape of Good Hope; but after they had doubled the Point, the Pilots bare too much to the North, whereas they should have steered directly East; so that when they had made the Height of the Island of Madagascar, they met with nothing but contrary Winds. For it is observable, that all the year long there blows but one Wind toward Maurice Island; so that a Ship may go thither in eight or nine days, but cannot return in thirty or forty. For you must steer Westward to 30 de∣grees, and from thence Eastward to 14 or 15 degrees, and then you light upon Maurice Island. Five days together the Ship was but rudely handled by the storm; which at length grew so violent, and the Sea so boisterous, that all the great Cabin was broken to pieces, the Beak of the Ship carried away, and the Foremast made unserviceable. Thir∣teen days together they remained in this miserable conditi∣on, toss'd up and down by the Sea and Wind, all which time they never saw the Sun, unable to take any height or ob∣servation where they were. The fourteenth day it cleared up, and the Sun appeared, and then taking the Height they observed themselves to be not far from the Maurice Island, which was very true; for the next day by break of day they found themselves not above two Leagues from the Island; and they found themselves upon the North side of the Island, whereas the Hollanders liv'd upon the South. And there∣fore perceiving that if the Wind did not change, it would be a long time, and that with great difficulty too, before they could fetch a compass about the Island to come to the Fort where the Hollanders were, they call'd a Council, where it was resolved that Loocker with ten Souldiers should be put on shoar, and that he should endeavour to get to the Fort by Land, there to make provision of Water and Refresh∣ments for the rest of the Company, against they could come about. Maurice Island has this advantage, to be furnished with excellent Water, and great store of Goats, Oranges,
Citrons, and other Fruits: but when the Ouragans happen there is not one to be seen upon the Trees, unless onely up∣on those which are shelter'd by the Ebony Boughs, which are thick and strong, and the Trees deeply rooted in the Earth. Loocker thereupon with ten Souldiers was put on shoar in a Shallop, with Provisions for six days. Nor was the Island in that part above eight or ten Leagues broad, which they thought to travel in few days: but the Woods were so thick, that had they not been well provided of Car∣penters Hatchets and Axes, they could never have made their way. The first day they travell'd not above a League, and the next day not above as much more, being still forced to hack their way along with great travel and pains. So that being now weary and spent, they laid themselves upon the ground to repose themselves, and get a little sleep. When they wak'd they heard the voices of several people, which much rejoyced them, believing them to be the Slaves and poor Creatures that were cutting Ebony not far off. Thereupon they fell to work to get as near them as they could: but the Woods proved so thick, that they de∣spair'd of doing any good. Nevertheless the further they advanced, the clearer they could hear the voices of the peo∣ple, some speaking Dutch, others Portuguese. Whereupon Loocker caus'd one of the Souldiers in his company that had a strong voice, to call out in the Portuguese Language, to the people to come and help them. But instead of that they all betook themselves to their heels, and fled to the Commander's Lodge, telling him that there were Devils in the Woods, and that they had call'd to them in the Portugal Language. The Commander seeing both the Souldiers and the Slaves in such a dismal amaze and terror, knew not at first what to think; however he endeavoured to resettle their distraction, and to revive a sort of people that were half dead with fear. The next day he persuaded them to return to their Work, persuading them to lay aside their vain Fears, which proceeded onely from idle Apprehensi∣ons: but they flatly denied him, telling him that they would rather die, than return to be torn in pieces by the Devil. However, others that had not been present at the accident, and therefore gave not so much credit to the report, profer∣ed to see the utmost of this business, provided any one that
had heard the voice would bring them to the place. Away upon this went a good number of them together, and co∣ming to the place fell to work. Now because Loocker and his Companions having labour'd all the night before, were fallen asleep; for a good while the Workmen heard no voice at all, nor so much as any thing stirring, so that they began to laugh at those that had brought them thither, who still obstinately maintained the truth of what they had heard. This Dispute at length began to grow so hot and so loud, that at length they wak'd Loocker and his Fellows, who be∣ing now got nearer to them by means of their last nights la∣bour, heard distinctly every word they said, and notwith∣standing their distress could not chuse but laugh. Soon af∣ter Loocker and the Souldiers call'd out again, Work toward us, they cried, we are Hollanders, come and help us out of the Wood, and we will put an end to the dispute. But the Workmen no sooner heard them, but away they ran for their Lives, and when they came to the Lodge, they were so har'd, so scar'd, and quite out of breath, that the Governour in vain endeavour'd to get the least tittle of a word from them. At length being come to themselves, they assur'd him that it was too true that the Devils were in the Wood, and that the more to deceive and wheedle them, to day they had not onely spoken Portuguese, but Dutch too. This put the Go∣vernour and all into a deep Consternation, insomuch that they were all at their Wits end. But the next morning Loocker and his Gang having made their way through, the Centinel spied them first from the Fort, and by the dis∣charge of his Musquet gave notice of the approach of the Devils. And then it was that the poor affrighted Mortals, laying aside their fears, and going forth to meet their own Shapes, found them to be a company of their Countrymen in distress, whom they then received into their kindness, to give an account of their Misfortunes. Three days after the Ship came into Harbour, though in a miserable condition.
CHAP. III. Of the Grandeur of the General at Batavia, and what befell his Wife and his Niece. THe Company to maintain their Authority and Commerce in the Indies, believe it to be to their advantage, that the General whom they send to Ba∣tavia, and who commands in all the places in Asia where the Dutch traffic, should keep up the Port of a Prince. There is no Cavalry in Europe so well clad or mounted as his; the Horsemen all upon Persian or Arabian Steeds. Nor is his Foot Guard less sumptuous: His Halberdiers wear their yellow Satten Doublets, Scarlet Breeches lac'd with Silver Lace, and their Silk Stockins. But this onely for the General's Guards; for those which they send abroad to their Forts and Garrisons, it is a great pity to see how poorly they are attir'd, and how meanly fed. When the Dutch Fleet arrives at Batavia, the Souldiers which they bring are drawn up in the Parade of the Fortress by the Major, who chuses out the handsomest to remain at Batavia, the rest are sent and distributed into other places. When the Gene∣ral and his Wife go abroad, they always ride in their Coach and six Horses, with six Halberdiers attending at each Boot, and a Troop of Horse and two Companies of Foot for their Guard. The Authority of the General is very great, though he may be sometimes commanded by his Wife: neither is it safe for them that depend upon them, to do or say any thing that may offend them. But for others, who have their Im∣ployments immediately from the Company, they never ob∣lige themselves to be so circumspect. For truth whereof I will relate the following pleasant Story. The Wife of General Matsuker having one day underta∣ken to play upon a Captain of a Ship call'd the Lucifer, and to laugh at him, for having lost a Bale of Goods which had been seized by the Company, in regard no particular person is permitted to trade. The Captain nettled at her Discourse▪ resolved to be revenged. Nor was it long before he found
the means; for being commanded away for Maslipatan in the Kingdom of Goleonda, where being arriv'd, laden, and ready to set Sail to return to Batavia, the chief of the Factory desired him to take in four Bales of Goods for the General's Wife, as belonging to her, and to deliver them privately to her. This was Nuts to the Captain: so that being return'd to Batavia, he went he went immediately to visit the Ge∣neral, and deliver him the Letters which concerned the Car∣go. Immediately according to custom the General invited him to dinner, at which time it is usual for the General to inform himself of the Condition of the Factory. Among the rest of the questions the General asked the Captain whe∣ther he had any Counterband Goods aboard, or any that were not upon the Company's sole account. To which the Captain answered, that all the Goods belonged to the Company, except four Bales, which the chief Factor at Maslipatan had particularly recommended to his care, as be∣longing to Madam General. This being publickly spoken in the presence of a great many that were at Table, the Lady that was not aware of such a blow, was not a little surpriz'd, and the General himself was not a little in wrath, sternly ask'd her how she durst undertake to trade without his knowledge. Presently she denied the whole matter, and averred that the Captain was mistaken, and took her for some other person. But the General sent for the Fiscal, and or∣der'd him to go forthwith with the Captain, and fetch the four Bales ashoar; which being done, he order'd further that the Goods should be carried into the public Hall of the Town House, with a Writing fix'd upon them, that who∣ever own'd those Goods should come and claim them; but no body came. So that the Captain had the pleasure to see the Lady in a delicate raging passion, and the Goods dispos'd of to the Fiscal, and the Poor of the Hospital. The same General and his Wife having no Children, they began to consider to whom they should leave their Estates. At length the General bethought himself of a Niece he had at Amsterdam, and therefore wrote to the Directors of the Company to send her to him. This Niece of his cried Pot∣herbs and Onions about the street to get her living; in which Calling she was at last found out, and brought to the Dire∣ctors, who presently changed her Habit, and of a Crier of
Cabbage made her a little Lady; who though she were of such a low condition, was not without a good proportion of natural Beauty. The Fleet being ready to depart, there was a Cabin built on purpose for this Niece, and the Company having pre∣sented her with several pieces of Tissue and Silks; recom∣mended her to C. Rosse, the Viceadmiral's care. This Cap∣tain had been several times at the Indies before, and was both rich and a Batchelour: so that when the Ship was out at Sea, he fail'd not to shew all the respects imaginable to this Niece. Now this young Virgin not being accustomed to the Sea, upon the least gust of Wind she was half dead; and all that time the Captain would not stir from her Bed-side, for fear any Accident should befall her. And as he was thus diligent not to stir from her Bed-side in fowl, 'tis verily believ'd he was seldom far from it in fair weather; and that instead of sitting by her Bed-side, he sometimes got fairly into it. But whether he were within or without, most certain it is, that before Madam Niece arrived at Ba∣tavia, she found her self to be with child, though she so discreetly concealed it, that none in the Vessel percei∣ved it. The Vessel had no sooner passed the Strait that lies to∣ward Bantam, but Madam General with a great number of her Friends in several little Barques came out to meet Ma∣dam Niece, and were not a little surprized to find her to be a person so well clad and handsom withall, without any appearance of what she had been before. A Coach and six Horses, and six Halberdiers, a Troop of Horse, and a Company of Foot, waited upon the shoar for Madam General. And thus was madam Niece conduct∣ed to the Fort with great pomp, and as kindly received by Monsieur General. Some few days after several of the Gal∣lants of Batavia came picquiering to the House to see Ma∣dam Niece; and so it was, that all being smitten, every one desired her in Marriage: but both Uncle and Aunt were deaf to all their Suits, as having design'd her to a young rich Merchant, who was then out of the way. C. Rosse laugh'd in his sleeve at the bustle that was made, and still continued his former respects and double Diligences, which were the more willingly permitted him in regard of the great care of
their Niece, for which the Uncle and the Aunt thought themselves oblig'd to him during their Voyage. But at length seeing such a swarm of Sweethearts about her, he thought it but charity to undeceive so many poor Gulls, and without further ceremony to go to her Aunt, and to demand her Niece for his Wife. The She General who look'd up∣on herself to be a kind of a Queen at Batavia, look'd upon it as a high offence and indignity for a Tarpaulin Captain of a Ship to dare to make her such a Proposal, having alrea∣dy refus'd such Matches, persons that might come to be Privy Counsellors of all the Indies. Nevertheless within a day or two after the Captain renewed his Charge, but then in a Majestic Fury she utterly forbid him the Fort. He ta∣king little notice of her rage, goes to the General, and after some Discourse makes the same Proposal, and receives the same Answer. But then the Captain gave the Husband such a Bone to pick, that he would not give the Wife; Sir, said he, twice already have I demanded your Niece in Mar∣riage, this is now the third time that I make the same de∣mand; if you refuse me, you shall ask me four times before I accept of her: and so saying briskly left him. The Gene∣ral reflecting upon the Captain's words, went to his Wife and told her the Story, who guessing at the effects of a long Voyage Familiarity, call'd Madam Niece into examination: She not being us'd to Dissimulation confess'd the whole mat∣ter, and without any more to do was married to the Cap∣tain, to the great wonder of the whole City, till the birth of a Boy at the end of six moneths unfolded the Riddle. But this lying in was her ruin; for about five or six days after, the Mother and the Nurse being ill, the chief Chirurgeon of the Fort order'd them to take a little Cremor Tartar; and to that purpose sent a young man to the Master Chirurgeon of the Town, to send him two quantities of Cremor Tartar in two Papers. He being drinking with his Friends, sends a young Barber newly come from Holland, to put up the two quantities according to direction. But the Barber mistook the Glass, and put up Sublimate instead of Cremor Tartar. So the two Women taking their Doses, dissolved in two Silver Cups of fair Water, died in 24 hours after.
CHAP. IV. Of General Vanderbroug, and of the Original of the City of Batavia GEneral Vanderbroug was of Anverse, and having stu∣died in the Jesuits College, retained some tincture of Learning, which he endeavoured to improve as much as his business would give him leave. While he was General he caus'd the Alcoran to be translated out of Arabic into Dutch. He was also a man of courage, and se∣veral times expos'd himself to great hazards for the Service of the Company, as you shall see by the following Re∣lation. After the Hollanders had taken several Prizes from the Portuguezes by Sea, they wanted a place of Retreat, where they might repair their endamaged Ships, and repose after the toils of the Sea. At first they cast their eyes upon the Island of Java, in that place where the English had built a small Convenience for their Trade. There is a Road in that part, where Vessels ride securely all the year, into which a River discharges it self that will receive Shallops of good burthen, for above a thousand Paces. The Water of this River is most excellent; for being carried never so far to Sea, it never stinks, nor engenders Worms; which can only be said of the Thames and Ganges besides. The Hollanders therefore came and lay upon the point of a River, over against the place where the English had their small House. They had with them then the greatest part of the Ships which they had in the Indies, laden with those great Bales of Cloth which come from Bengale and the Coast of Surat, so big that a dozen men can hardly manage them▪ These Bales they landed, and of them made a kind of Forti∣fication, planting a good number of great Guns between them: For they never wanted great Guns ever since they traded alone to Japon, the onely Kingdom of the World abounding in Copper; from whence they brought prodigi∣ous quantities to Macao and Goa, where they cast their Artil∣lery.
Thus the Hollanders thought that by Sea no body could endamage their small Fortification, made of Bales of cloth, which was defended by their Vessels which they had in the Road: But by Land they were afraid that the King of the Island, viz. either of Materan or Bantam, might di∣sturb them. Observing therefore the Situation of the Island, which on that side was all covered with Woods, which reached on that side within a League of the Sea; and that where they ended, to the Shoar there was no other way but a Bank, which separated the Marsh from the River: So that the Hollanders the better to secure themselves against the two Kings, resolved to raise a Tower upon the Bank. In this Tower they planted several Culverins and small Pieces, cramm'd with artificial Wildfire, and every evening relieved their Guards. The King of Materan perceiving this, and believing that the Hollanders would not stop here, advanced a powerful Army to pull down the Tower. To which purpose he brought with him great Chains of Iron, and Cables made of the Coco Flax; believing that by the favour of the Night, having got his Chains and Ropes about the Tower, by the strength of his Men and Elephants he might easily pull it down. But having fail'd in his Enterprize, and for that the Hollanders Artillery kill'd him abundance of Men, he retreated with his Army. But it was not long be∣fore he return'd again with a more powerful Force by Land, and also a great Fleet of small Vessels to assist him by Sea. With these Forces he gave a furious Onset a second time, which the Hollanders with no less vigour sustained, and beat him off. But nothing discouraged with his loss, he resolved to give a third Onset, onely he staid some few days in expe∣ctation of more Forces. In the mean while one of the most considerable Captains of his Army was accus'd to the King not to have done his Duty: though seasonably advertiz'd that the King was re∣solv'd to seize upon his person, and cut him to pieces. For you must know, that among the Javans when any person has merited Death, they tie the Offender all along upon a great piece of Timber, and the next Lord or great person that has a mind to try the goodness of his Scimitar, comes and cuts the Body into four pieces, the first stroak being made upon the Brest, the second upon the Pit of the Stomach, the
third upon the lower part of the Belly. The four pieces if they be Men, are burnt; if Women, thrown to the Dogs, which they keep for that purpose. For the Javans never burn any person. This Javanese Lord therefore knowing what he was to trust to, made his escape to the Hollanders, and was kindly received by Vanderbroug. To ingratiate himself, he told the Dutch General all the King's Designs in reference to the carrying the place; where he would make his Onset, and what number of men he had. This however did not suffi∣ciently chear up the General, who knew his own weakness. So that the Javanese perceiving him still pensive, I find (said he) that thou art afraid of the King's strength, and reason thou hast, but be rul'd by me: Thou art not ignorant that the Javanners are rigid Observers of the Law of Mahomet, and that if any Uncleanness from a Christian hand falls upon their Clothes, they fling them away, and spend six whole days in washing themselves, before they believe themselves clean. Hear then, said he; let all the Ordure and Dung of the People that are with thee be heaped in a place together, and made fluid in Pots for that purpose; and when they mount their Ladders, spare not for Showres of that Liquor, and I warrant ye they will retreat faster than they came on. Farther continued he; I know that the points of their Ar∣rows and Cric's are poison'd, and that this poison is so strong, that whoever are wounded therewith die suddenly, unless they have recourse to this onely Remedy; which is to preserve their own Excrement, and to dry it to powder; and when they find themselves wounded, to take a little of the powder, and drink it off in a small Beer-glass of Water. The General observing what the Javan Lord had said, when the Enemy mounted their Ladders, lustily besmear'd them with the Liquor, which he caus'd to be prepar'd against their coming; so that instead of gaining the tops of their Ladders, they made all the haste they could down again; but being hindred by those that follow'd them, they threw themselves headlong to the ground; by which means several of them were maimed, and several kill'd outright. Thus the Army disbanded in a moment, and the Emperour was the first that took his flight. Vanderbroug observing the disorderly Re∣treat of the Enemy, took a small Party with him, and pur∣su'd
the flying Enemy, who being enclosed by those in the Fort, that sally'd out upon them, were miserably cut in pie∣ces. But the General having left the greatest part of his men, and returning onely with a small and very inconsider∣able Company, the Javanners who had hid themselves in the Mershes for fear, resum'd courage, and suddenly fell up∣on him in his return, and so encompass'd him on every side, that it was impossible for him to escape. However they de∣fended themselves stoutly for a while, but being wounded with the Arrows and Cric's of the Indians, and not being provided of the forementioned Antidote, they died imme∣diately. The General was taken alive, not so much as wounded; for as he told me afterwards himself, he found they had no desire to kill him. So soon as he was taken they carried him to the Emperour, who as soon as he saw him bid him not fear any thing, but told him withall, that it was his pleasure, that he should command his Men to quit the Fort and Tower, and be gone; otherwise that he would make both him, and all those that should fall into his Hands, perpetual Slaves. At the same time the Empe∣rour with his principal Officers, and the General with a good Guard, came to the Foot of the Wall of the Tower, where the General in the Malay Language, laying before them his own misfortune, and the improbability of their holding out long, commanded them to quit the Fort, after they had embarqued whatever they saw fitting, but onely 6 Pieces of small Canon, 200 Bullets, and 500 Quintals of Powder. The Emperour was overjoy'd to hear what the General said, and thought himself sure of the Fort and Tower. But then the General turning to the Emperour, told him, that none of his men understood Malay, and that therefore it would be convenient for him to repeat the same in Flemish. Which being granted, he spoke to the Souldiers in Flemish, and ordered them quite the contrary; that is to say, that they should not be Traitors to their Countrey, but hold out the place till death, not minding what became of him; and to that end, that they should bid the Infidels forthwith re∣tire, or else they would immediately fire all their Guns up∣on them. The Emperour astonish'd at their Resolution re∣treats, and carries the General with him. Being thus re∣tir'd, the General made him believe that he would find a
means to write to the Company, to give them an account of what had pass'd, and that he was confident they would give such order for an Accommodation, as should satisfie His Majesty, which satisfi'd the Emperour for that time. In the mean while the General found an opportunity to get into a small Barque, and to get to the Fort, where he was joy∣fully receiv'd. This Recital I had from his own mouth. The General having done this and several other eminent Services for the Company, and acquitted himself with Re∣putation and a fair Estate, was desirous to return home, where the Prince of Orange, and several of the States had no less a desire to see him. Streight he took up his Habita∣tion at the Hague, and for a good while liv'd splendidly, gave great Presents and Entertainments to the Prince, and several other Grandees of Holland, by which means he ran himself into so great an Expence, that he was forc'd to de∣sire of the Company, that he might return into their Ser∣vice. One day the Prince of Orange asking him what Rarities he had brought out of the Indies, he call'd for five Silver Plates, and setting them upon the Table, drew out five little Bags out of his Pocket, and emptied a several Bag up∣on a several Plate; which surpriz'd not onely the Prince, but several others of the States then present, to see such a number of Diamonds and other Jewels of a vast value. It was not without some difficulty that he was again en∣tertain'd by the Company; but at length they sent him Ad∣miral of two Ships to Batavia, where being arriv'd, the Ge∣neral and Consuls made him Admiral of the Fleet that was just bound for the Coast of Coromandel, Surat, and Persia. Being return'd to Batavia, General Vandyme and the Coun∣cil sent him to Malaca, which the Hollanders then besieg'd, and where they found a stouter resistance than they imagin'd. There in an assault upon the Town he received a slight Wound, of which he was quickly cur'd; but soon after he fell sick, and died before the Town was surrendred.
CHAP. V. Of the Country about Cochin, and how the Holland General crown'd one of the Indian Princes. ALL the Countrey about Cochin is planted for the most part with that sort of Tree which they call Cocos, the Fruit whereof produces that sort of Wine which the Inhabitants call Tary, whereof they make their Strong Water. They mingle this Wine with course black Sugar unrefin'd, together with the Bark of a Tree which bears nothing but Thorns. This Bark causes the Tary and Sugar to boil and ferment like new Wine. When the Tary and the Sugar have fermented for above seven or eight hours, they distill them in an Alembic, and make Strong Water, which is stronger or smaller, by how much the more often or seldomer it is distill'd. Besides the Coverture of these Trees the whole Country is full of Cows; for they are all Idolaters in this Country, that onely worship their Cows for their Gods, feed upon their Milk, and eat nothing that has Life. When you leave the Countries of these Princes, which they call Rajas, travelling toward the North East you enter into the Territories of the Raja of Velouche, which are of a large extent. He and all his Subjects being Idolaters, un∣less it be about nine or ten thousand poor People call'd Chri∣stians of S. John, as being baptiz'd after the same manner that S. John baptiz'd the People in the Wilderness. After the taking of Cochin, of which we have given a full Relation in our Indian Travels, General Vangous, who com∣manded at the Siege, became so haughty that he despis'd all the other Officers, as well Military as those that belonged to the Government and Justice of the City. However to recompence one of the Raja's by whose means he had ta∣ken the City, he persuaded him to quit the Name of Raja, and to assume the Title of King, that he might have the Honour to set the Crown upon his Head. To this end he made great inquiry through his whole Army for a Gold∣smith,
and having found out one that undertook it, and caus'd him to make a Crown of massie Gold, that weigh'd near ten Marks, which I believe the Raja found more in∣convenient and weighty upon his Head, than an old Muc∣kender with three corners bound about his Head, which is the mark of the Raja's Sovereignty. While they were making this Crown there were great preparations for the Ceremony: It was performed in a Gar∣den near the Town, where was set a large Tent spread all over with painted Calicut. Within was a Throne erected with a Canopy of China Damask, and all the Steps to the Throne were cover'd with Persian Tapistry. The day being come, the greatest part of the Army, Offi∣cers and Souldiers, went to fetch the Raja, who lay in his Hut a quarter of a League off; where they mounted him upon one of two Elephants which the General sent him, be∣ing attended likewise with two led Horses, and two Palan∣quins for more State. Being come to the place, he was clad in a Scarlet Robe with great Hanging Sleeves, and so brought in where Vangous was sitting upon his Throne, with a Sword and a Crown by him. The Raja being come to the Foot of the Throne, the Major of the Army took the Sword, deliver'd him by the General, and girt the Raja, who then ascending the Steps of the Throne, prostrated himself be∣fore the Holland General while he put the Crown upon his Head. Then the new King riseth up, and lays his Hand upon the Head of a Cow that stood near the Throne. Which done, kneeling with his Hands clasp'd, and lifted toward the Head of the same Cow, he took his Oath to be true and faithful to the Company, and to embrace their Interests. On the other side the General promis'd him on the behalf of the Company, that they should assist him when he should have occasion against his Enemies. Which Solemnities be∣ing very gravely perform'd, the Musquettiers gave three Volleys, and the new King was conducted back to his Hut with the same Pomp that he was brought. Thus you see the Pride of a Pepper Merchant, to make Kings and domineer over Crowns. One other famous Act of Vangous must not be forgotten. You must know, that at the taking of Cochin the Jesuits had in that City one of the fairest Libraries in all Asia, as well
for the great quantity of Books sent them out of Europe, as for several rare Manuscripts in the Hebrew, Chaldee, Arabic, Persian, Indian, Chinese, and other Oriental Languages. For in all the Conquests of the Portugals, their first care was to summon all the Learned People of the several Nations, and to get all their Books into their hands. During that little time which the Jesuits staid in Aethiopia they had copied out all the good Books that came to their knowledge, and sent all those Books of Cochin. They had staid longer in Aethio∣pia, had it not been for the Jealousie of the Patriarchs, and their Bishops, which are very numerous; so that if there be two men in one Village that belong to one Church, the chief∣est calls himself Bishop. At their Ceremonies of Baptism when they name the Holy Ghost, they apply a hot Iron to the neck of the Infant, saying that the Holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles in the shape of Fiery Tongues. The Pa∣triarchs and Bishops were jealous of the Jesuits, finding that they had insinuated themselves into the favour of the King and Grandees of the Court. Which so enraged the Aethiopi∣ans, that they caus'd the People to mutiny, preaching that the King was about to alter the Religion of the Country, and to draw along with him several of the Lords. And the Fury of the People grew to that height, that whatever the King could do or say, he could not appease their Fury: So that they put him in prison, and elected his Brother in his place. The cause of this disorder was laid upon the Jesuits, and was the reason that they were expell'd the Kingdom; neither had they scap'd so, but that they were afraid of the Governour of Mozambique, and the Portugals that inhabit all along the Coast of Africa. But to tell ye what became of this Library, General Vangous made no conscience to expose it to the ignorance of his Souldiers, so that I have seen the Souldiers and Seamen tear several of those beautiful Volums to light their Tobacco.
CHAP. VI. Of the Sieur Hollebrand Glins, President of the Factory at Ormus. WHen the Ships come to Ormus, it is a great pre∣judice for the Goods to lie out of doors. For such is the extremity of the Heat in that part, that if the Spices, especially the Cloves, be not carried to the Water-side every foot, and there laid to steep in the Water for four and twenty hours, they would turn to a mere powder. Sugar is brought thither in great Wooden Chests, but if there be the least Cleft for a Fly or an Emmet to get in, in a small time the Chest will be half emptied. As for Camphire, which is brought from Borneo in Pipes, if it lie a little too long in that warm Air, it will exhale above half away. To remedy these Inconveniences Sieur Hollebrand resol∣ved to build a bigger Warehouse. Among the rest of the Workmen that were imployed in this Building was a Gun∣smith, who came in the interim in a Ship from Batavia. This poor Fellow was imployed to make Locks for the Warehouse; for in those Parts they have no other Keys, or Locks either, than what are made of Wood: So that it was a Crime for him to be found idle at any time. And there∣fore the President finding him one Sunday in the Afternoon drinking with two of his Companions that came from the Ship to see him, gave the Fellow half a dozen good Licks with his Cane, and would have given him more, but that the Smith being a sturdy Fellow, and feeling the Blows smart, wrested the Stick out of the President's Hands, and flung it out of the Window. For which the President, upon pre∣tence that the Fellow had struck him four Blows, which was untrue, as I my self being there could witness, sent him la∣den with Chains to the Ship, where he would have tried him for his Life, in a full Court of the Merchants of the Fa∣ctory: but they refusing him, for very madness he took
two Notaries, that he had a power over, went to the Ship alone, made the Officers of the Ship, and condemn'd the Fellow to be hang'd. And he had certainly been executed but for me and some other of my Countrymen, (for the Fel∣low was of Geneva) that threatned the President out of his design. Yet he caus'd him to be drubb'd Naked at the Main Mast after that inhuman manner, that he lost the use of one of his Arms. This the Genevese could never forget, and therefore sought all opportunities to kill him; to which purpose he put himself in the same Ship with Hollebrand when he returned for Holland. But coming to the Cape of Good Hope, and being sent ashoar in the Shallop for Provisi∣ons, the Shallop was overset in a stormy Sea, and Hollebrand's Life thereby secur'd. But before we leave Ormus, where Hollebrand was build∣ing his Warehouse that caus'd all this mischief, let us take notice of this by the way, that there is no abiding at Ormus till April, lest you pay for your stay with some Malignant Fever, that may hold a man as long as he lives; or if he be cur'd by chance, yet will the White of his Eyes be more yel∣low than Saffron. This same sort of Fever seizes our Euro∣peans in the Port of Alexandretta in Syria, and in the Islands where the Hollanders lade their Cloves, Nutmegs, and Mace. By the way observe, that there is a particular sort of Nut∣meg which the Hollanders call Maneque, and we the Male Nutmeg, as long again and a little bigger than the ordinary Nutmeg; and this sort they never carry into Europe, because they sell it to better profit in Persia and the Indies. This I shall also further add, that the ordinary Nutmeg condited, fuddles more than the strongest Wine, eating but onely one either at the beginning or ending of the Meal.
CHAP. VII. Touching the Islands of the Prince. THE Fort of Batavia has four fair Bastions, and is well built but upon an ill Foundation, those Bastions being plainly observ'd to sink, and requiring Repa∣ration from time to time. For the perfecting of which Work the Hollanders wanted Slaves: whereupon a Consultation was had where to get Slaves. To which Answer was made, that there was no better place than the Prince's Islands. Which being concluded, the General of Batavia dispatch'd away three the biggest Ships belonging to Batavia. These Ships visited every one of these Islands; feigning that they came from Holland and wanted Refreshment. So soon as the Inhabitants discover'd the Vessels, they flock'd to the Shoar Men, Women, and Children, as they wont to do, bringing along with them the best of their Provision, as Coco Wine, Nuts, and other Fruits of the growth of the Islands. Happy were they that could first get aboard, for they always get more by the Mariners and Souldiers, than by those that go ashoar to trade. Now so soon as they were ashoar, they gave them Strong Water to drink till they were drunk; and when the Masters of the Ships saw them in that condition, they immediately sent a good number of their men well ar∣med ashoar, who bound them that were upon the Sand to truck for their goods, and carried them away to their Ships, killing all those that made any resistance. But they did them little service; for finding themselves so inhumanly us'd as the Hollanders use their Slaves, they took a resolution to eat nothing, and to starve themselves to death, rather than to be forc'd to labour and be beaten every day.
CHAP. VIII. How the Hollanders sent to declare War against the Persians, and of the ill Success of their Fleet. MUch about the same time Charles Constant was sent by the Company with a Fleet of seven great Ships, to declare War against the Persians, in case they would not comply with the Dutch in reference to their Silk Trade and their Customs. Being arriv'd at Ormus he left the Fleet there, and hasten'd to Ispahan, and from thence to Casbin, where then the King was. But his Embassie had not that effect as he expected: For he thought that the King would have been frighted at the noise of a Fleet of seven great Ships that lay at Ormus, but he was mistaken. For the Persian knew he need not send any Force against the said Fleet, in regard it would be ruin'd without: It being impossible for our Europeans to stay at Ormus in the heat of Somer, as well by reason of the Heat, as for want of Water; for there is no good Water at Ormus, nor upon any part of the Coast of Persia, but what is kept in Cisterns, and that full of Worms. 'Tis true, that upon the Coast of Arabia there are Wells of good Water, but when the Arabians dis∣cover any Ships upon the Coast, they come down all in Arms to defend their Wells; for it is their profit to sell their Water, and that at a very dear rate, to those that are in ne∣cessity. Now the King and Council not being ignorant, that the longer the Fleet lay at Ormus, the worse would be its con∣dition, would not give the Commander his first Audience in two moneths. During which time there died above half the Men; for from six a clock in the morning till four in the afternoon, if any of the Seamen went to take a little Air upon the Deck, he presently fell down dead. The Admi∣ral was to blame not to make provision of Water being bound for such a place as Ormus. The Commander Constant did not take the right course to effect his business, by publishing what he intended to pre∣sent
the Ministers of State withall. For the Lords of Persia never take any Presents themselves, for fear it should come to the King's Ear. But there is a private Bill sent to the Party for whom it is intended, and he sends whom he thinks fit to receive it. Had he so done, and doubled his Sum of 5000 Venetian Ducats, perhaps the Athemadoulet might have us'd him more kindly, especially for so long time as that King had. For whatever a Predecessor does, a Successor changes many things. So that if the deceased King have given any House or Land to any person, it must be confirm∣ed by the succeeding King in his first Year, or else the Gift returns to the King. It is the same thing if any person builds a House upon the King's Demesns: which has been a great inconvenience to the Austin Friers and bare-foot Carmelites, because their Houses are built upon the Lands which Cha Abbas gave them of the Royal Demesns. So that every time a new King ascends the Throne, they are forc'd to make the Athemadoulet new Presents, sometimes to the Value of the Land: for it is a rare thing to find a prime Minister that is a Friend to the Christians▪ But the Jesuits and Capuchins, who came after them, provided better for themselves, each of those Orders having bought the Ground upon which their Houses are built. The Commander seeing that he could not compass his Design, and that the Athemadoulet would abate nothing of the forty four Tomans which he demanded, went to the Divanbegai and told him, that buying the same Goods of particular persons, they might be had for thirty two, or at most for thirty three Tomans. To which the Divanbegai an∣swered him, That all those particular persons paid the King Custom, and Convoy upon the Road, the Custom alone amounting to Eighteen per cent. which the Hollanders did not pay: and that there was not a Year wherein they did not bring in Goods to the Value of 30000 Tomans; and that if account should be taken of the Silks which they carried away, and of the Goods which they brought in, the Athema∣doulet ought to make them pay near 50000 Tomans for Du∣ties. The Commander ill satisfied with this Answer went to his Lodging, and without asking the Advice of the Mer∣chants that were with him, or of his Frenchman, who better understood the Practice of the Court, or without taking his
leave of the King, return'd privately to Ispahan, intending for Bander where the Fleet lay. The Athemadoulet being advertiz'd of his sudden departure, was very much offend∣ed; so much the more because at the Commanders first Ar∣rival he had done him great Civilities, even to the furnish∣ing his Lodgings after the European manner, with a Bed, Stools, and Tables. Thereupon he gave notice thereof to the King, who when he heard of it utter'd these words, Has any one given him any distaste, or is he turn'd Fool? He shall be glad to come back again. Being come to Ispahan, to the great wonder of the Franks, who heard nothing of his taking leave of the King, he be∣gan to make up his Pack, intending for Gomrom, in case the King did not send for him again; which he did, 'tis true, but not with those Compliments which he expected; for he flatter'd himself that the King would have petition'd him to return. The King sent for him indeed, but his Compliment was not very pleasing; for the person that brought the Message told him, That it was the King's pleasure he should speedily return, and if he would not go willingly he had order to carry him by force. But notwithstanding the King's Command and the Counsel of his Friends, he set out from Ispahan for Bander, according to his first intent. We accom∣panied him some part of his way, and being just ready to take our leaves, we saw a Persian Gentile and well mount∣ed, (he was a Captain of an hundred men) who calling the Interpreter to him, Go (said he) and tell thy President, that he must return to his Lodging, and to morrow make haste to the King, according to the Order he has already recei∣ved: and with that he rode away full speed. The Inter∣preter told the Commander what the Captain said; but not∣withstanding all this the Commander being a person of a hot and obstinate humour, continued his way. Neither the Merchants of Zulpha, nor any of the Persian or Armenian Servants would follow him, fearing the Bastinado, and be∣lieving he was secure enough; as it happen'd: for he had not rode far, before three Captains with their Bows and Ar∣rows in their hands bolted out upon him, one of which ri∣ding up directly to the Commander, Art thou (said he) the onely person that ever set foot in this Empire, that refusest to obey the Companion of the Sun, whom so great a part
of the World obeys? At the same time came up fifty stout Horsemen, and one of them who cammanded them made at Mr. Constant with his Mace. Then the Admiral was forc'd to lower his Sails and return back, forc'd to receive an Affront which he might have avoided▪ When he was come to his Lodging, the Persian Officer without alighting call'd the Interpreter, and bid him go forwarn the Commander in the Name of the King, that neither he nor any of the Hollanders presumed to stir out of their Houses till further order; for that if any of them were seen abroad, they should be taught to obey the King's Commands. Thus the Hol∣landers having been coop'd up nine days, word was brought the Commander he might return to Cusbin, where he found that all his Rodomontado's signified nothing, but that he must comply with the Athemadoulet. CHAP. IX. Of the Severity of the Holland Commanders in the Indies. GEneral Speck, before he came to his Imployment, had a Daughter by a Woman which he kept onely as his Mistress, not as his Wife. After his time was out he returned into Holland, and not being willing to carry his Daughter along with him, knowing that she would go off better at Batavia than in Holland, left her to the care of General Com, who succeeded him in his charge. The Girl was fair and left rich, so that her Father was no sooner gone, but she had many Suitors that courted her, without any consideration of her Birth, among all which there was none that she fancied, like one that was a Superior Merchant of the Fort, for whom she had a particular esteem. Nei∣ther did she believe but that General Com would have given his consent upon the first request, knowing the young man to be of a good Family. Nevertheless they were both de∣ceiv'd; for being ask'd, he utterly denied to yield to any
such matter. However, the young Man and the Maid con∣tinued their Fidelity to each other, and that with such a close respect, that at length the Virgin's Belly began to swell. Whereupon she made one of the Ladies of the City acquaint∣ed how the case stood, as also of her Council, believing that the General upon notice how Affairs went, would mar∣ry her to keep all things private. But so soon as the Lady had revealed the Mystery, he was so far from answering their expectation, that he threw the young Man laden with Fetters into prison, and shut up the young Woman close Prisoner in her Chamber. Next day he call'd a Council, declar'd to them the Matter of Fact, and gave his Opinion, that the young man deserv'd to lose his Head, and that the Maid should be whipp'd. The Council were of a contrary Judgment, and advis'd him to reconcile the Mischance by a Marriage. But notwithstanding all their persuasions the General resolv'd to have his own humour, the next day pri∣vately sent for the Executioner, and causing the young Man and the Maid to be brought into his Hall, commanded the Man's Head to be forthwith struck off, and the Virgin to be whipp'd though big with Child. The Sieur Goyre commanded the Holland Fleet that was sent to the Manilles, he landed all his Souldiers, and most of his Mariners. When they began to march, he command∣ed that not a man should stir out of his Rank upon pain of death. It happen'd that a young Souldier, who was troub∣led with the Bloudy Flux, stept a little aside to ease Nature, which the said Commander perceiving, caus'd him to be ap∣prehended and bound, and calling a Council of War would have had him hang'd; and when the Officers refus'd to give Sentence against one that had committed no offence, he cau∣sed seven or eight Blacks of the Low Countries to hang him up upon a Tree. But the Sieur Dirk Hogel, Lieutenant Gene∣ral, marching by in the nick of time, and seeing the poor Fel∣low in that condition, presently order'd him to be cut down, and so sav'd the poor Fellow's Life; who returning into Holland, and making his Complaint to the Company, the Directors wrote smartly to the General and Council at Ba∣tavia about the business; who upon Examination of the matter, in regard the Lad was sent by the Directors of the Orphans House at Amsterdam, condemned the Sieur Goyre
to pay four thousand Crowns to the Orphans House, and three hundred Crowns yearly to the poor Souldier. CHAP. X. Touching the Women. OFttimes when Women think that their Amours are most secret, they are by some strange and unexpect∣ed accident odly discover'd. While I was at Ba∣tavia, the Secretary of the Hospital, as handsom a person as any was in the City, had a Wife that pass'd for a Batavian Beauty, neither indeed was she despicable. This Couple had been seven years married without any Children; so that the Woman despairing of her Husband's Abilities, and to know where the fault lay, resolved to bestow her Fa∣vours upon one of her Slaves, who was well shap'd but ve∣ry black; chusing rather a private Familiarity with him, than with any young Hollander, whose frequent Visits might breed suspicion. It seems the fault did not lie in her, for her Sable Gallant had so improv'd his Talent, that in a short time she found the effects of Change. In short, the Wo∣mans Belly swell'd, and her Husband thinking his time had been come, began to boast of his Manhood, and great Joy there was among the Friends of the Woman upon the hopes of Issue. Great Provisions were made against the Lying in, and the General himself made choice of for Godfather. But when the good hour was come, and the Woman delivered, their Joy was turned into Mourning, for the Child prov'd one of the sooty Of-spring of the Sun-burnt race, a perfect Black. The Husband and Mother of the Woman blush'd as red for shame as the Child was black, and the Gossips hung down their heads like Bulrushes: nay the Husband was so transported with fury, that he could not hide his resolution to murder his Wife, for bringing such a piece of live Char∣cole into the world. But he was prevented, and secur'd in the Fort by the General, till by the intermission of Friends, who wisely laid before him the original cause of his Wifes
Transgression, they were at length made Friends, and the Slave for having shew'd himself a Man, was condemn'd to tug at the Oars in the Galleys that go to fetch Stone for the use of the City. Now as a White Woman may bring forth a Black, so sometimes a Black may be deliver'd of a White Child. For at Baçaim a Cafer's Wife, as black as himself, was deli∣ver'd of a white Child. The Cafer seeing his Child white, would have immediately fallen upon his Wife and strangled her, had not the good women that assisted at her Labour prevented him, and one of those Gossips was so cunning as to run to the Jesuits House, who are well respected by those Blacks, to desire Father Thomas de Bare, who had a long time been Rector at Agra, to come to the Cafer's House. Presently the Father came with another of the Fraternity, and finding the Cafer stamping and staring almost out of his wits, and in open hostility without all reason, to ap∣pease his fury ask'd him whether he kept any Hens, and whether he had any that were black. The Cafer answer'd that he did keep Hens, and that he had likewise black Hens. Presently the Father order'd one to be brought him; and then holding it in both his hands before the good Women, Does this Hen (said he to the Cafer) lay thee any Eggs? Yes, replied the Cafer. Of what colour are they, said the Father? White, answer'd the Cafer. Well then, said the Father, thou art worse than thy silly Creature, and hast far less reason; for if this Hen which is black lay thee white Eggs, why may not thy Wife which is black bring thee a white Child? This Comparison so wrought upon the Cafer, who was no Disputant, that he embrac'd his Wife, kiss'd his Child, and all was well again. Though for all the Jesuit's Comparison it was believ'd that some Portugal Souldier had quarter'd with his Wife, which was the reason of that more than usual Production. To conclude, there was a certain woman, the wife of one of the Counsellors of Batavia, who had both kindness and affection for a Merchant of the Fort, who was both young and handsom. And it is the Custom in that Coun∣trey to be not onely kind but free, she had for several years so well supplied his wants, that he was Company for the best. It happen'd that this Counsellor was sent abroad up∣on
some Negotiation, and staid longer than he thought he should have done. For this reason Money grew short with the Lady; so that her Gallant coming for a Supply, and she not having ready money to answer his Expectations, she gave him a Gold Chain worth 400 Crowns to pawn for his present Necessities till she could redeem it. But this Fatal Chain was the dissolution of all their former Love: For the young Gentleman being streighten'd for Money, and find∣ing no person that would lend him so much Money as he wanted upon it, very fairly goes and offers it to a Goldsmith to sell. While this unfortunate Lover was driving his Bar∣gain in the Shop, who in the name of ill luck should come by but one of his Mistresses Slaves, and spying the Chain in his hand, runs and tells her Patroness how she had seen her Gallant imploy'd. Who surpriz'd that her Gallant should go about to sell the Chain, when he had onely promis'd to pawn it in private and sure hands; now (quoth she) all will out, there will be the Devil upon Dun when my Husband comes home; and I forsooth that have liv'd credibly thus long, must be the sport of my Neighbours and the talk of the Town. This produc'd a Duel between Love and In∣terest, wherein Interest getting the victory, away she im∣mediately sends to all the Goldsmiths, to give them notice that she had been robb'd of a Gold Chain, desiring them to apprehend the Party that brought it. She also gave the same notice to the chief of the Chineses, and desir'd the Advocate Fiscal to make a public Search. Well, by these means the Chain was quickly found, and the Merchant whatever he could say for himself was apprehended and put in prison; soon after he was condemned for a Thief, and sentenced to row all his life in the Stone Galley, which is the Galley that fetches Stones for the use of Batavia. But happy for him, General Vanderlin's Lady falling into a hard Labour before the time of Execution, and desiring his Pardon at such a solemn Juncture, easily obtain'd it, seasonably reco∣vering him from the Misfortunes of Folly and Necessity.
A RELATION OF JAPON, AND Of the Cause of the Persecution of the Christians in those ISLANDS. THE Modern Geographers have made Descriptions of Japon, by means of such conjectures as they have drawn from the Relations of certain Mer∣chants who have traded in those Countries. But in regard there are very few Merchants who are skilful in Geography, as being such who only mind the profit and advantage of their Voyages, those Descriptions have prov'd very uncertain. As to the knowledge of the Ancients, in reference to this part of the World, it is no less imperfect; and it is but only by conjecture to this day, that we believe the Abadii of Ptolomy to be that Island which is now call'd Niphon. That which I could learn of most certainty, was by the Relation of several persons who have Travell'd these parts, that the Empire of Japon is at present compos'd of several Islands, of which some perhaps may not be absolute Islands, but rather Peninsula's, and particularly those that make a part of the
Land of Yesso, the Inhabitants whereof are Vassals and Tributaries to Japon. Nevertheless a Holland Pilot, who has been industrious to discover whether the whole Country it self were an Island, or a Continent adjoyning to that vast Tract of Land call'd Corea, unknown to this day, in those parts where it extends it self behind China to the bottom of Tartarie Niulhan, saith, that it is separated from Japon by a narrow Sea, which at this day is call'd The Streights of Sanguar. Through all the Islands of Japon, where formerly were accompted to have been 66 Kingdoms, there are three remarkable for their largeness, of which that of largest extent is called Niphon, the next Ximo, and the third Xicock. The Japonners accompt it a Journey of twenty seven days from the Province of Quanto, to the Country of Yesso; and they say farther, that this Country of Yesso, in those parts which are remote from the Sea, is so full of inaccessible Mountains, that those Japonners who have attempted a discovery by Land, could never accomplish their design, being discourag'd by the length of the Journey, and the difficulties and badness of the ways. The Island of Niphon is four times as big as the other two; and there is also a Mountain therein that vomits up Flames of Fire, like Mount Etna in Sicily; formerly it was distinguish'd into thirty five Kingdoms, but at this day it is only divided into five parts, the names whereof are Jamasoit, Jetsen, Jetsesen, Quanto, and Ochio, lying all in order as you travel from West to East. These five parts are again divided into several Provinces. The Island of Ximo, or Saycock, is situated to the South-West of Niphon, being about 160 Leagues in circuit. The Island of Xicock is seated by the South of Niphon, being about 120 Leagues in compass. The other Islands that lye round about are not so considerable, for in those Seas lye several Islands scatter'd up and down, as in the Archi∣pelago, between the Morea and the Coasts of Asia the less. As to the rest, I refer the Reader to the Map annexed, believing it to be very true, as having been made upon the places themselves. The Emperour at present keeps his Court in the City of Yeddo, in regard the Air is there more temperate, and the Heats not so violent; but when he has a Son that is arriv'd to the Age of fifteen years, he sends him to Surunga, there to reside, till the death of his Father makes him way to the Throne. Since Yeddo has been made choice of for the Seat of the Empire, it has so greatly enlarg'd it self from day to day, that it is at present three Leagues in length, and three in breadth, very populous, and the Houses standing very close together. When the Emperour rides through the City, or that there is any publick shew to be seen, it is impossible to get by the crowd of the people, though the Women are not permitted to be of the number. The Emperours Palace is cover'd with Plates of Gold, to which the Palaces of the Lords are every way correspondent in Mag∣nificence; so that afar off the City affords the richest and most magnifi∣cent Prospect that was ever beheld: Though it be not so beautiful within, by reason that the ordinary Houses are built only of Wood. The Great Dairy keeps his residence at Meaco, which is also a very large City, containing above a hundred thousand Houses; it was formerly the capital Seat of the Empire, at what time the Dairy's were laid aside. So soon as he is Crown'd by the Bonzes, who are the Priests and Lawyers, he is then no more to expose himself to the light of the Moon, nor to
shave his Head, or cut his Nails. The Natives report, that the Empire of Japon was formerly govern'd by a Prince call'd Dairy, who had acquir'd so high a reputation for Holiness, that his Subjects ador'd him as a God, and that to increase the awe and reverence of the people, he suffer'd his Hair and Nails to grow, affirming, that it it was a piece of Sacriledge to make use either of Razor or Sizzars. The Princes that succeeded him, though they had only the name of Kings, have still preserv'd the same custom, believing that it becomes not their Gran∣deur to appear in view of the Moon, as being Sons of the Sun. If he have a Daughter that is ripe for Marriage, the Emperour is oblig'd to Marry her, and she it is that bears the Title of Empress, though she should happen to have no Children, which is contrary to the Maxims of all the Eastern Monarchs, who give the Title of Queen and Sulta∣ness only to her, among all the rest of their Wives, that is first brought to Bed of a Male Successor to the Crown. At the end of every seven years, the Emperour sends one of the chief Princes of his Court to the Dairy with a Basket full of Earth, and to tell him, that all the Lands which the Emperour commands, are at the Dairy's Devotion; and indeed the Empire belongs to him by right of Succession, though at present he enjoys only the Title, and very large Revenues, which render him highly considerable in the Empire. The Japonners are Idolaters, and adore the Sun; but though they have a great number of Temples and different Idols, yet they are not over obstinate in their Devotion, only the Emperour is very severe against all other Religions. They never stir out of their Native Country to travel, unless it be to China, and the Land of Yesso; and within these few years the Emperour has prohibited his people under extream penal∣ties, from having any Commerce with Foreigners, the Chineses and Hollanders excepted. He had receiv'd Ambassadours at several times from several Princes, but never sent any of his own to them again. Nevertheless it is affirm'd, that several Lords of these Islands newly converted to the Faith, in the year 1585, sent their Children to Rome, to render their acknowledgments to Gregory the Thirteenth; and that being return'd back in the year 1587, to Goa, they were afterwards receiv'd, and welcom'd again into their own Country with great marks of joy. The little inclination which they have to Navigation and Traffick, proceeds in part from the great abundance of all things neces∣sary for Human support, which their own Country produces; and then in the next place from the jealousies of the Emperour, who is afraid of the alterations which new Religions may make in his Government; for they are very fickle, and easily seduc'd after Novelties, which has been the occasion of many Revolts, and Civil Wars, till Quabacondon wrested the Empire out of the hands of the Dairy; and reunited all the Provinces. They are so fiery and revengeful, that upon the least affront given them, if they cannot have an opportunity of a present revenge, they will rip up their own Bellies, and kill themselves. I was told a Story to confirm this. Two young Lords that serv'd the Emperour met in the Palace, and jostl'd one the other by accident; the most furious of the two was immediately for drawing his Sword. The other told him, the place was not convenient, that he was going to wait; but that if he would stay for him in such a place, he would give him satisfaction. Accordingly the party that thought himself affronted went and stay'd, but
his impatience was such, that after he had stay'd a while, not finding the other to come, he ripp'd up his own Bowels for very vexation. Upon which the people crowding about him, ask'd him the reason of his killing himself; to which they could draw no other answer but this, A cowardly Raskal has affronted me. By and by the other comes, makes way through the throng, and surpriz'd with what he beheld; Poor Creature, said he, thou need'st not have doubted my being as good as my word, this Dagger shall assure thee of it: And so saying, he kill'd himself upon the place, and fell by the others side. There is no Nation under Heaven that fears Death less than this, or that is more enclin'd to cruelty. If any Prince or great Lord makes a Feast for his Friends, at the end of the Feast he calls his principal Offi∣cers, and asks 'em, if there be any that has so much love for him as to kill himself before the Guests for his sake. Presently there arises a dispute among them who shall have the Honour; and who ever the Prince is pleas'd to name, rips up his Belly with a Cric, which is a kind of Dagger, the poynt whereof is Poyson'd. This custom is also practis'd upon the Death of their Masters, or when they lay the Foun∣dations of any Palace; for they are so superstitious as to believe, that these Victims are necessary to render both the Owners of the Building, and the Habitation fortunate. They punish all manner of Theft with Death. 'Tis also a capital Crime among them to play for Money. Adultery is only punish'd in the Women: But Coynage of false Money, setting Houses on Fire, Deflowring and Ravishing of Virgins, are not only punish'd in the persons of the Criminals, but also of those who are next of kin to them. The Women live retir'd, and are very faithful to their Husbands. The Emperour having put to Death one of the Lords of his Court, out of hopes to enjoy his Wife; she fearing violence, besought the Emperour to give her time to consider, which was granted for some few days. At the end whereof she shut her self up in a Room with her Children; and after she had delivered a Paper to one of her Servants to carry to the Emperour, she set the Chamber a Fire, and burnt both her self and her Children. The Emperour met with nothing else in the Paper but reproaches of his Tyranny, and attestations of joy from the Lady, that she had the opportunity to Sacrifice her self to the memory of her Hus∣band. Several other stories I have heard, which make me believe, that this Nation is not uncapable of doing actions worthy a Roman Vertue. The Portugals were the first people of Europe that discover'd the Islands of Japon. They were thrown upon the Coast by a violent Storm, in the year 1542, and understanding that there was great store of Gold and Silver in the Country, they return'd with a resolution to settle them∣selves. The first place where they thought to fix was neer Surunga, a City which stands about four Leagues from the Sea: But because there is but one Road, and that not very secure neither for Shipping, they remain'd there not above five years. At length they took possession of a little forsaken Island call'd Kisma, which they peopl'd afterward's; but since the last Persecution of the Christians, the Portugals were forc'd to abandon it, having no more Commerce with the Japonners. How the Hollanders came to erect their Factories there, I shall tell the Reader in another part of this Relation.
Seven years after the first coming of the Portugals to Japon, St. Francis Xavier made a Voyage thither to Preach the Gospel. The first place where he Landed was the Island of Niphon, where he stay'd two years and some Months, and travel'd several parts of these Islands; but his principal design being to go to China, he took shipping accordingly. The Vessel was no sooner out at Sea, but St. Francis fell sick, so that the Captain put him ashore again in the Island of Sechen, by others call'd Haynan, belonging to China, where in a few days after he dy'd, and never was in China, as some have reported and believ'd. After his death the Christian Religion spread it self very much in China, the people being very docible, and apprehensive of the instructions which were given them, but the behaviour of the Portugals displeasing the Principal Governours, and those who had most Power at Court, they did them ill Offices to the Emperour, and the Bonzes misliking the new Religion, and jealous of the effects thereof, were the fomenters of continual persecutions against the new Converts, pretending they favour'd the designs of the Portugueses. Nevertheless the Christian Religion daily got footing, and perhaps the whole Nation would have embrac'd it, if the covetousness and wicked∣ness of the Christians themselves had not been the chief impediment of their conversion. The Hollanders did all they could to lay the fault upon the Portugals, but the truth will easily appear by the Letter written to one Leonard Campen, a Hollander, wherein it is said, that when the Hollanders were ask'd by the Natives what Religion they were of, they made this answer, We are no Christians, we are Hollanders. I do not go about to blemish a whole Nation for the fault of a few, but only to shew what a dangerous thing it is, to make an ill choice of Officers upon the setling of a new Commerce in Regions so remote. The Holland East-India Company having set out a Vessel for Batavia, put aboard about a dozen young Boys, and as many Girls, taken out of the Hospitals in the Country. Among these Boys there was one who was design'd to serve in the Kitchin, but Fortune made him an Instru∣ment of one of the greatest Misfortunes that ever befell our Age. During the Voyage, the Merchant having observ'd him to be a Boy of a ready wit, and for that reason believing that he might one day prove ser∣viceable to the Holland Company, caus'd him to be taught to write and read; wherein he improv'd so well in a short time, that being come to Batavia, he was thought capable of a higher Employment. The Vessel being arriv'd, the General and his Council resolv'd to send the same Vessel to Japon, with some part of the Lading which was brought from Europe. Thereupon the Merchant was commanded upon this Voyage, and the under Accomptant happening in the mean time to dye, this Boy was by him advanc'd to the place, and by the Merchant carefully instructed in the knowledge of the East-India Trade. The Vessel being arriv'd at Firanda, the new under Accomptant believing no place more proper for him them that to raise his fortune, resolv'd to leave his Benefactor, and therefore when the Ship was to return, he hid himself out of the way, till he knew the Ship to be far enough on word on her Voyage, and by that means becoming a Member of the Factory, he grew so perfect in the Language of the Natives, and so useful to the Company, that do length. He came to be President of the Factory; the Authority of which Employment so puff'd him
up, that he was not only for continuing and upholding the Commerce of his own, but excluding all other Nations. Now, as I have already observ'd, the Portugals were the first Traders, and the first that propa∣gated the Christian Religion in those parts; therefore it was that the Christian Japonners would not Trade with any but the Portugals, as having known them longer, and finding them more true to their words. This the President observ'd, and made it his business to render them obnoxious at Court, and by vertue of his Presents, engag'd the Gover∣nours of Provinces, and other great Lords, to favour his design. However, the Portugals wanted neither friends nor confederates. And though they were not in a condition to be so liberal as the President, yet they made ashift to defend themselves, and render his under hand Dealings ineffectual. Thereupon finding that those Tricks would not take, he had recourse to the foulest of Calumnies; for he counter∣feited a Letter written in the Portuguese Language, containing a disco∣very of a design of the Christian Japonners to have made a general In∣surrection, and a particular Conspiracy against the person of the Em∣perour. This Letter he carry'd to a Lord of the Country, into whose favour and confidence he had wrought himself, who presently thought it to be his duty to give intelligence of so important a design to the Court. The President inform'd him by what accident the Letter came to his hands, and gave an account of such circumstances, as made his Impo∣sture look with a probable countenance, relating, how that the Hol∣landers had taken a Portugal Vessel returning from Japon to Goa, and that the Holland Captain having taken this Letter among other Papers, open'd it, and perceiving of what consequence it was, had sent an Express to the President to proceed as his prudence, and the affection of the Dutch Company toward the Emperour should guide him. That the Portugals, who were but Subjects to the Spaniards, had a pernicious Maxim, not to suffer any Religon but their own in any place where they had to do, and that for their own ends they never spar'd either the Life or Liberty of Man; that they thought it an acceptable Sacrifice to God, to cut the Throats of those whom they could not convert. And lastly, that the Hollanders were a people that accorded with all Nations and Religions, and minded nothing but their Trade. The Lord believ'd all these fraudulent Calumnies, and sent a Copy of the Letter to the Emperour, the substance whereof was, That the Spaniards in the Philippine Islands, and the Portugals in Japon, being in confederacy with the Christians of the Country, had sent to the Gover∣nour of Goa to send by a time prefix'd eight or ten Vessels, with Men and Arms, but especially a good number of Officers to command the Revolters, for that then there would be a numerous Army ready, and that they should easily make themselves Masters of Japon. The Portugals were then under the Dominion of the Spaniard, and though they would suffer no Spaniard in their Indian Acquisitions but the Viceroy, yet several of the Religious Orders did slip into Japon; carried thither by a true and real zeal; yet this zeal, when once indis∣creet, does as much mischief as covetousness it self. The Father Pau∣lists, for so they call the Jesuits in the Indies, by reason that their Church in Goa is dedicated to St. Paul; these Jesuits I say, had made a fair pro∣gress, and gain'd great credit among the people, notwhithstanding
their continual persecutions, according as the Lords of the Country were well or ill affected towards them. Their number therefore encreas'd, and the new Converts had this advantage, that they enrich'd themselves by Trading with the Portugals, who had made a positive Agreement not to Trade with the Bonzes. This provok'd the Bonzes against them, and the multitude of the Christians so far augmented the Emperour's jealousies and fears, that in a short time they produc'd the effects of open rage and cruelty. The Jesuits had converted to the Faith a great Lord of the Kingdom, who liv'd most commonly at Bugen, in the Island of Ximo, a person of great Interest and Power in the Island. He had four Sons, two of which liv'd with him, and following his Example, had embrac'd the Catholick Faith. The Father was Baptiz'd by the name of Ignatius; the eldest of the two was call'd Francis, and the youngest Charles: the two eldest Sons were at Court in great favour with the Emperour. The younger of the two that had embrac'd the Christian Religion, ad∣dicted himself wholly to the study of the Scripture, and retir'd with the Jesuits to their Seminary. His Example had wrought with a great number of young Lords, and as he was eloquent besides, he was of great use to the Jesuits in preaching the Gospel, and reclaiming the people from the grossness of their Errors. The Japonners are naturally endow'd with a noble mind, and great inclination to Learning; so that there is nothing wanting in that Nation but able Teachers. Not but that they have Doctors of their own: the Dairy's Court is full of them; where they preserve the Annals of their Country, and pretend that Printing and Artillery were in use among them before they were known in Europe. From this Court come all their Books, in regard the persons that attend upon this Prince apply themselves only to their Studies. It is reported, that they learnt all these things by their frequent Commerce with the Chineses, and that they are also originally descended from them. And in truth, the greatest Pro∣vince of the Island of Niphon is call'd Quanto, according to the name of the Sea-Coast part of China, where lies the greatest Traffick be∣tween the Japonners and Chineses. Moreover, if there be any credit to be given to the Chinese Histories, they say it was but a small part of their vast-Empire, which extended it self from North to South 56 Degrees of Latitude, from the Frozen Sea to the Equinoctial Line, being boun∣ded to the West by the Caspian Sea, and extending Eastward over all the Southern America to New Spain. Father Thomas Barr, a Portuguese, has often told me when I was at Agra, a capital City of the Great Mogul, where the Jesuits have a very fair House, that this and several other young Lords improv'd themselves so far in six or seven years, that they were as Learned as their Masters themselves, and that they were more zealous in converting those of their Nation. Now the Jesuits at that time had no House for the Instruction of Youth and Proselytes, and therefore they desir'd this young Lord to lend them one of his. Thereupon he having four very fair ones, with great Revenues belonging to them, gave that which was nearest to the City to his Converters. A while after, the youngest of his Sons fell sick, and was carried to this House for the Air's sake, where he recover'd by the care of the Fathers, and the Prayers of the Christians; but his Father did not long enjoy the pleasure of so great
a Cure, which seem'd almost miraculous; for he dy'd at what time both his Sons and the Christians stood most in need of his protection. The two eldest, who were with the Emperour, understanding the the Death of their Father, came to take possession of their Inheritance, and demanded of the Jesuits the House which their Father had given them, for in Japon no Parent can alienate the Estate of his Children; nay, when they come to such an Age, he is oblig'd to put them in possession of their Estates, reserving only such a proportion to himself. The Jesuits, loth to part with so fair a convenience, would not quit their hold, though it were for their own quiet, and to engage the whole Family to stand by them in their time of trouble. This refusal pro∣vok'd the two Brethren, and this quarrel between them and the Jesuits happen'd at the same time that the Dutch President was labouring to bring about his designs. He hd notice of this dispute, and as he was a great Impostor, he made  his business to enflame the two Brothers, not only against the Jesuits, but against the Portugals in general, giving them a Copy of the Letter which he had fram'd, as is before-men∣tion'd. These two Lords, who were Favourites of the Emperour, joyning Interest of State to their particular Interest, made their complaints at Court, with extraordinary aggravations; urging that there was no security for the Estates of particular Men, for the quiet of the Empire, nor the Life of the Prince, unless not only all the Portugals, but also all the Natives of Japon, who had suck'd their Errors, were exterminated out of the Island. To make good the reasons of their Exasperation they shew'd the Emperour a Copy of the Letter, and put him into such a fright, as well for his Person, as the Empire, that he would admit of no justification on the other side. Some of his Lords, who were Friends to the Portugals, besought him to examin the truth of what was alledg'd, before he proceeded to utmost extremities against a whole Nation, and against his own Subjects. But he was inexorable, and presently gave private Orders to certain Commissioners, to go through all the Provinces of the Empire, and to banish not only the Portugals, but also all the Christian Natives. Now in regard they had their private confederates, as well in the Court, as in other places, they had intelligence, in all parts, of the cruel resolution tak'n against them, though none were more zealous and faithful to them then the two Lords of Ximo, Francis and Charles. Thereupon the Christians met together to consult for their own safety, and their common preservation, and seeing all attempts to justifie themselves prove ineffectual, they resolv'd to stand upon their guards, and to dye in the defence of their Innocency and Religion. The two Lords put themselves at the head of the Christians Army, the elder of which had been a Souldier, and understood the Art of War; the younger kept up their Spirits and Courages by his continual Exhortations. The Emperour's Commissioners understanding that the Christians were thus embody'd, gave him speedy notice thereof, but said nothing either of the number of their Forces, or of their designs. The Jesuits and Austin Fryars at Goa, told me, that the Army of the Christians con∣sisted of above 40000 Men, besides those recruits that came up to them before and after the Battel was fought.
The Emperour not beleiving that the Army was so numerous, sent against them at first not above 25 or 30000 Men, under the Com∣mand of the youngest of the two Lords of Ximo, that liv'd at Court. But those Troops were no sooner upon their March, but he rais'd new Forces, and sent another Army after them, consisting of 40000 Men, commanded by the young Lord, to whom the Dutch President had shew'd the Letter first of all. The Christians having intelligence of the approach of these two Armies, prepar'd to receive them, choosing an advantagious place to intrench themselves. The first Army soon appear'd in sight of the Christians, who lay so encamp'd, that the Imperialists could discover no more than one part of them. However, before the Engagement, the youngest of the Christian Brothers advis'd his other Brother to send to the General of the Emperour's Army, who was their Brother likewise, to desire Peace, and to beseech him to intercede for them to the Emperour, and to assure him, that they were ready to lay down their Arms, and throw themselves at his Feet, and to justifie their Innocency. To this purpose a Letter was fram'd and sent to the General, but the Messenger that carry'd it was nail'd to a Cross in sight of the whole Army of the Christians, and at the same time the Enemy came on with great fury to assail them. The Fight lasted almost three hours with equal advantage; the Cap∣tain of the Imperialists seeking every where for his Brothers, while they strove to avoid him. The Christians, who knew that all their safety consisted in their Victory, and that there was otherwise no hope of par∣don, fought with so much valour; that the Imperialists were forc'd to give ground. Their General was slain upon the place, and at length the whole Army of the Idolaters was cut in pieces. This Victory wrought the Conversion of several of the Idolaters; and the Christians, after they had given thanks to God three days toge∣ther, prepar'd themselves for a second Combat, not doubting but the other Army would set upon them while they were weary, and weaken'd by the last Battel. But that General more prudent then the former, only posted himself where the Christians could not come at him, and writ to the Court the particulars of the Defeat of the first Army, upon which he expected the Emperour's Orders. In the mean while, the Army of the Christians daily encreas'd, so that in a few days they were above fifty thousand strong. The Emperour, resolv'd to stifle this Revolt in the beginning, sent Orders through all his Empire to make new Levies; and all the while the Dutch President's Confederates ceas'd not to aggravate him against the Christians, not suffering the other Courtiers to open his Eyes, and prevent so unjust a prosecution. The defeat of his Army had put him into such a rage be∣sides, that though the Captains of the Christians Army did all they could to clear themselves from the false accusations laid upon them, and to obtain their pardons, there was no possibility of being heard. The Emperour call'd his Council, where the wisest were of opinion, that it would prove the best way to receive the submissions of the Chri∣stians, who offer'd to lay down their Arms upon a general pardon, and the free exercise of their Religion. But the President's Cabal carry'd it beyond this sober advice, and the Emperour, exasperated by his Impo∣stures, took the wrong course. Thereupon the Council resolv'd with
all speed to raise a vast Army, which was to joyn with the other, and so to ruin the Christians all at a blow. The Dairy also, who is con∣sulted upon all important affairs, approv'd this Council. Thereupon the Lords who are oblig'd to furnish the Emperour with Men, strove who should bring their Troops and Companies first to the Randevouz appointed, which was neer the place where the second Army lay; so that when both Armies were joyn'd together, there was in the Field a Body of 150000 Men. The Brother of the General, who was slain in the first Battel, commanded under the Emperour, who resolv'd to go in person. But first of all he caus'd a Proclamation to be made in his Camp, whereby he forbad any Quarter to be given to any Christian, unless it were the two Brothers, whom he intended to punish openly; and that they who left the Field before the Christians were banish'd, should be put, they and their Kindred, to the most cruel Deaths that could be imagin'd; but that they should be rewarded that brought the Head of a Christian to the Emperour. The Copies of this Proclamation were scatter'd in the Army of the Christians, though they did no harm but only encou∣rag'd them against the Idolaters, seeing there was no hope of pardon. Nevertheless the youngest of the two Brothers offer'd to go and throw himself at the Emperour's Feet, to implore his clemency in the name of the whole Army; saying withall, That he should accompt himself happy to suffer Martyrdom to shew his Innocency; but they would not suffer him to stir. All he could obtain from them, was to write a Letter full of respect, submission, and repentance for what had been already done, declaring that they were ready to lay down their Arms, if the Emperour would grant them pardon, and the free Exercise of their Religion, offering with the hazard of their Lives to make out the falsity of all those things wherewith they had been accus'd. This was by an Idolater carry'd to a certain Lord who secretly favour'd the Christians; but the Emperour toar it without reading it, vowing at the same time, that he would never return to his Court 'till the Idola∣ters were all extirpated. The Christian Army understanding the Em∣perour's resolution, minded nothing more then their own defence. 'Tis true, the Ground where they lay was advantagious enough for the smallness of their Number, but the Idolaters were three to one; besides that the Idolaters of the Country, who favour'd the Christians before, now declar'd all against them so soon as they saw the Imperial Army. So that now both Armies lying so near together, several hot Skirmishes pass'd between 'em; and at length it came to a general Battel. At first the Christians overthrew the Idolaters, not able to stand before them: with so much vigour did the youngest of their Chieftains assail them. He was remarkable for his Habit that day, but more remarkable for his courage; so that the Field was cover'd with the Bodies of the slain, fear and dread possessing the yielding Enemy. But while the Victor forgot his Brother's advice, and pursu'd too far from the Body of the Army, he was encompass'd on every side, wounded, and being carried away by the press of his Enemies, was at length taken, and lead before the Emperour. His eldest Brother, more experienc'd in War, rally'd and recall'd those that had follow'd his Brother, and till Night maintain'd the advantages, which he had got over the Imperialists, who were still supply'd with fresh Succours, as necessity requir'd. The next day the Fight
was renew'd again by break of day, and with a success as honourable, but more bloody to the Christians. The third day the Emperour enrag'd at such a resistance, caus'd them to be set upon in several places at one time. The General of the Chri∣stians Army rode from Rank to Rank, encouraging the Souldiers both by his Exhortations, and his Example: but at length having receiv'd several wounds, he was overlaid by the multitude of his Enemies that crouded to his destruction. And now the General being lost, and the Christians having no person to command them, it ceas'd to be a Com∣bat, and became a Massacre. However, resolving to dye with their Swords in their hands, they flung themselves into the thickest of their Enemies, and Sacrific'd themselves to their own Innocency. Their Camp was soon forc'd, and all the old Men, Women, and Children put to the Sword, except some few that escap'd and hid themselves in the Mountains, who afterwards made a relation of this bloody Story to them who rehears'd it to me. This was the deplorable end of the Christians, and indeed of the Christianisme of Japon, which the President procur'd by his impostures and fallacies. And it has been made appear by three exact accompts, that there has perish'd, either in Battels or by Tortures, above 60000 Chri∣stians. The eldest of their Captains suffer'd a most cruel Martyrdom for seven days, neither could any offer, that the Emperour could make him for his Brothers and his own Valours sake, induce him to renounce the Christian Faith. After that, there was a kind of Inquisition set up thorough the whole Empire, which lasted for several years, whereby those that persever'd in the Faith, were condemn'd to most intolerable Torments, in so much that the Relation which Van Varen, a Hollander, whose credit it would be a vanity to question in this particular, cannot be read over without Horrour. In sixteen years, that is, from 1613 to 1629, the Christians were so multiply'd, that there were above 400000; but in the year 1649, the same Hollander relates, that those Japonners who were brought from thence by the Company's Ships to Am∣sterdam, affirm'd, that Christianity was utterly extirpated out of the Island. Being at Ogli, a large Town upon the fairest Arm of the Ganges, I met a Holland Merchant, who had serv'd the Company in Japon a long time and had made several Voyages. He came thither with two laden with Bars of Silver and Copper, which he had exchang'd for Silks, which the Hollanders buy at Bengale. This Merchant know∣ing I was there, came to visit me; and I finding him to be a sincere honest Man, and well verst in the affairs of Japan, especially in reference to the last persecution of the Christians, grew cove∣tous of his converse, and invited him often to my House. In our familiar discourses concerning the settlement of the Hollanders in the East-Indies, and of the extraordinary gain which they make by their Trade there, and passing thus from one thing to another, at length I ask'd him who was the Author and Contriver of a Massacre so horrid, as that was reported to be. Whereupon he related to me all the particu∣lars of which I have here made a recital, and many more which I have forgot or omitted, as being either not pertinent to my subject, or else already related by others. He had his information from such of the Natives that had escap'd out of the Battel, and several of the Idolater
Merchants, in whose memories the fact was then fresh: and indeed he was so ingenious in his Story, that I could not find any motive to in∣cite me to misdoubt the truth of it. For many times he could not for∣bear shedding tears, and to interrupt his discourse with his sighs, often imprecating Heav'ns Vengeance upon the President, and protesting he wonder'd the Company employ'd him so long. But God reserv'd his punishment to himself. For the deserts of his crimes always atten∣ding him, and provoking judgments and misfortunes upon whatever Enterprize he took in hand, he miserably perish'd in sight of Lisbon in fair weather. All the men in the Ship were sav'd; only he returning to recover a certain Cabinet of Jewels which he had there, the Ship split, and the Portugals had the satisfaction to see him swallow'd up in the Sea, who had been the occasion of the Ruin of so many of their Country-men in Japon; and immediately they rang their Bells in the City for joy of his Death. In my last Voyage to the Indies I was at Bandar-Abassi, where the Hollanders have a Factory. Thither arriv'd two Vessels from Japon to take in Silks, which the Hollanders buy of the Persians to exchange in Japon. The Captain of one of the Ships told me, that during several trading Voyages which he had made to that Island, the Emperour had caus'd two Inquisitions to be made after the Christians; in the first of which the Inquisitors met with 247, who were all most exquisitely tormented to Death; in the latter they only found 63, among whom were seventeen Children, twelve Girls and five Boys, of which the eldest were not above thirteen years of Age. Among all the persecutions which the Christians suffer'd, there was none comparable to this for extremity of Torments: For the Japonners are the most ingenious in cruelty of any people in the World, and the most constant in suffering. For there have been Children from ten to a dozen years old, who for 60 days together have endur'd to have their Bodies fasten'd to the Cross, half burnt, half torn in pieces, while their Executioners forc'd them to eat, on purpose to prolong their Lives in misery; and yet they would not renounce the Faith which they had embrac'd. Neither did this barbarous Inquisition extend only to the Christians, but to their Kindred and Relations, nay, to their very Neighbours. For if a Priest were taken in any House, all the people in that House, and the Houses adjoyning, were hall'd to Execution, for not having made the discovery. At the beginning of every year there is a new Inquisition, at which time all that can write are requir'd to subscribe, or else the chief of the Family subscribes for all the rest, that they neither are Christians, nor are acquainted with any Christians, and that they abominate Christianity as a Religion dangerous to the State. Don John of Braganza, being advanc'd to the Crown, that sudden change which in one day, and without the least Tumult in Lisbon, wrested the Crown of Portugal from the King of Spain, wrought the same effect at Goa. All the Portugals at Goa at the same time acknow∣ledg'd their new Soveraign; the Viceroy who was a Spaniard, was sent away to Spain by the first Vessels that were homeward bound; and Don Philip de Mascarennas, a Portugal, Governour of Ceylan, came to Goa, and took upon him the command of Viceroy.
So soon as he came to the Government, his first thoughts were how to Establish the Trade of the Portugals in Japon, which when they were expell'd, amounted to three Millions of Pardo's yearly, one Pardo being worth twenty seven Sous of French Money. The hopes therefore of regaining so great a loss, made him toward the end of the year 1642, take a resolution to send a solemn Embassy to the Emperour of Japon, fur∣nish'd with magnificent Presents: For which reason he made choice of what was most rare, and most likely to be acceptable to the Emperour, and the Grandees of his Court. The most costly of these Presents was a piece of Lignum Aloes, otherwise call'd Wood of Calambour, four Foot in length, and two Foot in Diameter; a larger piece then which the Indies had never seen, having cost 40000 Parao's. To this he added a great quantity of fair Coral Beads of an extraordinary bigness. This is the most acceptable Present that can be sent to the Lords of Japon, which they fasten to the Strings wherewith they draw their Pouches together. With these he sent a great number of Carpets and Hangings of Cloth of Gold, Silver, and Silk, and several pieces of Tissue of Gold and Silver. 'Tis said the whole Present cost the City of Goa above eight hundred thousand Pardo's, which amounts to about 86666 l. 13 s. 4 d. of English Money. Besides all this, the two great Ships which were prepar'd for the Embassador, carry'd one of them 50 Peeces of Canon, and the other 35, both laden with all sorts of Commodities which are esteem'd and priz'd in Japon, amounting to about 83333 l. 6 s. 8 d. Sterling. The Equipage of the Embassador was no less sumptuous. And because the Viceroy would not be thought to give any occasion of offence to the Emperour, he would not suffer one Jesuit in the Train, but only four Augustins for the Admiral, and four Jacobins for the other, Men of discretion and conduct. While I was at Goa, in the year 1648, I met with some of these Fathers, who gave an exact accompt of the Embassy. They made a prosperous Voyage, and arriv'd happily at their in∣tended Port. But you must understand, that when any Ship arrives at Japon, no persons are permitted to come ashore, 'till the Governour of the place have an accompt who they are, that they may give notice thereof to the Emperour, and know his pleasure, whether they shall be received or no. In the mean time the Ships rode in a very dangerous place, at the entry of the Haven, into which there was no steering, without the assistance of the Native Pilots. The Governour of Nangasaqui surpriz'd to understand that they were Portugueses, wrote in all hast to the Emperour. The Dutch President being inform'd of the news, play'd all the pranks he could, us'd all the contrivances imaginable to frustrate the success of the Embassy, and to ruine the Vessels that brought the Embassadour and his Presents. To which purpose he found a way to bribe the Courrier, who was sent with the Emperours Orders; so that instead of twenty days, which were sufficient for his journey, he made it above two Months before he deliver'd his dispatches. During which time the two Ships had suffer'd very bad weather upon the Coasts, and endur'd many a severe Storm. At length the Orders came that none should be permitted to Land but the Embassadour, the two Captains, and the two Pilots, to give an accompt of the subject and cause of their coming. The Embassadour being Landed, acquainted the Governour that he came to compliment
the Emperour in the behalf of the King his Master, and to assure him that they were no longer under the Power of the King of Spain. That about a year since, a lawful Heir of Portugal had recover'd the Diadem of his Ancestors which the Spaniard had usurp'd. That this new King was so just and generous a Prince, that understanding that some of his Subjects had deserted the Island of Japon, without paying their Debts, he had now sent to make a general satisfaction; but chiefly out of that respect which obliges all Soveraigns newly come to the Crown, to give notice thereof to those Princes, whose friendship they desire. The Governour inform'd the Emperour of all these things; but the President having as good intelligence by means of his Friends at Court, alledg'd to the Emperour that they were Rebels, who came from the utmost parts of the West, to bring the News and Example of their Revolt to Japon: That the natural restlesness of this Nation caus'd fre∣quent disturbances and revolutions among them. That they were never long at rest themselves, nor would suffer others to be at quiet. That considering the experience he had had, he could not be either too cau∣tious for the security of his person, or the tranquillity of his Empire. Lastly, that the Emperour and the Empire would be ruin'd past reco∣very, if those people were ever admitted to set footing therein. This Counsel well seconded by the rest of the Cabal, easily made an impression in the Heart of the Prince naturally Barbarous, and an Enemy to the Christians. Thereupon he sent an Order to the Gover∣nour to invite all the Whites aboard, and to treat them for eight days in the best manner he could. At the end of eight days they were order'd to repair aboard again, and at the same time he made a Present to the Embassadour, and chief of his Train, consisting of six great Cabinets, and six Coffers lacker'd with black, with Figures in Relief, intermix'd with spangles of Gold, all the Embellishments being of Massie Gold. With them were six Cabinets, and six Coffers, lacker'd with Red, Embellish'd after the same manner with Silver. I saw some of them when I was at Goa, and I must confess I never beheld any so rare and beautiful in that kind, which made me admire the ingenious Industry of the Artists of Japon; Our European imitations of their workmanship being no way comparable to them. The Embassadour having receiv'd his Present, had Order to remove all the Goods in the second Vessel into the Admiral. He would have made great Presents to the Governour, who refus'd them; telling the Embassadour withall, that he had express command to refuse them, and to declare to the Embassadour, that if he did not make hast away, he would sink his Ship. That the Emperour his Master had made a new prohibition, forbidding all Portugals and Spaniards to venture near his Dominions upon any pretence whatsoever; nay, though it were upon pretence of an Embassy, upon pain of being crucifi'd upon the place, without liberty to speak for themselves. As for the Debts of the Portu∣gals, he had undertaken to discharge them himself; only he had sent that Present to the King his Master to thank him for that Embassy. The Embassadour had no sooner remov'd the Goods out of the second Vessel into the Admiral, but they sank her before his face. And not contented with that affront, the Governour sent for all the Blacks that were in the Admiral, and cut off their Heads, pretending they were Indians, and that, as such, they could not be ignorant of the Rigorous prohibitions
which the Emperour had put forth, forbidding all Strangers, except the Hollanders, to set footing in Japon. After the Portugal Embassadour was thus harbarously frustrated and dismiss'd, he sent News thereof to the General at Batavia, urging him to execute the design which the Hollanders had upon Macao; telling him also, That though there were a probability of a League between the Hollander and the Portugal against the Spaniard, yet that it could be no harm to seize Macao beforehand, as they had made themselves Masters of several places, while the Portugals were under the King of Spain. The General taking the President's advice, was ready to set Sail upon this enterprize, when a Messenger from Portugal brought him the News of the Treaty concluded between Portugal and Holland; as also of the Navy which the Hollanders had sent to Lisbon to aid the Portugals. At first he made as if it had been a false Rumour, and put the Messenger in Prison; nevertheless while he delay'd the departure of the Fleet, he receiv'd express Orders from his Superiours to Treat the Portugals as Friends and Allies. So that he was constrain'd to turn all his Forces against the Molucca Islands, then in the possession of the Spaniards. The President was very sorry for the last News, by reason that the General and he had great designs upon the Conquest of that place, and had promis'd the Company by that means to make them absolute Masters of the Trade of China, and of all the East. True it is, that Macao is very advantagiously seated for those that design to be Masters of those Seas, especially upon the Coasts of Quantung and Fockien, which are the Provinces, whither are brought down all the Merchandizes of this Empire. It lies at the Mouth of the Gulph of Canton, in a small Peninsula adjoyning to a larger Island, and built upon a kind of a Pro∣montory, on three sides environ'd with the Sea, which no Ship can come neer by reason of the Flats, unless it be on that side next the Port, which is defended by a strong Fortress. This City drew from the only Fair of Quanchiu 1300 Chests of Silks of all sorts, every Chest con∣taining 150 pieces, and 2500 Lingots of Gold, not reckoning the raw Silks, the Gold Wire, and other Merchandizes: whence it may be easily judg'd what advantage the Portugueses made of it; and wherefore the President desir'd so much to expell them from thence. But his Designs were disappointed, not only by the revolution in Portugal, but also by the loss which the Hollanders sustain'd of the Island of Formosae, which the Chineses took from them, following the advice of a French Souldier, whom the Governour of Tayovan had refus'd to dismiss after his time was out. For the better understanding this accident, you must know that the Hollanders being setl'd in Japon, and having excluded all other Nations from thence, except the Chineses, whom the Emperour permitted to return, after that the Massacre com∣mitted by the Japonners in a City of China, of which they had a desire to make themselves Masters, had caus'd a Cessation of the Commerce between the two Kingdoms, and constrain'd the Emperour of China to set a price upon the Heads of the Japonners. Nevertheless the Hollan∣ders did all they could to make a new Rupture between the people, or else themselves to seize upon some place that lay proper to ruin the Trade of the Chineses to Japon. To this purpose, not daring to attempt upon the Portugueses, they over-ran the Seas which environ'd the neighbouring Islands, and took
the Vessels of the Chineses which were bound for Macao, exercising strange Cruelties upon the people that had escap'd into those Islands, after the irruption of the Tartars into China. Coxinga, the Son of Chinchilunge, that famous Pirate, who sav'd the remainders of that ruin'd Empire, then commanded those people, and was become formi∣dable to the Tartars themselves. Who to revenge himself upon the Dutch Pirates, undertook the Siege of Tayovan, where they usually retir'd, and by gaining that place drave them wholly out of Formosa. This is a large Island plac'd at the poynt of the Phillippines, stretch∣ing out in length from North to South, and to the West lying opposite to the Provinces of Fockien, and Quantung. The Chineses call it Tali∣eukieu. Since which time, 'tis very probable that the Spaniards gave it the name of Formosa, from its beauty and fertility. They being the first people of Europe that discover'd it, and inhabited it; and upon one of its Promontories to the North built the Fort of Kiling. The natu∣ral Inhabitants live almost all in the Woods and Mountains, where they maintain themselves by hunting the Hart, and wild Boar, whose dry'd Flesh, Skins, and Horns they sell to the Sangleys, who in exchange bring them other necessaries. The little Island of Tayovan lent its Name to the little Fort which the English built, over against the great Island; it was very convenient for the Hollanders, who made great advantage of the Cattel, Hides, and Horns, both of Harts and Bufalo's, which they carry'd from thence, and sold to the Chineses and Japonners, who make great use thereof in several of their Trades and Manufactures. But the chiefest advantage which the Hollanders made of this Island consisted in this, that it lay in the middle way between Batavia and Japon, and serv'd as a place of security for their Ships in bad Seasons, and to take in refreshments. There also they laded off several of the Goods of the Chineses, which they took by way of Piracy from the Chineses, or which were brought them by the Sangleys, who are the Original Merchants of the Chineses, setled at the Philippines, but who drive the greatest Trade of that Country, independent from the Spaniards. Coxinga, though an Idolater and a Pirate, banish'd out of his Country, and provok'd by the Hollanders, had so much humanity as to send to the General at Batavia to send away Vessels to fetch away his Men, and de∣liver'd them all without suffering them to receive the least injury. He had his Friends and Favourers in the Emperour of Japon's Court, as being a declar'd Enemy to the Tartars, whose neer Neighbourhood the Japonners cannot endure. For so quick a Conquest of so many Lands and Provinces in seven years, as it were only upon sight of the Enemy, had very much alarum'd them. He by his Friends acquainted the Em∣perour of the acts of Hostility, committed by the Hollanders against the Chinese Merchants: Adding moreover, that they had made private propositions to league themselves with the common Enemy; and that it was one of the Nations of the North, born for the desolation of other Countries, and to invade the Peace of Empires. That they had setled themselves in the Islands of the East only by treachery and violence. That for some years since, they had made it their business to cruise the Seas between China and Japon, on purpose to make themselves absolute Masters of the Trade, and that if he did not take a speedy course, they would do the same mischief in his Dominions which the Tartars had done in China.
The President had much ado to divert the Storm, for the most potent Lords at Court, although his Pensioners and Friends, began to open their Eyes, and in some measure took Coxinga's part, saying, That the Chineses were unfortunate enough, in being laid wast by the Tartars▪ without being persecuted and afflicted by the Hollanders. That seeing that after they had been expell'd their Country, they had nothing left but their Boats, and some few Rocks for their places of refuge, it was a piece of inhumanity to disturb them in their last Sanctuaries, and to deprive them of their liberty of the Sea, and their Commerce with Japon, from whence those miserable Exiles had their chiefest support. The Bonzes, the Merchants, the vulgar People, all took the Chineses part. Thereupon the Emperour sent for the Dutch President, and told him, I understand, said he, that thy Company abuses my Protection, and that their Vessels, instead of being contented with the Trade which I have permitted them, presume to play the Pyrates upon the Chineses, and to trouble the Seas adjoyning to my Empire. If I hear any more of these complaints, I will cause thee and all thy Nation to be Cru∣cifi'd. I know not how the President appeas'd the Emperour's fury; this I know in general, that the Hollanders made a secret alliance with the Tartars against Coxinga. Him the Inhabitants of Fockien call'd to their assistance, having rais'd an Army of 200000 Men; whereupon he went to aid them with a very powerful Navy. After several Skir∣mishes, the Tartars and Chineses came to a pitch'd Field, where the Captain of the Tartars having plac'd the best part of his Cavalry in Ambush, order'd his Men to retreat by degrees, 'till they had drawn the Chineses into the Ambuscade; at what time the Tartars encom∣passing them on every side, kill'd 80000 upon the place; Coxinga with his Navy not being able to relieve them. During this War, the Hollanders took their opportunity, and made themselves Masters of the Island of Fishers, between Formosa and the Coast of Fockien. In a short while after Coxinga dy'd, and Savia his Uncle, the richest Merchant of China, who out of his own revenue had disburs'd the expences of the last War, grew weary of the charge, and was desirous to make Peace with the Tartars. Of which one of the Sons of Coxinga being advertiz'd, seiz'd upon his Uncles person, and shut him up in a close Prison, where he kill'd himself for madness. The Hollanders overjoy'd at the Dath of Savia, who had always hin∣der'd them from the Trade of the Province of Fockien, sent a Navy against his Nephew in favour of the Tartars, who made War against him all along the Sea-Coast. Several Combats happen'd between the Juncks of the Islanders and the Holland Vessels in view of the Tartars, who satisfi'd themselves with being only Spectators. But all the benefit which the Hollanders reap'd from the advantages which they obtain'd over the Islanders, was only to put into the Hands of the Tartars the Cities of Bemos aed Quesmoy, and all the places thereabouts, which Coxinga's Party possess'd before. For notwithstanding all their kindness, the Tartars would not assist them to retake Tayovan; so that they only were content to build certain small Forts in the small Islands adjoyning to Formosa: and since my return from the Indies, I never could inform my self of the truth of the issue of that Enterprize. But the Hollanders were not content with their settlement at Firmando, which was an Island both desert and barren, seated upon a Streight,
which separates the Point of the Land of Corea from Japon, a place no way commodious for their Designs of Engrossing the Trade of China, as being too remote from Nangisaqui: Besides, that the North and South Winds are so violent at their Seasons in this Streight, between the two Coasts, that it is impossible to come near the shoar when they blow. The President therefore having such good luck in the Expulsion of the Portugals out of Japon, doubted not but that he might obtain the small Island of Kisma, an Island that had been wholly deserted ever since the Habitations of the people had been destroy'd. At first he only desir'd leave to build a small Tenement for the conveniency of the Factors. Now between this Island and Nangisaqui, there is only a narrow Frith, not above a Musquet Shot over. Here the President desir'd the Gover∣nour that he might make a Bridge of Boats for a more easie intercourse between the City and the Port. The Governour gain'd by Presents, gave him leave to build the Bridge; but seeing that the Hollanders made an ill use of it, and that they came too frequently and numerously into the City, he built two Forts at both ends of the Bridge, and furnish'd them with Souldiers, who were to take notice who pass'd to and fro. He also publish'd an Order, That such Hollanders as came by day into the Town, should return to their Lodgings before night, upon pain of Death. This Order, and the little conveniency which they had for Lodging in their own Quarters, very much troubl'd them; so that the President made new Applications at Court, and obtain'd leave to build a Factory, and Warehouses for their Goods. The Governour thereupon sent a Surveyor to the Hollanders, to mark out the Ground which the Emperour had given them to build upon. This person being largely rewarded, made them good measure, and yet they were not contented; so that in the Night-time they had enlarg'd their Quarters, by removing the first marks. The Governour, being advertiz'd thereof, began to be very angry; but they found means to appease him with their Presents: so that he easily condescended to the slight reasons which they gave him for what they had done. Thus in a short time they finish'd their work, which was without encompass'd with a Wall, much like a Garden Wall, but within contain'd a real Fort, flanck'd and lin'd according to all the Rules of Art; and which, the outward Wall being beaten down, not only defended their Bridge, but commanded the entry into the Haven of Nangisaqui. They took great care not to admit any but Hollanders, for fear their Design should be discover'd. So that when the whole was finish'd, the President gave advice to the General at Batavia what he had done, desiring him to send him eight Brass Guns, so broken, as to be easily put together in the places where they were broken. He adviz'd him also to put them up in Hogsheads, pack'd up like other Goods; and instead of Mariners, to send a good number of Souldiers, habited like Mariners, for the security of the Factory. But this Stratagem had not that success which he expected; for about that time the Emperour had sent a new Governour to Nangisaqui: So that when the Ships arriv'd at Batavia, the new chang'd Officers, being more vigilant then the for∣mer, coming to weigh the Bales as they were put ashore, and finding certain Hogsheads at the bottom of the hold, which they could not re∣move by reason of their weight, they presently brake them up, and perceiving there the broken pieces of Canons, carry'd some of them
to the Governour, who immediately sent intelligence thereof to Yeddo, of which the President had as suddain notice by his Pensioners. He having his invention at command, repairs forthwith to the Emperour's Court, and there tells the Emperour, That he had receiv'd Orders from his Superiours to present him with certain Peeces of Canon, made according to the newest Invention of his Country, the use whereof was so convenient, that they were with little difficulty and trouble to be drawn up, and made use of, where others could not possibly be brought to play: and that he thought no Present could be more acceptable or ser∣viceable to him, to render him Victorious over his Enemies. Upon this the Emperour was very well satisfi'd, and sent to the Governour of Nangisaqui to send him those Guns, and withall, not to molest the Hollanders, either in their Factory, or in vending their Wares. Having so fortunately disengag'd himself out of these Briers, he lays another design, and sends to the General at Batavia, a person of a turbulent and unquiet Spirit like himself, to set out two Vessels, to make a discovery of all the Coasts of Japon, and particularly of those Coasts which were next the Gold Mines, and to see if they could find any safe Harbour for Ships to ride in, in those tempestuous Seas, or any places proper to fortifie, that they might no longer depend upon the uncertain humour of the Court of Japon, which was as inconstant as their Seas. The General provided two Ships, and furnish'd them with excellent Pilots, good Souldiers, expert Mariners, and Provisions for two years, with all other Necessaries and Instruments, as well for del∣ving as building. One of the seven of the General's Council was chos'n Supervisor of the Enterprize. 'Tis said, that those two Vessels skirted all along the Coast of Japon, from the East to the South, and from the South to the North, fetching a compass about the Islands to the 47 deg. of Northern Latitude, and that they discover'd one Island which they call'd The States Island, and afterwards touch'd upon another Land which they nam'd The Company's Land, inhabited by White people, with long Hair, habited after the Japon fashion, which they found to be a Continent adjoyning to Niulhan, and Corea; and that after they had wander'd a long time upon the Sea, without any other design then to make new Discoveries, they pass'd through the Streights of Sanguar, which separates the Land of Yesso from Japon, and kept along those Coasts of Japon to the East, to observe the Bays of Aizu, and Xendai, where are the Gold Mines. In that part a furious Tempest took them, in sight of the Mountains, where the Gold Mines lye, which lasted four days together. The second of these Vessels run full against a Rock, and split her self, with the total loss of every Mothers Son in the Vessel. The Admiral held out a longer time, but coasting the Land where the Mountains of Sataque appear, the Tempest grew so violent, that she also brake against the Rocks. In this second Ship∣wrack only the Admiral, and thirteen persons more escap'd, partly by the help of the Planks, and partly by Swiming. The Japonners upon the Coast presently ran to view them, and wonder'd to see people in those parts, whose Language they did not understand. Nevertheless, they entertain'd them civilly enough; but in regard they were Stran∣gers, and that there was a strict prohibition not to receive any Stran∣gers among them upon any pretence whatsoever, they were at a great loss what to do with 'em. One, wiser then the rest, advis'd his
Brethren to carry them to the Emperour, whose counsel was follow'd; and so they took their journey toward Yeddo, which was above a hun∣dred Leagues off. The Emperour, being inform'd of their arrival, order'd that they should be civilly us'd; and at the end of eight days sent for them, and caus'd them to be ask'd, of what Country they were, and what Design brought them into his Seas? The Admiral, who was a person of a ready ingenuity, answer'd, That he was a Hollander, who all his life time had serv'd his Country as a Souldier, where he had the command of a thousand Horse, and two thousand Foot, at what time Fortune, or rather the care of preserving his Honour, forc'd him from his Native Soyl. I was, said he, one of the chief Commanders in the Army, and though I say it, my Service had gain'd me a fair reputation. The Prince, who commanded us, had a great confidence in me, which made one of his near Relations jealous of me; so that he was not only content to do me all ill Offices with the General, but sought all occa∣sions to pick a quarrel with me. I dare be bold to say, that had he not been so nearly related to the Prince, I should not have taken his affronts so long patiently. But at length he provok'd that patience to such a degree, and so deeply and openly affronted me, that I was constrain'd to meet him with my Sword in my hand. His misfortune and mine so order'd it, that I kill'd him at the first push. My Friends assisted me to make my escape, and kept me hid for some days, thinking to have ap∣peas'd the Princes anger; but it continu'd so violent, that they advis'd me to absent my self for some years. Therefore to render my Exile less tedious, and that I might be still doing something for the Service of my Country, I desir'd my Friends to furnish me with two Ships, with a resolution to seek out and destroy all those Pirates that infested the Indian Seas. I have been in chace of them for a whole year together; and sometimes we met with Tempests so violent, that drave us we know not whither our selves, my Pilots not being experienc'd in the Eastern Seas. Soon after meeting with another Tempest no less rude and boystrous, we were forc'd to let our Ships drive as the Winds themselves were pleas'd to force them, which at length drove us upon the Coasts of this Empire, where we have suffer'd Shipwrack, not having sav'd above fourteen of four hundred, which I brought along with me. Happy in such a misfortune, to be cast upon the Territories of a Prince so potent and generous, that, no question, will have compassion upon our miseries. When the Interpreter had repeated this Relation to the Emperour, the Prince, and all the Lords of the Court were very much concern'd, and admir'd both the Courage and Aspect of the Stranger. The Emperour sent him very rich Presents, and to all those of his Company; and gave Order, that he should be conducted to Kisma, to the Holland Factory, and that he should be well treated upon the way, during the whole journey, which was five and twenty or thirty days Travel. There this famous Champion stay'd four Months, in expectation of the Ships that come every year from Batavia to Japon; so that he had time enough to make a full Relation of the Lands which he had observ'd, and of all the particulars of the Shipwrack. One day as he was telling how he had cajoll'd the Emperour, and that the President was applauding the quick∣ness of his wit for inventing such an imaginary piece of Knight-Errantry,
a Japonese Boy that serv'd the President, heard all the dis∣course, without being observ'd by his Master. Some Months after, the President had beaten this Boy, which he, as all the Japoneses are of a fiery and vindicative Nature, resolving to revenge, went to the Governour of Nangisaqui, and repeated to him the whole Discourse between his Master and the Admiral. The Governour, finding it to be a business of importance, sends advice thereof to the Court. The Emperour was so enrag'd at the injury and affront put upon him, that he commanded the Governour to stop the Admiral and his Train, and to send him with a good Guard to Yeddo, and not to let any Ship enter the Harbour, 'till he had had a full Examination of the matter. This Order was not so secret, but that the Presidents Friends had notice thereof, who presently gave him intelligence of it so seasonably, that the Admiral was sent away before the Order came to the Governour. Eight days after, three Holland Vessels arriv'd at Kisma, to whom the Governour sent express command to keep out at Sea, and not to come ashore. The President feigning to be surpriz'd at this Prohibition, went to the Governour to know the reason, who gave him this Answer, The Emperour, said he, is acquainted with your tricks, you shall have no more kindness from me; I have sent to Court to give notice of the arrival of your three Ships, and I shall follow my Orders when they come. Upon this the President made no doubt but the Admiral's story was discover'd; and recollecting with himself that he had beaten his Japonese Boy, and that he was run away from him, he soon conjectur'd at the Author of all the mischief. In short, the Governour receives his Orders, the Tenour whereof was, That he should send away the three Vessels, without permitting them to land either Men or Goods; and that he should tell the President, That the Emperour was satisfi'd that the Admiral was a Cheat and a Spy, whom he intended to punish severely; and therefore, if he did not send for him to Japon by the first opportunity of the Winds, he would put to Death all those of his Nation, and fling their Goods into the Sea. Upon the return of three Ships to Batavia, there was no small hurly burly in the Island; for by them they understood the danger that their Country-men were in, if they did not send back the Admiral. There∣upon an extraordinary Council was call'd, to deliberate upon an affair of so great importance, who were all of one mind, that the Admi∣ral was to be sent back, and that it was better for one to suffer, then a whole Nation. The Admiral being advertiz'd of this their resolution, publickly pro∣tested against the violence and injustice they were about to do him; telling them, that he was born a Subject of the Republick of Holland, who had only the Power of his life and death; that in their Service, he would expose his life to a thousand hazards, but that he was not oblig'd to sacrifice himself for the particular Interests of a private Trade. The Ministers took his part, and made it a case in Religion. The common people mutiny'd against the General, and the Tumult grew to that heat, that the Sea-men were sent for from aboard their Ships to disperse the multitude. At length, by the interposition of a Minister, the business was brought to a conclusion; who perswaded the Admiral by his smooth Language, to appease the disorder of the people, by submitting to the Result of the Council. Thereupon he
promis'd to return to Japon, provided they would allow him what he demanded, not only for his reward, but also that which should bear him out in that same new part which he had in his head to act. First he demanded two Ships magnificently trim'd, a Train of fifty chosen Men, every one of which was to have three changes of Habit, of the richest Stuffs that could be had: Moreover 50000 Crowns for his Voyage, a Cupboard of Gold and Silver Plate, with all Equipage proportionable, and that those that accompany'd him should respect him, as a person of great Quality. All this was allow'd him, and the Admiral departed from Batavia, and arriv'd well at Nangisaqui. The Governour surpriz'd at the beauty of the Vessels, could not believe them to be Merchants, and therefore sent to know who they were; but he was more surpriz'd when he knew that it was the Admiral. Forthwith he dispatch'd a Courrier to the Em∣perour, to give him notice, and to inform him with what magnificence the Admiral was return'd. The President also sent, that he might have a favourable reception, and to desire his Friends to let the Emperour know, that this was a Person of great Quality, whom an Honourable Action had driven from his Country, and that he no sooner understood the accusation that lay against him, but that he was return'd with that Equipage that became him, to justifie himself. 'Till the Order came, the Governour, according to custom, caus'd all the Sails and Rudders of the Ships to be brought to him, not per∣mitting any person to come ashore. At length the Order came, that the Admiral and his Attendants should be receiv'd into the City, toge∣ther with all things necessary for their persons, and that they should be convoy'd to Yeddo, and that in all places where they came, they should be nobly treated. The President accompany'd the Admiral to assist him, as well with his Counils, as with the favour of his Friends. Their Entry was very magnificent, and the richness of their Habits brought the people from all parts, as being mainly greedy after No∣velty, so that the noise thereof was spread all over the Court: Yet the Emperour would not admit them to their Audience upon the day which they desir'd. Two Months were elaps'd, during which time the Admiral kept open Table, and display'd his dasling Riches to the Eyes of the Japoneses, and being of a quick and apprehensive wit, he caus'd himself to be in∣structed in the Language of the Island, and in a short time he began to un∣derstand many Words. When the Emperour sent for him, he clad himself and his Train in a richer Habit then that which they had on when he made his Entry. At first the Emperour seem'd to be angry; I understand, said he, that thou art an Impostor and a Traytor, that thy Birth is obscure, and that thou art come as a spy into my Kingdom, and therefore I am resolv'd to punish thee according to thy merits. When the Interpreter had explain'd the Emperour's words, the Admiral with an undaunted countenance, Sir, said he, a Prince so great as you are, should rather be a comfort and support to the unfortu∣nate, then add to their affliction. Fortune, that persecutes me, has in nothing been more cruel to me, then in raising those Calumnies, with which she has endeavour'd to blemish my reputation with your Ma∣jesty. She might expell me my Country, and cast me upon unknown Coasts at the other end of the World; but she can never inspire into
me thoughts unworthy of my Birth. This is the second time I have been within your Dominions, the first by occasion of Shipwrack, the second to obey your Majesties commands. The first accuses none but the Winds. And had I been guilty of what I am accus'd, I should never have ventur'd my self into your hands so far off from your Power. But, Sir, my Accusers have one advantage which I have not; they speak your Language, I understand it not, nor how to make you apprehend the truth of my justification. Allow me eight Months to learn the Speech of your Country, and then, if you will be so gratious as to hear me, I make no doubt but to confound my Accusers, and to satisfie your Majesty in all things. The Emperour was surpriz'd, and mov'd with his Answer, but more especially at his request of eight Months to learn the Japonick Language. I grant it thee, said the Emperour, for it is but just that a person ac∣cus'd should have both the Liberty and means to do it. And in the mean time I will take care that thou be honourably entertain'd in all places where thou hast a desire to reside. The Admiral us'd this Liberty with so much prudence, and got so much the love of the Courtiers by his carriage and his liberality, that by their converse, he not only learnt the Language, but by vertue of their good Character, the Emperour would often send for him, and ask him several Questions concerning our Europe, in reference to the Qualities of the Countries, the Manners of the People, the several Forms of Government, the Extent of the several Kingdoms, their Riches, Strength, and War-like Discipline; of all which, the Admi∣ral gave him so handsome an Accompt, that the Prince took great de∣light in his Discourse. And at length he had gain'd so much the favour and confidence of the Emperour, that he utterly laid aside all the ill thoughts which he had of him, and condemn'd to Death, as a false Witness, and a Traducer, the Japonese that had accus'd him. After so fortunate an escape, the Admiral thought it but common prudence to make a fair retreat in the Grandeur of his Reputation, and thereupon he took leave of the Emperour, who loaded him with Honours and Presents. The Courtiers were also sorry for his departure, so that some of them accompany'd him back, and took order for his entertain∣ment, which was very magnificent all the way to Nangisaqui, where he took Shipping a few days after, and return'd to Batavia. All the People throng'd to the Port to see him when he Landed. He told them in few words the success of his Voyage. Some applauded his ingenuity and courage; others extoll'd the Service which he had done the Company and Nation. The Council receiv'd him also with thanks and praises, and gave him all the Gold and Plate which he had brought back. A while after he departed for Amsterdam, where he was no sooner arriv'd, but he presented a Petition to the States General against the East-India Company, for sending him back to Japon, and for reparation of the violence and injury done him. The business was long in debate, but at last the Company was condemn'd to pay him great damages, and Interest for the same. But to return to the President: He began now to be weary of being confin'd to one Factory, though he made up his Pack well enough where he was. But his Ambition carry'd him farther, and he thought he had done Service enough to be advanc'd to a higher Dignity. Nei∣ther
was his presence so necessary at Japon, where he had settl'd the Dutch Trade in as good a condition as it could well be. And in truth, the Hollanders had then almost the whole Trade of the East-Indies. They had taken from the English, Formosa, Amboyna, and ooleron, and by that means engross'd all the Trade of Cloves, Mace, and Nutmegs. They had taken Baton by surprize. The Inhabitants of the Celebes, Ternate, and Tidor, were become their Vassals; and the King of Ma∣cassar having made an Alliance with them, had expell'd the Portugueses out of his Dominions. By means of their Factories in Sumatra, they had got all the Pepper Trade of the Western Coast of that Island into their hands, besides several other advantages which they had in several other places, where they had encroach'd upon the Portugals, Spaniards, and the English themselves. The East-India Company at that time enter∣tain'd 140 Ships, part Men of War, and part Merchant-men, pro∣vided with great Guns, Ammunition, and Provision of all sorts, and in these Ships above 6000 Men, part Souldiers, part Mariners. Bata∣via was the Soul of their Conquests, made upon the Ruins of the Portu∣gueses, which had they lain all together, would have made a large Empire, and by which they might have grown infinitely rich, had not the expences of their Navies and Souldiers eaten out the gains of their vast Trade. One of their wisest Generals told me frequently, We have, said he, but too many Fortresses, we need no more then the Cape of Good Hope, and Batavia, Factories well settl'd, good Ships, and honest Men to serve us. For in short, their Officers pillage unmercifully, and cause the Commerce and Dominion of their Country men to be detested by the Indians, through their Covetousness and Cruelty. I know my self, that in the year 1664, the Expences of the Hollanders in the East-Indies amounted, communibus annis, to twelve Millions a year, not to reckon Shipwracks, decay of Ships, and wast of Goods, and yet their Cargo's for Asia and Europe have not amounted to above ten Millions; and sometimes the Cargo's are so mean, that the Receits do not answer the Expences. Nevertheless their perseverance and courage were worthy of admiration. For what could be more to be admir'd, then to see that a small number of Merchants, assembled at first upon the single score of Trade, should afterwards presume to make War in Regions so far distant, assail so many Princes and Nations, plant so many Colonies, besiege so many Cities and Forts, and lastly, set forth so many Navies at such prodigious Expences, that it would put many potent Soveraigns to a plunge to do as they did? This was the Estate of the Holland East-India Company, at what time the President, the principal Subject of this Relation, was recall'd from Japon to Batavia, there to take upon him the Office of Chief Director. He carry'd thither great store of Wealth, and built several magnificent Houses in the City. His Authority also was very large; but he exer∣cis'd it according to his usual custom, and was hated by all the Officers of the Company, and the Citizens themselves. He thought himself secure of the Employment of General, but he was deceiv'd in his hopes; upon which he took pet, and return'd for Amsterdam, where he liv'd quietly for some years. At length his turbulent and ambitious Spirit put him upon new Designs, to revenge the injury which he thought he had receiv'd. To which purpose he return'd to the Indies. His undertaking was not so prosperous for those that employ'd him, and who merited to
have been better serv'd. He pillag'd, couzen'd, and caus'd several disorders in their affairs, and at length returning home again, perish'd in the River of Lisbon with his Money and Jewels, as hath been already related. The End of the First Part.
A RELATION OF What pass'd in the Negotiation of the DEPUTIES Which were sent to PERSIA and the INDIES, As well on the behalf of the KING, as of the FRENCH COMPANY, for the settling of Trade. IN the Relation which I have undertaken, I shall make a faithful Report of things in such manner as I saw them transacted by the Deputies sent to Persia, and the Indies, as well on the behalf of the King, as of the French Company, for the settlement of Trade. The Thirteenth of July, 1665. the Sieur Lalin, Gentleman in Extraordinary to the King, and the Sieur de la Boulaye, a Gentleman of Anjou, with the Sieurs Beber, Mariage, and du Pont, Deputies of the new French Company, for the settling of Trade in Persia and the Indies, arriv'd at Ispahan, and took up their Lodgings at Zulpha, being the Suburbs of the same City, where also at that time liv'd the Sieur L'Estoile, a French Merchant. Lalin and Boulaye, without saying any thing to the Deputies, deliver'd to L'Estoile the Letters which Monsieur de Lyonne had written to him; the Inscrip∣tion whereof was thus. To Mr. L'Estoile, first Valet du Chambre to the King of Persia, or in his absence, to Mr. Logis, his Son in Law. Which was not a little to be admir'd at by the Franks, who had sojourn'd any time in that Country, to find that Monsier Boulaye, who had been be∣fore in Persia, and should have better understood the Custom of the Court, should be no better able to instruct a Secretary of State, then to let him give L'Estoile the Title of Valet du Chambre to the King of Persia,
who has none to serve him in his Chamber but Eunuchs, and never suffers a Christian to touch his Habits, for fear of being defil'd. The purport of the Letters, was to admonish L'Estoile to support; assist, and protect the Deputies in the Business upon which the Com∣pany had sent them; and in case of losses by the way, to furnish them with such necessaries as they should want. The King of Persia was then three days journey from Ispahan; for which reason a Messenger was dispatch'd with a Letter to the Nazar, or Grand Master of the House, and another to the Mirzateker, or his Lieutenant, to know whether his Majesty would command them to wait on him there, or whether they should expect his return to Ispahan. In the mean while the Deputies could not agree amongst themselves: For the three Merchants Beber, Mariage, and du Pont affirm'd, that the two Gentlemen were only interested by the by in this Negotiation; and that having no right to take cognizance of the Affairs of the Com∣pany, they ought not to trouble themselves any farther, then the King's Letters directed them, in the affairs of the Company. That the Effect of the King's Letters was no more, then that two Gentlemen, desirous to see the Court of Persia, were joyn'd with the Deputies of the Com∣pany; and therefore it belong'd to them only to treat with the Ministers of the King of Persia. That the Gentlemen had no more to do then to deliver the King of France's Letter to the Persian King, and to desire a nomination of Commissioners to treat with the Deputies. This con∣test, which all the Franks in vain endeavour'd to compose, came at length to the Nazar's Ears; who was strangely surpriz'd at it, having then a design to procure an Order from the King to remove out of Ispahan and the Suburbs, all the Christians of what opinion soever, and place them over against Zulpha. However, the Deputies rais'd new objections and difficulties every day; which Father Raphael of Mans, Superiour of the Order of Capu∣chins in Persia, employ'd all his credit and industry to accommodate. He wrote them out several forms of a Letter, which they were to send to the Nazar; but those that pleas'd the one Party, did not like the other. At length Father Raphael, weary of scribling and altering, amending and correcting, and all to no purpose; told them seriously, they did ill to act in such a manner, and to insist upon idle formalities; that the Persian Style, wherein they ought to write to the Nazar, ought to be concise and plain, without superfluities, or impertinencies; and lastly, that all their contentions did but redound to the disadvantage of the Com∣pany, whose Interests they pretended to manage. After several con∣tests, Father Raphael, at last, finish'd the Letter to the content of both Parties, which was transcrib'd into the Persian Language; with ano∣ther to the Mirzateker, and both were dispatch'd away. The Nazar having read it, presently inform'd the King of the French Companies design, and of the arrival of the Deputies. His Majesty commanded him to let them know that they were welcome, and that in a short time, he would return to Ispahan, and give them Audience. Some few dayes after, the Court return'd to Ispahan, and while the King stopp'd at one of his Houses near the Gates of the City, the Nazar sent for Father Raphael, to know of him who the French Deputies were, and who had sent them into Persia, to which the Father gave him the best satisfaction he could. For the Nazar wonder'd that they were
come into the Kingdom, and sent, as they said, from such a potent Prince, and yet that the Governours of Erivan and Tauris should know nothing of their passage through those Cities. The Athemadoulet also was in the same Astonishment; and it gave them reason to suspect both the Quality of their Persons, and the Reality of their Commission. For either they were ignorant of the custom of the Country, or else they did ill to travel incognito, like ordinary Tradesmen, and Persons of mean condition. But Father Raphael having assur'd them, that they were sent by the King of France to settle a Company of Trade, and that he had Letters of Advice thereof out of Europe, the Nazar bid Father Raphael tell the Deputies they should be in a readiness, for that the King would give them Audience in a few days. But the former misunderstanding, still continuing between the Gen∣tlemen and Deputies, Father Raphael fearing some mischievous conse∣quence of it in the presence of the King, or that they should make some dispute for priority, the Father represented to the Nazar, that whereas the Deptuies were of two Orders, the one of Gentlemen, and the other of Merchants; therefore to take away all suspition of jealousie, it would do well, that His Majesty would be pleas'd when he admitted them to their Audience, to permit the Gentlemen their seats on the one side, and the Merchants on the other. Which the Nazar approv'd, and the King allow'd of the same day. The 27th of September, the King being at his Palace of Scader-Abbas, upon the bank of the River, between the Bridge of Zulpha, and the Bridge of Schiras, caus'd a preparation of Artificial Fire-works to be made, which came to above 2000 l. and early in the Morning caus'd notice to be given, that he intended that day to give audience to the King of France's Deputies. Father Raphael also had Order to be ready with the Deputies, to the end, the Mehemender, or Master of the Ceremonies, might not be oblig'd to wait. Accordingly that very day the Mehemender came to L'Estoile's House, and from thence con∣ducted the Deputies, with all their Train, and the rest of the Franks then resident in those parts all mounted on Horse-back, with a march so slow and grave, and for the advantage of the sight so far about, that it was almost Night before they arriv'd at Scader-Abbas; at what time the Mehemender enter'd the Palace alone, leaving the Merchants at the Door. In the mean while, the Merchants believing that Father Raphael did not favour them so much as the Gentlemen, cry'd out aloud, that they would have an Interpreter also for themselves, or else would go no farther. Father Raphael, who acted only by the Nazar's Order, and for the advantage of the French Nation, told them, that whither they went any farther or no it was all one to him: that for his part he was not there as an Interpreter, either for the one or the other, but only in obedience to the King's commands. In the mid'st of this debate the Mehemender return'd to carry the De∣puties to their Audience; five hundred Musketeers being rank'd in order upon the bank of the River, to give them a Volley as they pass'd along. The Mehemender's march at first was slow and grave, but approaching the place where the King was, and from whence he had a view of the De∣puties, he caus'd them to double their pace to the foot of the Steps, where the Lackeys took off their Shooes; and from thence they proceeded into the Hall of Audience, where the Kans, and other great Lords were
sitting. Upon each side stood the Youth of Quality, sumptuously clad in Tissue of Gold and Silver, their Cloaks and Mantles being lin'd with Martins, Sables, and other rich Furs. The Deputies being come into the King's presence, the Mehemender caus'd them to kneel, and bow their Heads to the Ground three times: That done, he caus'd them to rise, and lead up Lalin by the hand alone, as being the person who had in charge the presenting of the Letter to the King. After him follow'd Boulaye, and the rest of the Deputies, and thus they mounted up to the place where sate the Athemadoulet, and the Nazar. The King was seated upon a Scaffold somewhat higher then the rest, encom∣pas'd with 150 young Gentlemen magnificently clad, to whom the Sieur Lalin, at the head of the Deputies, made his compliments in French, and then humbly presented the Kings Letter, seal'd with a flat Seal upon a flying Label, enclos'd in an Embroider'd Box, with the Arms of France and Navar, in relief, upon the Lid. Father Raphael explain'd to the King the effect of Lalin's Speech. After which the King gave a little bow with his Head, and at the same time gave a sign to the Master of the Ceremonies to carry them back to their places. Being come to the bottom of the Hall, where the Officers had Order to separate the Gentlemen from the Merchants, the Officers by mistake put Boulaye with two of the Merchants, and Mariage one of the Mer∣chants with Lalin, which made Boulaye cry out aloud in the Turkish Lan∣guage Menbeg-Zaddè, I am a Gentlemen; but the thing being done, and the King being present, there was no help. Then the Persian Musick began to play for a quarter of an Hour; which having given over, the Master of the Ceremonies came again, and carried up Father Ra∣phael, and the two Gentlemen, as he suppos'd, of which Mariage by the forementioned mistake happen'd to be one, again to the King: at what time Lalin with a comely grace made his Harangue, and set forth the occasion of his Deputation to His Majesty, of which His Majesty testifi'd his good liking by a nod of his Head. For Lalin had a handsom presence, and spake with an acceptable Tone, and his magnificent Habit very much added to the comely Air of his Person. The Speech was expounded by Father Raphael; which when he had done, the King ask'd the Deputies several Questions, and then with his hand made them a sign to retire to their places, beck'ning at the same time to Father Ra∣phael to stay; and causing him to come near him, more particularly in∣form'd himself of the Power of the King of France, the Extent of his Dominions, his Military Discipline, and his Councils: of all which the Father gave him the best accompt he could, and then with the King's leave, retir'd to his place. This Scene being over, a Flagon of Gold, and a Glass were sent to the Deputies, attended with a short Banquet of Fruits, and other sorts of Food; the Instrumental and Vocal Musick playing all the while. Which being over, the King again sent for Lalin, Mariage, and Father Raphael, and after a short Discourse, having dismiss'd all but father Raphael, he fell into a dispute with him touching the Unity of the Divine Nature, the necessity of one Prophet, and how Mahomet was the Seal and Crown of all Prophets. He seem'd to admire that the Franks, who had the Reputation of being People of Wit and Discretion, could think Jesus Christ to be a God: to all which parti∣culars, the Father endeavour'd to give the King the best satisfaction he could. But then, Father Raphael being desirous that the three Deputies
should partake of the King's favour as the other two had done. Where∣upon the King sent for the other three Deputies, and having discours'd a while with Boulaye, while Father Raphael interpreted between them, in a short while he dismiss'd them all again, but Father Raphael, with whom he enter'd into a more jocular Discourse then the former, of the Colours, Black and White, and of the Beauty of the French Women, the King confessing that naturally he did not love Brown Women, the White complection being more agreeable to him, as being that com∣plexion which alone compos'd the Beauty of Women. The Father modestly made his answer, that Beauty consisted only in fancy; for that the Persians lov'd thick and full Eyebrows, which were not at all esteem'd in France. Then the King casting his Eyes upon the Box wherein the King of France's Letter lay, he took out the Letter, and observing it to be a small piece of Parchment, and not such a one as he had receiv'd from several Princes and Potentates of Europe, nor indeed like those which the Jesuits had brought him formerly from the King of France himself, in a fair piece of Parchment, with a large Seal deep cut, he gave evident Demonstrations of his contempt of it, and was about to have thrown it away. Father Raphael perceiv'd him to be out of humour, to whom the King in pursuance of his dislike, said, Ra∣phael, I never receive open Letters without a Seal, take it, and let me see it no more, for I do not believe it comes from so great a King as the King of France, and at the same time made him a sign to retire. He durst do no otherwise then take the Letter, and so returning to his place, he told both Lalin and Mariage what had pass'd in his Discourse be∣tween him and the King. Two hours, after that, were spent in be∣holding the Mummeries of their common Dancers, a pastime very usual in Persia. Which being over, the King sent again for Lalin, Mariage, and the Father; and after some few Questions, to whith they gave the best Answers they could, he again dismiss'd both the Deputies, retaining only Father Raphael with him. The Father, then taking his opportunity, told the King, that he had always observ'd it to be the custom of the Athemadoulet to cause the Letters, which the European Princes sent His Majesty, to be interpreted in his presence. And therefore, added the Father, I beseech Your Majesty to permit me to give the King of France's Letter to the Athemadoulet, to the end, it may be truly interpreted to him according to usual custom. Thereupon the King made a sign to the Father to give it him, and glad he was to be so rid of it. The Father observing the King in a good humour, spoke to him in behalf of the other three Deputies, that he would be pleas'd to admit them to be sent for a second time, in regard the others had been sent for three times. But the King told him, it was enough for him to speak to the Gentlemen, let his Ministers talk with the Merchants. The Father being then dismiss'd, he sent for Lalin alone, for whom he shew'd himself to have a very great kindness and affection; and at the same time commanded the Nazar to bring him the next day, together with Father Raphael, and Lagis the Genevese, who was retain'd in his Service, to Court, for that he intended to be merry with them. Then he went on, and told Lalin, that so soon as the French Ships were arriv'd, he would send an Embassadour to the King of France, and make a strict Alliance with him. Lalin reply'd, that His Majesty of France desir'd nothing more. Why then, reply'd the King, is not my Alliance suffi∣cient,
but that you must go seek the Alliance of the Blacks, from whom you will not draw those advantages, with which you flatter your selves? For you must know, that the Deputies kept their affairs so secret, that no body knew of them but all the World, the Servants as well as the Masters. Not considering, that the Persians are good Poli∣ticians, and that that Court is never without Spies. Therefore the King knew, that as soon as the Deputies had dispatch'd at his Court, they were to depart for the Indies, with which Nation he keeps no good Correspondence. And for that reason, he was not a little offended with them, though they endeavour'd to persuade him, that their Errand to the Indies was only for Linnen and Spices. The Deputies presented to the King a very fair Fuzee, together with the Kings Picture, in little, drawn to the Life, which was so much the more esteem'd, because at the same time several large Cuts had been brought to Ispahan, and presented to the King, which perfectly agreed with the Picture in Oyl, by which the whole Court was convinc'd that it was the real Portraiture of the King. When these Presents were laid before the King, he ask'd the Deputies, for which of the Eastern Na∣tions the French had most affection; to whom M. Lalin made answer, that certainly for the Persian; thereupon the King return'd, that cer∣tainly they had reason; for that the Persians were white, like the French, and that it was impossible for them to have any affection for the Indians who were black. At length the King, to shew the Deputies his highest favour, would have them drink the HEZARD PICHE, in a golden Cup, which holds about a Pint of Paris. He order'd the Wine to be the same which he drank himself, which was in a Bottle of Chrystal Glass, studded with Diamonds. Lalin drank couragiously, and so did Mariage; but Father Raphael made a fair excuse, and got off. After midnight the Zerhaftes, or Table-Cloaths of Cloth of Gold were spread upon the Floor, and several roasted Viands very hot of the Spice, and Dishes of Salt Fish, purchas'd from the Caspian Sea, were brought and set upon the Cloaths; together with several Pastrie Meats, dry'd Raisins, Comfits, Almonds, and Pistaches, and other provocatives to drink. The repast being ended, several Buffons were brought in, who Sung and Danc'd after the Turkish fashion, and made a hundred wry Mouths and ugly Faces. Among the rest of the Divertisements, there were two Men introduc'd, that play'd one against another with each a Battoon in his hand, with a piece of Linnen dipt in Naphta, ty'd to the end of the Stick, which cast forth a very clear brightness in the dark; at the same time four artificial Whirle-Winds were made to rise one after another, which were all hovering in the Air at once, and in a continual Agitation. Three Hours after Midnight the Masters of the Ceremonies came to raise the Deputies to take leave of the King; and so leading them to the lower end of the Hall, after a profound reverence, they retir'd, not one person beside stirring out of his place, to the end they might have time to take their Shoes without confusion. When they were gone, the King dismiss'd the Court, and then it is that the croud is so great, that not one in twenty but loses their own, and gets whose-ever Shoes he can lay his hands on. The Deputies and Father Raphael being upon their return home, by that time they got half way, met an Officer belonging to the Athemadoulet,
who told Father Raphael that his Master expected the French Begzades at his House by Ten a Clock next Morning, to treat them, by his Majesties Order. Father Raphael, Lalin, and Boulaye, were punctual to their time, and no sooner did the Athemadoulet know of their arrival, but he came down into his Hall of Audience, to receive them, where he had also order'd a very fair Banquet to be ready for their entertainment. There Father Raphael left them, while he went with the Athemadoulet's Secre∣tary, to Translate the King of France's Letter into the Persian Lan∣guage; which being finish'd, and he come again into the Hall, after several Civilities past on both sides, the Father and the Deputies return'd to Zulpha. The Merchant Deputies offended at the Honour which the Gentle∣men had receiv'd, would have gone in their Turn; but Father Raphael told them, that it was not the Custom in Persia to visit the Prime Mi∣nister, without being sent for. In the Evening, Father Raphael, and the Begzades received new Orders to attend the King, but the King stirr'd not out that Evening, so that their Journey was in vain. The Merchants still perceiving the Honours which were done the Gentlemen, and believing Father Raphael to be the cause of all, they began to rail at him, and give him foul Language, and threaten'd to write into France to give an accompt of his behaviour. Father Raphael netled at the Language of the Deputies, told them, that he had done what in him lay to procure them the same Honours, which the others had receiv'd, though they were so little sensible of it. That he would continue his endeavours for the Advancement of their Affairs, though not for their own sakes, yet for the sake of the Company, that had sent them. Which answer, though it were sharp enough, and shew'd that the Father was angry, yet he did not forget, that they were his Coun∣trymen; so that he ventur'd to carry them twice to the Prime Minister of his own accord, contrary to the Custom. The first time he was not to be spoken with. The second time, he made an Errant to him with the three Deputies, to present him a Copy of the Letter from the Directors of the Company, in the Persian Language; at which time he shew'd them the Deputies, acquainting him withal that those were the Persons with whom he was to treat in point of Trade. To which the Athemadoulet reply'd, that he had no Commission from the King to meddle with those Deputies, but only, to entertain the Begzade that brought the King's Letter, which he had already done. Thereupon the Father desir'd him he would be pleas'd to speak to the King to nomi∣nate Commissioners to treat with them, which the Athemadoulet pro∣mis'd to do. That day in the evening, a Messenger was sent to Father Raphael, to acquaint him, that the King had appointed the Nazar to treat with the Deputies the next day, and to know their demands. Of which the Father gave the Deputies quick intelligence. The next day, being the First of September, Father Raphael fail'd not to be with the Deputies very early in the Morning, to bring them to the Nazar; but he was very much surpriz'd to see, that they would not go altogether, but still loo'k with an evil Eye one upon another, and continued their former differences. To the end therefore that he might set things to rights, he went to the Nazar, and told him, that he thought it would be the best way for the Merchants Deputies to come
first, because that they were the Persons with whom he was chiefly to Treat. The Nazar answer'd, that the King understood that they were all five in the same Commission joyntly. To which, when the Father answer'd the second time, that it would be the best way to do as he had propos'd; The Nazar with a Surly Countenance, why, What's the matter now? said he to the Father; Are not you French-men asham'd to be thus at odds one with another, and to give all the World, nay the very Foot-boys occasion to discourse of your Divisions? What would they have us think of them and their Commission? Are they so little afraid of offending the King? Or, is their King more indulgent then the King of Persia, who would never pardon such faults in his Subjects? To this rebuke the Father made no reply. Only he desir'd the Nazar, that he might have two Horse-men to attend the Deputies at Zulpha, telling the Nazar not a word of his design to bring the Merchants an Hour sooner then the Gentlemen. This fell out to the Fathers desire; For the Father sent one of the Horse-men to Zulpha, to the Gentlemen, with order to drink with them, and not to be over hasty, but to bring them fair and softly along with him; with the other he made hast to the Merchant Deputies, and causing them to double their pace, they got betimes to the Nazar's House, where they were civilly receiv'd. Dupont presented the Nazar with the Deputies Commission, translated into the Persian Language; after which they fell into a discourse, which lasted above three quartes of an Hour, concerning the Customs, Tolls, and Qua∣lity of the Merchants, and the justness of the French in their Dealing. They had just finish'd their Discourse of Trade, when the Nazar was advertiz'd, that the three Gentlemen were arriv'd; who thereupon desir'd Father Raphael to go and receive them. The Father went and waited upon them in, neatly chiding them for having stay'd so long, and making the Nazar wait. Well said he, now you are together, go into that Cabinet, and write down your demands, and the Articles of your Commission. The Merchant Deputies, which had now dis∣cours'd with the Nazar what they had to say, were well enough con∣tent to enter into a General Conference with the Gentlemen. Then calling for Pen, Ink and Paper, they made a draught of their Demands, the chief of which were, three Years Immunity from Customs and Tolls, to begin from the time of the arrival of our Ships; and that after that, they should enjoy all the Priviledges and Favours granted to other Nations. They also desir'd precedence above all other Nations, when they should be call'd to Court, as they suggested, that they had at the Court of the Grand Signior. And lastly, they requir'd a House for those that belong'd to the Company, to live in the City. These demands were dictated word for word by Father Raphael, to the Nazars Secretary, in the Name of all the five Gentlemen; and because the Nazar's Secretary knew not how to pronounce them, the Father undertook to write them in the Persian Character; which being done, and the writing read in the hearing of the Deputies, the Nazar took the Paper to present to the King. Thus after a fair Banquet, accompany'd with Music, both Vocal and Instrumental, the Deputies were dismiss'd by the Nazar, who bid them rely upon his care; for that he would do them all the Favour that lay in his pow'r, and give them his Majesties Answer in a short time. The Deputies very well satisfy'd with the Nazar's reception, sent him
afterwards a Present, which was a Shame both to the Nation and the Company, that pretended to such great and high things, and endea∣vour'd to six and opinion of their Wealth and Grandeur among Strangers. For they sent him only a Tin Cup Enamel'd, and eight little Cases of Perspectives, or Looking-Glasses, the whole not amounting to above 40 Crowns. They also made much such another Present, but meaner, to the Mirzateker, consisting of about a Dozen Pair of Gilt Scissars for Women. We must speak the Truth: For they were not a little saught at for their ridiculous Presents, which were the Scorn and Contempt of those that receiv'd them, when the Deputies were gone. To Father Raphael they presented a Purse, with 40 Tomans, or Six Hundred Crowns in it, believing that he would never accept of it; and indeed he refus'd it with scorn; not a little angry with them, that they should have such mean thoughts of him, as to believe him Mercenary. Two days after, the Nazar gave notice to the Father, that the King had granted the French their Demands; and had order'd every one of them a Calaat, or a Vest-Royal, and in respect of Superiority, a Horse for Monsieur Lalin. That the Kings Answer and the Grant were both ready for the Directors of the Company, according to their desire. The King was then onward upon a journey to Mazandran, three days Travel from Ispahan, at one of his Palaces, call'd Tajabat. A Pleasant Situation, in the mid'st of a great Valley, shaded with Trees, and full of Villages. The Ninth of October, came a Letter from the Nazar, to Father Ra∣phael, signifying the King's Pleasure, that both he and the Deputies should repair to Tajabat with all speed. Thereupon the Father and they made such hast, that in less than three days they got to Tajabat, where the Nazar order'd them to lye in the House of an Armenian Renegado. The King sent them immediately eight or ten bottles of Wine, with four Gold Dishes, full of lovely Fruits, and Tapistries for their Dining Room. But these Presents occasion'd new Quarrels; For there being two Factions, and both living apart, there was a great dispute who should have this present. Father Raphael, having done all that possible he could to reconcile the business, and not being able to persuade them, in a just Passion, bid them take their Swords and Pistols, and go and decide the Quarrel in the Field. Till now, said he, I have done all I could to conceal your detestable divisions from the Court, which nevertheless, is but too well acquainted therewith: Is it your design to publish your own Ignominy, and to make not only your selves, but the whole Nation of the French ridiculous to the Persians? At length they were so far reconcil'd, that one Room serv'd them to Feed, and consequently the same Furniture. For the Father's reproofs had put them a little out of Countenance. The Seventeenth of October, the Mehemander came to the Deputies Lodgings, and brought five Royal Vests; The Richest, which was of Tissue of Gold, was for Monsieur Lalin; the next, not altogether so rich, for Monsieur Boulaye; and the other three of a lower price, for the Merchants; The value of the whole might amount to 600 Crowns, for which the French Deputies most generously gave the Officers that brought them 25 or 30 Crowns, as a Gratuity. The Officers of the
Stable also brought two Horses for the Gentlemen, for which they receiv'd six Crowns in Gold, as a reward. I confess, I should have been asham'd of such a poorness of Spirit, at such a time as that. At length also the Ragan or Patent for the Company was deliver'd into the Hands of the Deputies, faithfully Translated by Father Raphael to this Effect. That whereas the Merchants of the Kingdom of France, who are favour'd by the Favour extreemly Royal, and the Justice excessively Royal, being made constant in the hope and participation in the time, have presented their Petition, which is arriv'd at the Ear of the Ministers Commissioners for the Court of Grandeur and high Fortune; Their Intentions and Demands have found the Visage of Acceptation, and we have strictly commanded, that the Conservatours of Rights, Tolls and Priviledges, acknowledge them for exempt and priviledg'd, during the space of Three Years; and that there be nothing demanded upon their Goods and Factories, conformable to the request of the Deputies, &c. The next day, the Mehemander Bachi, came early in the Morning to attend the Deputies, and bring them with all speed to the Court: Where being admitted into the Garden, they met the King a Horse-back, and all the Court a Foot. The Athemadoulet held the King's Answer to the King of France, in a Bag of Cloth of Gold, Seal'd with the Kings Seal upon red Spanish Wax. The Sieur Lalin then, and the rest of the Deputies were order'd to go neer and Kiss the Kings Boot, who kept his Grandeur, without speaking a word. When they had so done, the Athemadoulet calling them to him, there, said he, there is the Answer for the Grand Cha, that is, for the King of the Kings of France. The Deputies having made their Obeysances to the King, the whole Court took Horse; and the King took the Road of Cachan; and within an Hour, that Campaign, which look'd like a thick peopl'd City, became as Desert as the most part of Persia. The Deputies, having read over the Patent, began to find many defects, and Mariage would fain have follow'd the Court for amendments, and would have persuaded Lalin and Father Raphael to have gone along with him. But Father Raphael over-persuaded them to retun first to their Lodgings at Zulpha, and there to hear the Patent distinctly read over, and to consider better of it. When they came to Zulpha, and that they had debated upon the meer Letter of the Patent, then they were worse mad then they were before. Then there were so many Cavils, so many Disputes, so many Exceptions, and so many Expo∣sitions put upon the Words Conformably and Reasonably, that they must get a Horse back immediately. Boulaye stopp'd this fury for a while; So that after many Disputes and Consultations, it was agreed, that Mariage, as chief of the Negotiation, and Lalin, should follow the Court; and that Boulaye, Breber, and Dupont, should proceed forward to the Indies. The Sieur L'Estoile, and all the rest of the Franks, were of opinion, that Lalin should forthwith depart for France, with the King's Letter. But their Counsel was not follow'd, and so the Deputies divided them∣selves: Lalin and Mariage to follow the Court, which was then remov'd as far as Mazandran: And the other three to pursue their Journey to the East Indies. The two former fain would have had Father Raphael have accompany'd them to the Court; but he fairly excus'd himself.
Neither would L'Estoile permit his Son, to whom he allow'd 20 Tomans a Year, to return to the Court, choosing rather to send him to Bander with the other three. Whereupon, the Seventeenth of November, they set forward upon their Journey. Du Pont, without doubt, was the most solid and judicious of all the Merchants, but he took it so to heart, to see the dis-union among them, that he fell into a languishing Disease at Ispahan, and dy'd not far from Schiras. As for Lalin and Mariage, they left Ispahan the Fifteenth of Decem∣ber, and arriv'd at Court soon after, where they lay a long time neg∣lected, their Divisions still continuing, which made them contempti∣ble to the Persians, and ruin'd the Affairs of the Company. One Evening, the Nazar sent them a Flow'r, advising them, that as that Flow'r never chang'd; so it became them not to vary in their Resolutions. After a long and tedious stay, Mariage obtain'd some few impertinent Alterations in his Patent; and permission to make Wine at Schiras, as the English, Hollanders, and Portugueses had. With these Alterations they both leave the Court; and Mariage would certainly have accompany'd Lalin, who had an intention to see Ardevil, Tauris, and Kom, had he not been solicited to return to Zul∣pha, by a Young Dalilah, that had smitten his heart. For by the means of an old Woman, the Mother of one of his Lacqueys, he had de∣bauch'd a young Armenian Virgin, whom he kept privately to himself; yet not so privately, but the noise thereof was quickly spread all over Zulpha. All the Armenians were scandaliz'd at it, and sent to seize the Baud, to punish her, by their Laws, as she deserv'd. Mariage adver∣tiz'd thereof, flew out of his Lodging to her assistance, and to protect her from Justice. But seeing the People in an uproar, and finding the Stones to flye too thick about his Ears, he was forc'd to mind his own safety, and to seek for shelter in the next House where he could be ad∣mitted. But the Business was not so put up, for the Armenians, won∣dring to see that a Deputy of an Illustrious Company, who was come to the Court of Persia upon so serious an Affair, should do so much wrong to his Nation, by publickly appearing in so shameful an Action, and so unworthy of a Person in public Employment, that they resolv'd to prose∣cute him all manner of ways. They were resolv'd, to that end, to have sent into France an Express, to have Complain'd to the King of his ill Management and bad Behaviour. But Mariage at length restor'd the Armenian Girl which he had kept close lock'd up; after which time the Armenians never look'd upon him but with scorn and contempt. Lalin being return'd to Ispahan, departed thence the 22th of Novem∣ber, 1666. for Bander, with a Resolution, to Travel into the Indies. But he fell sick at Bander, and thinking to return to Schiras, for the Air's sake, he dy'd by the way at a Village call'd Bend-Ali. A Gen∣tleman endow'd with noble Qualities, and whose Gentile and Generous behaviour was an honour to his Nation. The Thirtieth of the same November, Mariage also left Ispahan, and departed for Bander, with one Father Mercier, a Jesuite, whom he took along with him as his Almoner, and Lewis L'Estoile, his Kalmachi, or Interpreter: There he stay'd four Months for the arrival of the Ships, but none coming, and the heats encreasing, he resolv'd to spend the rest of the Year at Schiras. As for the Jesuit, and young L' Estoile,
because there was no Converse but with the people of the Country, they return'd back to Ispahan. Boulaye and Beber arriv'd at Suratte the first of April, 1666. Being come to the Bar, they sent to Father Ambroise, chief of the Mission of the Capuchins, who presently attended them with a Sloop, which he had obtain'd of the Governour, and brought them home to the Capu∣chin's House, where they stay'd till they departed for Agra. Some∣time before was arriv'd there a Merchant of Aleppo, who had run him∣self out at heels, and of a Maronite Christian was become a Roman Catholick, in hopes to patch up his broken Fortune, being in truth a meer Counterfeit, and a Hypocrite: For these Levantine Christians seldom change their Religion, but upon some motive of Interest; and when they have got a good Sum together, they presently whip back again into their own Country, and for a small piece of Money obtain absolution of their Patriarch. Thus several of the Religious Franks that travel out of Europe into Asia are often deceiv'd, making a great noise of their Conversion of the Levantines, when the Conversion, at the bottom, is only an outward Conversion, and a meer piece of Gul∣lery. Among many others that I could relate, I will only mention one, of a Franciscan, call'd Paul Stella, who coming with 400 Crowns, or thereabouts, in his Pocket, for his subsistance, a Maronite smelt him out, and under the pretence of giving him the Honour of his Conver∣sion to the Catholick Religion, never left him till he had suck'd him dry, and turn'd the Channel of his Money. This Maronite Merchant before mention'd, whose Name was Chelebi, shew'd himself very zealous for the Capuchins, and he had reason enough; for the Capuchins of Aleppo had been very serviceable to him, and had help'd him in his Affairs when they were at the lowest ebb. They were overjoy'd at his arrival at Surat, and gave it out immediately that it was he that had given them Money for the building their House and Church. But when I came to look over my Accompts, I found that the Money that had pay'd for the Ground and a good share of the building, came out of my Purse; Father Ambroise having promis'd that I should be reimburs'd upon my return to Paris. But I never heard more of my Money, nor indeed did I ever look after it. The reason why the Capuchins were willing that the Aleppo Merchant, who never had disburs'd a Peny, should own the Expences of their House and Church, is this; because no Frangui Christian is permitted in the Indies to enjoy the propriety of Houses, or to make any reparati∣ons of those which they hire, without the leave of the Governour of the place. Both the English and Holland Companies are only Lessees to the Indians; the Great Mogul having suffer'd from the Christians in seve∣ral places, where under pretence of repairing or adorning certain Houses, which they possess'd by way of propriety, they have so well fortifi'd them, that when the Governours have come to require any Duties from them, they have made them good so long, till they have forc'd the Governours to yield to their demands. So soon as the Deputies were landed at Surat, they presently spread abroad a report, that there were seven or eight Ships belonging to the French Company that would suddainly follow them. The Aleppo Merchant was overjoy'd to hear the News, and was in great hopes, that by the favour of the Capuchins, and the advantage which he had of speaking
several of the Asiatick Languages, that the greatest part of the French Merchandize would pass through his hands. Upon these hopes he made great Treats, and presented large Presents to the Deputies, and maintain'd their Servants at his own Charges. He found the De∣puties to be sufficiently covetous, but he was still in great expectations, that his civil Entertainments, and the Presents which they receiv'd from him, would oblige them to acknowledge his kindness, and that one day he should find himself repay'd by the management of their busi∣ness; but he was foully mistaken. For it cost him above 1500 Rupies, part which he spent upon them himself at Surat, and partly what his Nephew furnish'd them withall at Agra for their present occasions. Three or four days after their arrival at Surat, the English President sent to visit them by some of his Council, and would have waited on them himself, but that he lay then ill of the Gout. The Holland Commander did the same with his Council, shewing all the civilities and kindnesses that lay in his power; and a few days after invited them solemnly to a great Feast, with as many as they could bring along with them. In the midst of their Jollity the King's Health was sent about, and after that, the Prosperity of the French Company; which oblig'd Boulaye to begin another Health to the happy Progress of the Holland Company. But when it came to Mr. Beber's turn to drink it, notwithstanding all that Boulaye, and the rest of the Company could say to him, they could not oblige him to pledge it. Nay, he did worse then this, for he threw the Glass, Wine, and all at his Feet; and when he had so done, he rose in a heat from the Table, and after a pitiful manner left the Company, and went home to his Lodging, though without any attendance. The Hollanders were so discreet as to take little notice of his folly, but remain'd very merry at the Table with Mr. Boulaye till Midnight. But they could not forbear telling their Friends, that they wonder'd, in regard there were so many discreet and ingenious Men in France, that the Company should make choice of such a Fool for the management of such an important Affair as he was sent about; and that they foresaw he would do the Company no small injury. While the Deputies stay'd at Surat, the Governour of the place, at the request of Father Ambroise, entertain'd them, and shew'd them all the respect that could be shew'd to Strangers. One day that they were in Discourse together, he told them, that if they would follow his Counsel, he adviz'd them not to go to Court till their Ships were arriv'd. But seeing that they were resolv'd to the contrary, he offer'd them Money, Horses, and Souldiers, to attend them, with Letters of Recommendation to some of the Grandees of the Court. The Cha∣bander, or Provost of Merchants, made them the same offers that the Governour had done; all which they refus'd very obstinately. More then this, they behav'd themselves very ill, in reference to the Presents which the Governour and the Cha-Bander sent them, for they gave their Servants that carry'd them not a Doight, which is look'd upon as a very dirty action in the Indies. For the Indians never give their Ser∣vants any other Wages, then what they get by carrying Presents from their Masters. And the more they have given them, the more Honour it is, both for him that receives, and him that sends the Present. The Deputies then being resolv'd for Agra, hir'd their Waynes, and their Oxen to carry their Luggage, and five and twenty Souldiers for
their Convoy. They likewise made a great noise, of their being honour'd from so Great a King, and so Noble a Company. Upon which score, they ought to have had five or six Wains for their Baggage, every one their Pallaquin and a Led-horse, and every one a Flag with their Arms or their Cyphers, which is the gentile way of Travelling in India, and as I was always wont to travel. But they took but five and twenty Souldiers, whereas they ought to have hir'd an hundred and fifty at the rate they talk'd. But instead of so doing, three Days Journey from Surat, Beber began to quarrel with Boulaye, that they had too great a Train at their heels, for which he blam'd the Advise of Father Ambroise and the Merchant of Aleppo: That for his part he would pay for no more than four Souldiers, and that if he would not send the rest back, he should pay them himself. Upon which, they agreed to send back the six Souldiers which the Governour had order'd to attend them as far as Brampour; upon their dismissment, not giving them so much as the Worth of a Pipe of Tobacco. When they came to Agra, the Nephew of Chelebi, the Aleppo Merchant, fail'd not to wait upon them, and to offer them his service. There was at that time a French Chirurgeon, whose Name was James, he spake good Indian, and was married in the Country to the Daughter of a Portugal: The Nahab, the King's Uncle and Grand Vizier, had a great kindness for this Chirurgeon; and by his procurement it was, that the Deputies had Audience of Giafer-Kan, for so was the Nahab call'd. They requested of him, that by his favour they might present a Letter from their King to the Great Mogul, as also that they might be admitted to treat concerning the Settlement of a French Trade in the Countrey. The Nahab told them, that he would speak to the King, and take care that they should be admitted to their Audience in a little time. With that he order'd them to be conducted to the Lodgings appointed for them, which they found ready furnish'd with all necessary provision for the Belly; but their Lacqueys and Servants were to cook it themselves; for it is not here as it is in Persia, where the Meat is sent ready drest out of the King's Kitchin to the Embassadors Table. The Nahab, who understood that they had brought no Presents, neither for him, nor any of the Grandees of the Court, nor for the King himself, was not over hasty to admit them to their Audience. So that it was above a Month before the Deputies could set Eyes upon the Nahab again, though the Chirurgeon, and other Franguis, us'd all their Interest in their behalf. Being very weary of this Delay, they gave it out, that they could stay no longer at Agra, in regard they were to be at Surat upon the Arrival of the French Vessels. Upon which false Report, the Nahab sent to them for the King their Master's Letter, that he might present it to the Great Mogul himself. Upon this Demand of their Letter, they were quite blank, not being acquainted with the manner how the Kings of India receive those Letters which are brought them by Embassadors: For they never receive any with their own hands, but such as come from the Grand Signior: All other Letters, according to the Grandeur of the Kings that send them, are put into the hands of the Grand Officers of the Court, who present them to the King: And the more potent the King is, from whom the Letter comes, through the fewer hands it passes before it is presented
to the Great Mogul. For the present State of Europe and Asia is very well known in the Court of the Great Mogul, and the Difference between the Soveraigns of both, in reference to their Grandeur and Puissance. Neither is there a Stranger that enters into the Kingdom, of whom the Governour of the Frontier Province does not give advice to the Nahab; and if he appear to be a person of Ingenuity, there's no help for't, but he must go to Court, where he is caress'd, on purpose to get information of the Country from whence he comes. But to return to the Deputies, they obstinately refus'd to send the Letter to the Nahab: At which he was not a little troubl'd; fearing lest upon the Arrival of the French Vessels, it might be the occasion of a Rupture, and hinder the conclusion of the Treaty of Commerce. Moreover he was not a little jealous, lest they should seize upon the Great Mogul's Vessels in their Voyage to Mecca, as Hugh Lambert the Holland Pyrat did, who took all the Baggage belonging to the Queen of Visapour, when she was going to Mecca and Medina. The Nahab having made these Reflexions to himself, so wrought with the King, that he consented that the Deputies, contrary to custom, should be admitted into his presence, there to give the Letter into the Hands of the Prime Minister, to be by him presented to the King. This, as I said before, was an unusual favour; and yet the Deputies were so obstinate, as to reject this Proposition, saying, that they would rather return home, and carry back their Letters, then not present them to the King themselves. This obstinacy of theirs, to maintain their own conceited humour against the Custom of the Countrey, was very much blam'd by all people, that admir'd at the patience of the Nahab, who at length sent them word, they might take their own course, since they refus'd the Honours which he would have done them. After that, the Deputies staid ten or twelve days in the City, flattering themselves, that the Nahab would comply with their Folly; but they were deceiv'd. For the Nahab offended at their idle carriage, took such order, that not one person living, either Merchant or other, went to visit them all the while. So that they resolv'd to return to Surat, in expectation of their Ships. When they left Agra, they went and lay two Leagues off from the City in the Field, setting up one Tent apiece, (and those pitiful ones Heaven knows) to serve for them and their Servants, whereas they might have lodg'd with more security in a fair Inn that stood not far off. Now it is the Custom at the Great Mogul's Court, that every Night some Prince or great Lord keeps Guard in his turn for a Week together, having under him five or six thousand Horse, that beat the Road for three or four Leagues round the place where the King quarters. A Party of these Horsemen scouting by the Deputies Tents, and enquiring whose they were, one of the Servants reply'd, that they were the Tents of the French Deputies: of which the Horsemen gave immediate notice to their Captain, at that time the Grand Provost of the Empire. A Person handsom, well endow'd, and a great Lover of Strangers, who had rais'd himself by his Valour, as being an Abyssin by Nation. So sn as he understood that they were the French Deputies, he sent one of his principal Officers, with fifty Horse, to desire them to give them leave to guard them that Night, because they were in no security, and for that if they came to any mischief the Head of their
Captain must answer for it. But they very ill receiv'd the kind proffer of the Provost, proudly answering, that they were strong enough to guard themselves, and the first that came near them should know whe∣ther the French had Courage or no, adding withal, that if their Captain were afraid, they would guard him, with a deal of other scurrilous riffraff which very much surpriz'd the Officers. The next day they set up their Tents about a quarter of a League far∣ther, because they expected something to be brought them from Agra. The Conteval or Grand Provost admiring they made such slow journeys, and that they had now pitch'd in a more dangerous place then before, sent the same Horsemen with the same proffer, or else that they would be pleas'd to lye in an Inn where they might be safe. Boulaye was of the mind that so kind an offer should not be refus'd: but Beber gave them nothing but bad language; reviling their Captain, that he was afraid they should go and lye with his wives, offering if he pleas'd to go and guard them. He spoke half Portuguese, half Italian, which being a kind of Lingua Franca, some of the Horsemen made a shift to understand him, and having made a report to the Grand Provost of his Insolent Answer, the Lord was not a little nettl'd at it, and therefore resolv'd to be re∣veng'd. About midnight fourscore or a hundred Horse came and cut all the Cords of Bebers Tent, thinking to have let it fall about his ears. But he found a way to quit himself by the assistance of his Servant; and en∣deavour'd to escape to the House of a Dervich on the other side of a small Rivolet, nere the place where the Tents were set up. But the Moon shining as bright as day, he could not hide himself from the pursuit of the Horsemen, who shot at him, and with their Arrows wounded him in three places, once in the thigh and twice in the buttocks. Bou∣laye hearing the noise which the Horsemen made, peep'd out of his Tent, and seeing so many Horsemen in pursuit of Beber, was not a little daunt∣ed. He was afraid of running the same risco; but not having long to consider, he took his purse of Duckets, and fled till he got about half a league off, where he lay all night under a great Tree. But by the con∣sequence he found that the Horsemen had nothing to say to him; being satisfi'd when they saw Beber fall, as believing him dead. For had they not thought him so, they would never have left him, till they had quite done his business. But to colour the business, that it might not seem a point of revenge they broke open all Beber's Chests; that it might seem as if he had bin robb'd; but they found very little or nothing to enrich themselves. So soon as Beber's boy saw that the Horsemen were gone, he ran to the Town for a Pallanquin to carry his Master thither. Being brought to the Town they laid him in the Jesuits house, where Boulaye also arriv'd not long after and took up his Quarters, to the great consolation of the Jesuits, whose Revenues are but small in those parts, where there are no devout people to leave them Legacies. Their Ordinary was very sparing; but it was such as the Deputies must be glad of. Though it were a feast for Boulaye, who was not wont to make better chear. For a Sheeps head, of his own purchase, usually serv'd him two meals. Which made him ridiculous to the Franks, who liv'd after a more splendid rate. At Smyrna and Aleppo, when he was not invited by the Franguis, he had recourse to his Sheeps tongues, or a cold piece of double Tripe, which he carri'd to the poor Cabaretts of the Greeks, taking his Chopin of Wine
to wash it down: and such was his good husbandry that what was left was order'd to be set up for his supper. One day he had drank a little more then he had bled, and the Franguis found him a sleep in the street, about a hundred paces from the Cabaret. They had so much charity for him as to remove him to his lodging, lest other Nations should laugh at the choice which they had made of an Envoy to settle the Trade of such a considerable Company. As for Beber, who lov'd good Chear when it cost him nothing, as being a true exemplar of covetousness, he com∣plain'd of the Jesuits entertainment, though they out-run the Constable to treat him like a Deputy. His man who had more wit than he, and plainly saw what a trouble he was to his Hosts, made them a merry relation of the Noble Table which his Master kept for him, how he had made pro∣vision of a Barrel of Herrings; which when Invitations fail'd, he wa∣rily fed upon, rubbing his bread with the tail to give it a haut goust. For my part, said the Boy, I am but a poor Servant, yet I have made a shift to spend an hundred and fifty Crowns which I had got in the service of the Consul of Smyrna. 'Twas my misfortune to be inveigl'd out of his service, for I was with a Noble Master where I got Money; but in this man's service I have eaten all that I had got before. Two days after I arriv'd at Agra, and heard of Beber's being wounded and where he lay, and went to give him a visit. And as I never went unprovided in my travels with all things necessary, I had some Oyntments and Plasters, which were very serviceable to him. It was an easie thing to observe that Boulaye was glad of the opportu∣nity of Beber's being wounded, that he might have the sole honour of giving the Letter to the King. For he pretended to be the true Envoy from the King of France, and that Beber was only sent to bear him com∣pany. La Boulaye therefore believing that the business would take effect, persuaded the Chyrurgion already mention'd to solicit the Nahab who had a kindness for him, so close, that thereby the Nahab permitted him to bring the Letter. But Boulaye who thought he should give it himself to the King, was much surpriz'd when he saw that the Nahab, who had got the Letter into his own power, gave it to one of the meanest Officers of his Court, who by the Prime Minister's order, gave it to another, and he to a third, who brought it back to the Nahab, who at length pre∣sented it to the King, but not in the presence of Boulaye. And thus you see the Effect of the ridiculous pride of the Deputies, Boulaye was forc'd to stay in an outer Court, having two more to pass thorough before he came into the King's Quarter. Where, while he re∣main'd big with expectation, word was brought him, that the King would return an Answer to the King his Master, so soon as the Ships should be arriv'd; and so he was forc'd to go back to his Lodging with the melancholy dissatisfaction of a frustrate hope. The wounded Gentleman being new cur'd, but still very lame, de∣sir'd Audience of the Nahab, that he might have justice for the mis∣chief done him by an Assassination and a Robbery. The Nahab readily admitted him, limping when he came into his presence worse then when he first left his bed. The first Compliment he made was of the Wounds he had receiv'd, and then he demanded satisfaction for the loss of his Blood, and the Goods which had bin stolen from him. The Na∣hab promis'd him to inform the King of the business, assuring him that he should have no wrong done him upon the high-way within the Ter∣ritories
where he had to do. Four or five days after, the Nahab sent to Beber to know how much the Loss which he pretended to have receiv'd amounted to. Beber brought in an account of four and twenty thousand Roupies, or 12000 Crowns, and for the loss of his Blood, he left it to the Kings Generosity. His Accompt he made out thus: Imprimis. A Note for the value of six thousand Roupies which he had lent a Merchant when he departed for Marseilles, which Note was among the Papers he had lost. As to that, the Nahab ask'd him whether the No∣taries in France did not make an Entry of such publick Acts as were sign'd before them▪ Beber made answer, that he should never be paid, if he could not produce the same Paper that had bin taken from him, and that he could not demand his Money without it. The Nahab replying; that that was contrary to the Custom of all Nations, and that he knew it could not be as he said, added withal, that he should take no care for his satis∣faction in that particular. After that he read on. Item. Five thousand Roupies in Gold and Silver Money. Item. Four thousand Roupies in Gold Lace and Galoon to trim his Clothes. Item. Two Diamond Rings at two thousand one hundred Roupies. Item. Two other Rings, a Topaz, and another of sea-green water, which cost three hundred Roupies. Item. His Clothes, his Linnen, and for a Chest of Medicaments, which might be worth 4000 Roupies; of which he had procur'd his Chi∣rurgeon to give in a Bill. Item. A Chain of Gold valu'd at 500 Roupies. In all amounting to 24000 Roupies, as I said before. Two or three days after, the King caus'd an Order to be deliver'd to him for the payment of his Money at the Treasury-Chamber. Upon which Order, he agreed with a Merchant to be paid at Surat. And when he was ready to depart, the King commanded 12000 Roupies to be paid him for the loss of his Blood. But that sum he never receiv'd. For be∣ing in haste to be gone to Surat, and failing to present the Treasurer, he drill'd him out so long, that his patience was quite tir'd, and so he was forc'd to go without it. I could never understand the Policy of the Great Mogul to pay Beber the sum which he said had bin taken from him; when the Nahab knew to a thread what he had lost, and had given in an accompt thereof to the King; the whole not amounting to 2000 Roupies. And as for the Fran∣guis, so soon as they understood that he had demanded 4000 Roupies for his Chirurgeons Chest, they all cry'd out that it was a meer cheat. For a few days before Beber arriv'd at Agra, the Chirurgeon had receiv'd 200 Roupies by the Charity of the Franks to return to Surat, and he fell sick the next day that this Bill was presented to the Nahab. After the Mogul had read the King of France's Letter, the Nahab by order of his Master, order'd a Lodging to be provided for the Deputies, which overjoy'd the Jesuits, who were by that means rid of two very troublesome Guests. As for Boulaye, in regard the King had signifi'd his pleasure, that he would not return any answer to the King's Letter till the arrival of the Ships, he never troubled himself any farther▪ but staid till the waters were fallen, that he might go to Bengale, and from thence to Golconda to settle a Trade in those parts. But Beber moil'd like
a horse, and did nothing but run to and fro, to know the King's pleasure touching the settlement of Trade. But the Nahab either laugh'd at him, or took little notice of what he said. For indeed by Beber's outward appearance, and deportment, no man could make any other judgment of him, but that he was a poor spirited fellow, and one that knew not what it was to live. For all the Europeans that travel into Persia and the Indies are always richly habited, nor would any of them keep Beber company, who by his Habit look'd rather like a Footman, than a Depu∣ty of a Royal Company of Trade. At length a whim took him to make himself a suit of painted Calicut, after the French Fashion, the like whereof had never been seen in the Country; the whole Suit not standing him in above 13 Livres and 13 Sous. For the trimming of his new Suit he took off the Ribbands of his old Cloaths, which he was two days lathering, and smoothing with a Taylers Goose. When he had got this rare Habit upon his back, he went to visit the Nahab, who was then attended by the Principal Lords of the Court. Who when they saw him enter, fell all a gazing upon him, and ask'd one another whe∣ther that Frangui were turn'd Faquir, or a Dervich of Hossen Mamout, which they usually call the ragged Saint. For you must know, that all the Faquirs or Derviches that are of this Order, never apparel themselves but with such rags as they pick up in the streets, and if they meet with any pieces better than other, they make of them a kind of Galoon to trim the rest. They also carry half Pikes, with a great company of Tatters fasten'd to the end of them, to make a shew of their beggery. Be∣ber's Habit very much surpriz'd the Nahab, and all others that beheld him so ridiculously accouter'd. As he pass'd one morning by my win∣dow, I bid him good morrow, telling him withal, that he look'd more spruce and gay than he us'd to do. He reply'd, that he had reason so to do, for that he had receiv'd Letters from Surat, by which he had advice, that the Country people upon the Coast of Cape St. John had decry'd four Vessels out at Sea, which they could not make to be either English, or Hollanders, from whence he concluded that they were the Companies ships; and that he was going to the Nahab with the News. But I pre∣vented him at that time, telling him that I had often observ'd that rascally sort of people to come both to the English and Hollanders, with such kind of Intelligence, on purpose to get Money; when indeed they had never seen any such sight, and admonishing him not to believe Reports upon such slight foundations. I ask'd him what date his Letters bore? he told me, thirty days ago. Then, said I, if the discovery had bin true, the Nahab would have had notice of it in fourteen; and then he would certainly have told you of it, or my self; for it is but two days since I took my leave of him. Thereupon he took my counsel and resolv'd for Surat in a few days. Three days after that the Chirurgeon had given in his Bill for the Chest of Medicaments that he had lost among Beber's Baggage, he was so touch'd in Conscience, that he fell sick, and dy'd in two days. Upon his death-bed he ask'd pardon of God for the Cheat which he had con∣sented to, to ask 4000 Roupies for that which was really worth but four hundred; 200 of which he had receiv'd from the Charity of the Fran∣guis, the rest upon the sale of a Horse. For my part, finding that Beber was resolv'd for Surat, I made what hast I could out of Agra, to be quit of his company. But the second
day after my departure, having set up my tent by a Rivers side, just as I was going to dinner I spy'd Beber coming, nor could I get rid of him afterwards till I came to Surat. So that we were forc'd to travel toge∣ther, though he committed a thousand Impertinencies by the way. Among the rest, he put one trick upon the Chief of the Cheraffs or Bankers at Brampour, not to be passed over in silence. In regard the ways were bad, and that he had but one pitiful weak Chariot, and four weak Boys, which with the help of Oxen, were hardly strong enough to help him out when he stuck in the mire, he sel∣dom came to his journeys end till two or three hours after me. Now upon the report that ran of the French ships being seen out at Sea▪ and the general belief that Beber would be one of the Principal Trustees of the Company, several, as I said before, courted him, and sought to engage his Friendship. Being arriv'd at Brampour, the Chief of the Cheraffs, attended by a dozen of his servants came to visit us. Upon the first acquaintance Beber told him that he wanted a Pallaquin to go to Su∣rat, whereupon the Cheraff civilly offered him his, and caus'd it to be trimm'd up for his better accommodation. Beber thought that trimming would have bin finisht in one day, when indeed it requir'd three or four. The next day I order'd my Coach to be got ready, and order'd my Pal∣laquin to be carri'd away. Beber, who verily believ'd that the Compa∣ny's ships were already in the Road of Surat, began to curse and bann the Cheraff, who presently came to him and endeavour'd to appease him with good words. He told him, it could be no prejudice to him to stay a day or two; for by that time the Roads would be better, and he might travel the faster. But Beber, being transported with passion, was so far from taking the Cheraffs reasons for satisfaction, that snatching a Cudgel out of his Waggoners hands that stood next to him, he gave the Cheraff three or four good Licks cross the shoulders. The Merchants and other people that were in the Inn, were strangely surpriz'd at such a piece of rudeness, and ran out presently, some with Stones, and others with Cudgels, making a hideous noise, and crying out, that they had never seen the like. They took it for a most enormous Crime, to strike the Chief of the Cheraffs, above fourscore years old, whose very age ought to have bin protection enough from such an Affront. Good luck it was for Beber, after such a rash action committed, that I was well known at Brampour, having been there ten or twelve times, and in some of my Travels having dealt for above 200000 Roupies. There were none of the Cheraffs with whom I had not dealt by Letters of Exchange, and very few Merchants or Brokers who had not had some business or other upon my accompt. They cry'd out, speaking of me; See there the Monsieur Franqui, with whom we have dealt so often, yet never heard him give us an ill word. Another good chance he had to meet there the Coutevall's Lieutenant, and three Merchants of Surat; and thus be∣tween us, having disingag'd Beber out of the Brabble wherein he had so sillily bemir'd himself, we made him get into my Coach, and so packt him out of the City. I follow'd him two hours after: for had he staid longer in Brampour, I believe the Faquirs and Derviches would have beat out his brains. For he was no sooner gone, but a great number of that sort of rabble came to the Inn, crying out, Where was that Dog of a Cafer that had beaten the Cheraff. Thereupon, seeing the Multitude encrease, I stole out of the Town, without saying a word, and rid on
till I got three leagues from Brampour, to an old Town call'd Badelpoura, where I overtook Beber, who had hir'd a Coach made after the fashion of the Country. It was but reason, that I should have my own Coach to sleep in in the night: For though in all places where you come to lye in the night, the Indians will offer you a little bed to lye on, yet in re∣gard the rains were but just over, the bedsteads were so full of Puhies, that there was no resting. These Punies are ingender'd by the moisture which the rains, that fall for four months together, cause in those Coun∣tries. Which being over, and the Sun recovering its wonted heat, the women carry forth their beds every morning, and beating them, well with good big sticks, never leave till the Punies fall to the ground, and there turning up their bellies presently dye. These beds consist of four feet and four round stayes, as broad and as long as you please. To the staves are fasten'd girths about four fingers broad, which are much more commodious than the bottoms of our beds that are plank'd with Deal or other wood. Over the girths they only lay a single Coverlet or Sheet, which is a manner of lying easie enough, considering the heat of the Country. The fourth day after our departure from Brampour, being near a great Town call'd Semqueles, in a flat Country, we perceiv'd all the Plain co∣ver'd with Tents. It appear'd to be the Camp of one of the chief Kans, or Lords, whom the Great Mogull had sent with 50000 men against the Rebel Raja Sevagi. This Lord, understanding who we were, very ci∣villy sent us Melons, and Mango's, and bid his Officers tell us withal, that we were out of all danger, and might safely pursue our journey. Whatever I could say to Beber, to perswade him that it was but an act of civility and good manners, to wait upon the Prince, I could by no means engage him. I seeing his impertinency, shifted my habit, and sent one of my servants to the Camp, to learn whether the Kan drank Wine; and understanding that he did, I took a bottle of Spanish, and another of Schirus Wine, and a small pocket Pistol delicately embel∣lish'd with silver; and with this small Present away I went to wait upon the General. Being come into his Presence, I excus'd Beber, as not being well, and immediately presented him the little Pistol, which he took, and bid me charge, being desirous to try it. After he had shot it off, said he to his Lords that stood by, Now must we confess these Fran∣qui's to be ingenious. This man sees that I am going to the Wars, and presents me wherewithal to desend my life. Then casting his eyes upon the little Hamper, where the Bottles were, he ask'd what it was? They told him in his Ear. Oh, said he, looking at the same time upon two or three Mim Bachi's, or Colonels that were present, This Franqui Gentleman has given me a bottle of Wine, well we must drink it; for I find I shall please him in so doing. When the Mollah's heard him talk of Wine, they slunk away; which made the Kan laugh heartily. These are Agi's, quoth he; they have bin Pilgrims to Mecca, and never drink Wine after they come home again. Having taken my leave, he sent me a Pomere, which is a kind of Scarf that may also serve for a Girdle. It was made of white Sattin with flow'rs of Gold, and might be worth about a hundred Roupies. He that brought it, told me, I should do the Kan a great kindness, to send him another bottle of Wine: thereupon I sent him two of three, which was all my store. He sent me six Horsemen to conduct us three days journey, till we had pass'd a
great River that flows from the Mountains of the South, which wash∣ing the City of Baroche, from whence it takes its Name, falls into the Bay of Cambay. When we came to our last stage, which is a great Town, call'd Bar∣noli, from whence it is but 14 Leagues to Surat, Beber sent one of his Hirelings to give notice thereof to Father Ambrose. When the News came, the Father went with the Aleppo Merchant, often already men∣tion'd, to borrow the English President's Coaches: and there were about 15 or 16 more Coaches all in a train, with several Horsemen and Mer∣chant Banians that made hast to meet the Deputy. This happen'd upon the first of November, 1666. They carri'd with them Provision enough to make merry, and every Banian had his Present ready. For my part, I as soon as I had saluted the Father Capuchin, I went directly to my Lodging, where I had left two Servants to take care of a Sum of Money which I had receiv'd of the King of Persia, unwilling to hazard it upon the Road. For in whatever part of the Indies I came, I had credit enough to buy without Money. I only gave my Bills for payment at Agra, Visapour, Golconda, or Surat, where I generally left my Money, as having receiv'd it there for the most part of the Lords or Kings of the Country. As for Beber, he was no Changeling, the follies that he committed are too numerous to be related: but how he began the year 1667, is not to be omitted. M. Thevenot, upon his return from Madraspatan and Golconda, lodg'd in the Capuchins house. Beber going to visit him, told him, that the Capuchins were the Hollanders Spies, and that he had often advis'd Father Ambrose to break with them, and not to go any more to their House. That while he frequented their Society, the French Company would be sure to find some obstacle in their Trade when the Ships should arrive; and that if the Hollanders had not been at Agra, they might have done what they pleas'd with the King. That the hundred thousand Roupies which they had presented to the King and Grandees of the Court, had hinder'd them from obtaining what they design'd. By which it appear'd, he understood not the humour of the Hollanders; for they are not so liberal: nor would all their tricks, or presents have any thing avail'd them, the Great Mogul being desirous that all Nations should be welcome to his Dominions, especially Merchants, as well they that import little, as they that bring in much. M. Thevenot told him, that he had never observ'd so much of the Hollanders in all his travels; for if it were true, that they had such a desire to hinder the Trade of other Nations, they would not afford them passage in their Ships, or to put their Goods aboard, as they often did. Moreover, they send away many times one or two Ships according to the quantity, laden all with stran∣gers Goods, from Maslipatan or Surat, in which Ships, there is not oft∣times so much as one Bale belonging to the Company. And this, added he, is farther observable, That they afford their Freight cheaper then the English, or any other Nation, who have Ships in these parts. Thus Monsieur Thevenot endeavour'd to convince M. Beber; who would have had Father Ambrose have fallen out with the Hollanders. But he knew better things then to disoblige persons to whom he was so much behold∣ing as he was every day. For every week they allow'd the house a certain quantity of Bread and Meat, and upon Fast-days sent them Fish,
Eggs, Brandy, and Wine, which were no such unkindnesses to be quarrell'd with. Monsieur Thevenot at the same time told Beber, that he should do well to repay Father Ambrose the Money which he had borrow'd to pay for the Coach which he had broken to serve him, as also that which he had given the Seamen, for trying if they could discover the Companies Vessels upon the Coast. But he turn'd his deaf ear to that discourse, and would never be persuaded to reimburse the Money which Father Ambrose laid out for him. Monsieur Thevenot perceiving his unwillingness, and pressing him to do things handsomly, put him into such a chase, that he fell a swearing after such a violent rate, in a Parlour, that was parted only by a thin board from the place where the Mass was said, that one of the Fryers, just ready to go to the Altar, came forth to desire him to leave his blaspheming. But Beber's insolence took his admonition so ill, that he very rudely beat the Fryer in Mr. The∣venot's presence; swearing, That had it not been out of respect to him, he would have knockt him o' the head. The Capuchin being so inju∣riously us'd, came to Me, being hardly able to stir his neck, by reason of one of the blows that Beber had given him. I chaft his neck with Oyl of Coco's, and wrapt it up warm: but we durst not speak a word of Beber's idle action, for fear of exposing our selves to the laughter of the English and Hollanders, who would have made good sport with it. Besides these Enormities, he put away his Servant that had sav'd his Life, and kept his Wages. After that he went to lye at an Apothe∣caries house, whose Name was Mouillon, who came from Goa, with a good quantity of Portugal Wine, and kept a Tavern at Surat. While he lay there he had a great Contest with the Merchant, who receiv'd the 24000 Roupies, which the King had given him for the loss which he alleadg'd that he and his Chyrurgeon had sustain'd. For the Merchant would acknowledge the receipt of no more then 23900 Roupies, the other Hundred being deducted for Fees of the Treasury. He also main∣tain'd, That the Merchant had receiv'd the 12000 Roupies which the King had allow'd him for the loss of his Blood: but it was known that the Grand Treasurer would never pay that Money. Thus when he saw that his Cheats were discover'd to all the World, he began to bethink him∣self how to get away: and we observ'd, that he would fain have quitted Surat without noise. But there is such good Order taken both by Land and Sea, that no person can go away without the knowledge and leave of the Governour. For as the Countrymen that come from the other side of the water cannot return unless they shew a mark in their hands made with red Earth at the Custom-house; neither Horse nor Coach can stir without a Note from the Chabander, and another for the Ra∣dars, who lye sometimes two or three Leagues from the Town. Beber nevertheless had some assurance from his Vintner, that he might get into a Boat, by bidding the Boatmen carry him to Reynel, a large Town on the other side of the water. The Master of the Boat ask'd him for his Ticket, but Beber answer'd him with his Cudgel, forcing him for∣ward, and telling him, he was not to demand Billets of such a person as he was. As he was got half way the River a great number of Souldiers hollow'd after the Boatmen, to row the Strangers back ashoar. But Beber laid his hand upon his Sword, and compell'd the Boatmen to go forward. That evening, Beber being return'd, the poor Boatmen were apprehended, and bastinado'd till they were almost maim'd. The
people cri'd out, that it was the Frangui that ought to be so serv'd, and not the poor Watermen, who had done nothing but by constraint. Thus did this Envoy behave himself both in Persia and India, to the great hindrance of the French Nation. Now let us see what became of both Boulaye and Beber after all their Extravagancies. The Sieur de la Boulaye, according to the accompt given by the Hollan∣ders that were at Agra, left the Town five or six days after my departure. Knowing I went to Surat, he had plaid his game so well with me, that he got a Hamper of twelve large bottles of Wine for 138 Roupies, though they cost me more, for which he gave me a Note of his hand, that I have still in my custody, to be paid at Surat, upon the arrival of the French Companies ships. From thence he travell'd to Patna, where he staid nine or ten days, partly with the English, partly with the Hollan∣ders: from whence he departed for Daca, the Residence of the Governour of the Province. The Governour of the Province of Bengale was then the Great Mogul's Uncle, whose name was Cha-Est-Kan, a potent Prince, who has always under his Command thirty or forty thousand men. At Patna, Boulaye had a project, that from thence he might easily pass into China, and to that purpose he there embarqu'd with some Persian Souldiers, who were going to list themselves under Cha-Est-Kan. But after that, to this hour, it never could be certainly known what became of him: but by all probable conjectures, it is verily believ'd, that the Persian Souldiers murder'd him and his little Slave, in hopes of some good booty. Of the truth whereof, the Observation that follows was no small evidence. About a quarter of a mile from Daca lies a Town, where five several mungrel Portugal Officers, belonging to the Gover∣nour of Bengale, as Canoneers and Carpenters, and some of the same Nation that serve in the Cavalry of Cha-Est-Kan. There they have also a small Church very well built, where an Austin Fryar officiates, to whom, about three months after Boulaye's departure from Patna, a cer∣tain Persian in the Habit of a Souldier, with two more companions, brought two large Books, the one in Folio, and the other in Quarto to sell. The Fryar, who was a mungrel also, understood no Latin; but finding them not to be in the Portugal Language, would have stopp'd the Books as stoln from the Hollanders, had not the Souldier been too strong for him. These Books were thought to have been Boulaye's; who, to my knowledge, had two Chests full, well bound; in reading whereof he spent the greatest part of his time. His Avarice was his Ruine; for had he taken a Bark by himself, as I did when I went from Patna, and had oblig'd the Watermen to give him good security, he could have run no hazard. For my part I took one with four and twenty men; and every one, knowing I never spar'd for cost, gave me excellent security. These Barks are little Galliots, which will undertake to carry you to your journey's end, and name your own day. If you will lye ashoar every evening, they will set up your Tents; and stop at any Town or City to take in Provisions. I never made so pleasant a Voy∣age in my life, nor with less trouble. For in these Barks, there is a Room where the Sun cannot come in, where you may repose in the day time, and sit in the cool Air on that side from whence the Breez comes. There is another place cover'd for your Kitchin; and another little Garderobe for the private deeds of Nature. By the way I kill'd great
store of large Geese, Cranes, and Crocodiles, which I gave the Water∣men, who were very glad of them; for they sold them in the Towns as they row'd along. The people in those quarters are very good natur'd and officious. Dyet is little worth, as being the place where you may buy a hundred Pullets for a Crown: and for three or four Pence, you may buy a Fish of a prodigious length and bigness. Beber's end was no less sad. For when the French Companies Ships were arriv'd, M. Caron, who commanded them, and M. Rambos, with an Armenian, who had the management of the chiefest part of the business, had been acquainted with what had pass'd at Surat, between Beber and the Capuchins. Presently Affections and Interests parted. Caron and Rambos took Beber's part; the Armenian held for the Capuchins, which was at length the ruin of Beber and Rambos. The Holland Commander going aboard to visit the Sieur Caron, upon his return would not permit the Captain to stir out of his Cabin; so that Rambos and the Armenian took upon them to wait upon the Commander. Upon this Occasion the Armenian took upon him to precede Rambos, and briskly threw him∣self before the French-man; who being provok'd at the Affront, gave the Armenian a swinging cuff o' the Ear before all the company. To be short, the Sieur Caron, Rambos, and Beber holding all together, the Ar∣menian found himself too weak to resist: and in regard he had the Management of the Cash, he was accus'd of Misbehaviour, and was condemn'd to be hang'd. But because they could not execute the Sen∣tence which they had given at Surat, they sent him away to the Council Royal of the Island of Madagascar, of which M. Mondevergue was chief; who was so far from confirming the Sentence given at Surat, that he admitted the Armenian to justifie himself; and finding that he was not only innocent, but that he might be very useful to the Company, he sent him back to Surat with more power then he had before. This put Beber and Rambos into a fit of Despair, to see the person whom they thought to have ruin'd, now above them. Thereupon they found a way to get 12000 Roupies a piece for their Wages, which they pretended to be due from the Company: and with that and 24000 Roupies which Beber had of his own they Embarqu'd both together for Goa. Where, being arriv'd, Beber dy'd soon after: But as for Rambos, he return'd home again through Ispahan.
OBSERVATIONS UPON THE TRADE OF THE EAST-INDIES. THat Nation which has a design to settle a Trade in the East-Indies, must be sure in the first place, to possess themselves of a convenient place in that Country, to carine their Ships, and shelter themselves during the tempestuous Seasons. This want of a good Haven is the reason that the English have not made those advan∣tages which otherwise they might have done; because it is impossible that any Vessel should remain in those Seas without being carin'd, or else eaten by the worms. Therefore, because it is a long way from Europe to the East-Indies, it would be requisite to have a retreating place at the Cape of good Hope, to take in fresh Water and Provisions, whether going or coming; but especially in their return, in regard that the Ships being then laden, can∣not take in Water for any long time. The Road of the Island of St. Helen's, where the English have built a Fort, is a very commodious place: and if the Water be not so good upon the North-side, yet the Plain is an excellent spot of Ground to sow, with convenience of all things necessary for human support. This advantage the English and Dutch have depriv'd all other Nations of, by their Forts upon the Cape of good Hope, and St. Helen's. And there∣fore some River's mouth, near the Cape of good Hope, ought to be sought for, for the same purpose, which would be far more convenient then the Dauphin Island, where there is no Trade but that of buying Cattel for their Hides; which being a Trade of so little consequence, would ruin a Company to follow it. The reason why I make this Proposal is, because that in the year 1648, two Portugal Vessels being bound from Lisbon to the East-Indies, and resolving to touch at the Cape, to take in fresh Water, mistook their just Depths, so that the Sea running high, they fell into a Bay, 18 or 20 Leagues from the Cape, upon the Coast that looks to the West. In that
Bay they found a River, whose Water was very good; and the Blacks of the Country brought them Refreshments of all sorts of Fowl, Fish, and Bullock's flesh. There they staid above 15 days, and before they set sail, they took two of the Negro's, which they carri'd along with them to Goa; to teach them the Portuguese Language; on purpose to try if they could discover by them any knowledge of the Trade of the Country. The Dutch Commander at Surat desir'd me, to inform my self, when I went to Goa, what the Portugals had learnt from those two Negro's. But one St. Amand, a French Ingeneer, who was Supervisor of the Fortifications of Goa, told me, That he could not make them learn one word of the Language; and that he could only guess by their signs, that they had some knowledge of Ambergreece and Elephants Teeth. The Portugals however made no question but to meet with Gold, if they could find a way to trade higher up i' the Country. The Revolutions of Portugal, and their Wars with Spain have hinder'd them from making any more particular discovery of the Coast. Which it were to be wish'd the French would undertake, provided they gave no cause of jealousie to the Hollanders, of what they were going about. There is also a necessity of possessing, or at least having the liberty of some place near Surat, to ride safe in, and to wash and tallow in, in case they should be staid by the Rain-Seasons. The reason is, because that during that ill season, at what time it is impossible to keep the Seas, the Mogul jealous of his Fortress of Surat suffers no Foreign Vessel in the River, where nevertheless, the Ships being unladen, may ride securely from the terrible Tempests that last for five Months. The only secure place for the Companies Vessels would be the Town of Dia, belonging to the Portugals. The advantage of the situation is considerable for several reasons. The circuit of the City contains almost 400 Houses, and might be capable to receive a greater number of people, where the Ships would find all conveniencies during their stay. It is seated upon the Coast of Guzerat, upon a point of the Gulph of Cambaye, looking toward the South-east. The form of it is almost round; and above half the Circle environ'd by the Sea. It is not commanded by any Hill; and the Por∣tugals have begun those Fortifications, which might be easily finish'd. It contains several Wells of very good Water, and a River which falls into the Sea near the City, whose Water is better then that of Surat, or Souali, and the Harbour is very commodious for Shipping. The Portugals, when they had first settl'd themselves in the Indies, kept there a Fleet compos'd of Galleys, Brigantines, and other light Vessels, whereby they made themselves Masters, for a long time, of all the Trade of the Places we have treated of. So that no Ship could trade, without the Governour of Dia's Passport, who made it in the Name of the Viceroy that liv'd at Goa. The Imposition, which the Ships paid, was sufficient to maintain the Fleet and Garrison, and to enrich the Go∣vernour besides. When the Rain-Seasons are over, that the wind sits at North and North-east, you may sail from Dia to Surat in three or four Tides with light Vessels; but great Ships that are laden must fetch a compass about the Bank. The City has no Land belonging to it, but what it stands upon, yet it would be no difficult thing to agree with the Raja, or Govervour of
the Province, and to obtain as much as should be sufficient for the Inha∣bitants. Neither is the Land about it very fertile, and besides, the people are the poorest in the whole Empire of the Mogul. Nevertheless the Country is so well stor'd with Cattel, that an Ox or a Bufalo will not cost above two Piasters. The English and Hollanders make use of these Cattel to feed their People, and to spare the Provisions of their Ships, while they stay at Souali. But it is observable that the Bufalo's flesh in those parts causes frequent Dysenteries, which the Bullocks flesh or Beef never does. The Raja that commands the Country has only the Title of Governour for life. Which is common to most of the Raja's in the Mogul's Em∣pire, whose Ancestours were Lords of Provinces, where now their Descendants only enjoy the Titles of Governours. Having thus got possession of a good Post; the next thing of Impor∣tance is to choose out two men considerable for their Honesty Prudence, and Skill in Trade, who are to be allow'd the full of their Expences. These two persons are to serve the Company, the one in the nature of a President, with a Council, consisting of a certain number of persons, to assist him. The other in the quality of a Broaker, who must be an Idolater of the Country, and not a Mahumetan, in regard all the Work∣men he has to deal with are Idolaters. Civility and Faith of Promise are altogether requisit to gain Credit among strangers. And these particular qualities are requir'd in the particular Broakers, who are under the Broaker-General in the Pro∣vinces where the Factories are settl'd. Good Intelligence is necessary for these two persons, to understand the alteration of Manufactures. This alteration happens either through the craft and subtilty of the Workmen and the Merchants themselves, or by the correspondence of the Broakers and Workmen. Which alteration may cause so much dammage to the Company, that the Broakers shall gain ten and twelve i' the hundred by it. If the President and Broaker-General combine with the particular Broakers and Merchants, it will be a difficult thing for the Company to avoid being deceiv'd; but if these two persons are but faithful and honest, the fraud may be easily remedi'd by changing the particular Broakers. The Officers of a Company may be unfaithful to their Trust in this respect: When a Vessel arrives in Port, the President for the Nation receives the Company's Letters, and the Bills of Lading; upon which he calls his Council, sends for the Broaker, and gives him a Copy of the said Bills. The Broaker shews them to three or four of the principal Merchants of the Country, who are wont to buy by whole sale. If the President and the Broaker hold together for their own profit, the Broaker instead of facilitating the sale as he ought to do, advises the Merchants to be shie, and to offer only such a price: Then the President sends for the Broaker and these two or three Merchants; and in the presence of the Council he asks the Merchants what they will give for the Goods in the Bills of Lading mention'd. If the Merchants are resolute to give
no more then so much; The President puts off the sale 15 days longer, more or less, as he pretends himself press'd to sell. In the mean time he sends for the Merchants several times for a shew, and at length, to avoid suspicion, and to discharge himself, he asks the advice of the Council, and as they approve, orders the delivery of the Goods to the Merchant. But though the Temptations be very great, to which these two Offi∣cers are subject, by reason of their pow'r, their frequent opportunities, and their distance from their Superiours, the Company, besides their being wary in their Election, may remedy these disorders by depriving them of that pretence, which the Dutch Commanders and Broakers have, of being constrain'd to sell off presently to the Merchants in gross, to avoid the expences of delay. The Errour which the Hollanders commit in this respect is, That their Officers bespeak every year upon Credit all the Goods which they have occasion for in the Empire of the Mogul, according to the Orders which they receive from Batavia. The credit of this Advance costs them sometimes twelve, sometimes fifteen per Cent; so that so soon as their laden Vessels are arriv'd in the the Port where they are to be sold, they are oblig'd to sell them presently off at the Merchants rate first offer'd to their Broakers, to make up a present stock to pay off their credit for the Goods bespoke for their Ships to carry back again, and to get more credit for the next year. This is that which cherishes that confederacy between the President, the Broaker and the Merchant, who makes advantage enough of this necessity of selling. Whereas the better way were, for them that carry the same Commo∣dities which the Hollanders do, to carry Money also to pay the Work∣men for the Goods bespoken for the next year. The Company making this advantage shall not be put to pay that great Interest of 12 and 15 per Cent.: and besides, they shall have better Goods, and better cheap. The Ships loading shall be ready before they arrive in Port; and being quick laden they may return before the bad Season. Neither shall the Company be put to sell their Goods at a low price; because their Broakers will have time to stay for the coming of Merchants from other parts; or else because they have time enough to send them to other places, where they are sure of a quicker sale. Observe also, That it is far more profitable to carry to the Indies Gold and Silver in Ingots, rather then ready coin'd; for being coin'd the Money is valu'd only according to their Alloys; and there is always a defalcation made for the charge of Coinage. The Broaker also, if he be dishonest, may combine with the Master of the Mogul's Mint, which is settl'd in several parts of the Empire, and put a lower value upon the Gold and Silver then it deserves, by telling the President and Council, that upon the touch it appears to be no more worth. But it is an easie thing to avoid this deceit, provided the President be a person of credit and prudence, by sending for one of the Refiners of Gold and Silver, that live in the Country, who perfectly understand the Touch of Metals, and to let him Essay the Gold and Silver before the Broaker's face. This is that which the Sieur Walkenton did for the Holland Company
in their Factory at Casambazar, where he bought every year six or seven thousand Bales of Silk. For by this Essay he found, that his Broaker being in confederacy with the Master of the Mint, had cheated the Company of one and a half and two per Cent. in the value of the Gold and Silver which was brought him from Japan, as well coin'd as in barr, to a very considerable sum of Money. The Broaker also may confederate with the Master of the Mint to couzen the Merchant in weghing his Gold or Silver, by making use of false Weights or Scales unduly pois'd. But that fraud is easily avoided, if the President and his Council will be but so patient as to see their Metal weigh'd themselves, and take care that the Weights be right, and the Scales true. One of the most important Observations in reference to the Trade of the Company, and discipline of their Factories is this: To prevent the Merchants or under-Merchants, Accomptants and under-Accomptants, who officiate under the Commanders and Broakers, from driving any particular Trade by themselves, for they having a familiarity with the men of Manufacture, and finding by the Letters of Advice what Goods are likely to be most vendible next year, buy them up upon their own accompts, and find a way to lade them off in the Com∣pany's Vessels, to the great dammage of the whole, though to the great gain of particular people. And this the President permits them to do, either for his own In∣terest, or by connivance under the pretence of their small Wages. The Captain of the Vessel also winks at what they do, because he has a spell for loading and unloading. And because these people having no great Stocks, are desirous to put off their Goods with the first opportunities, they give order to their Correspondents to under-sell the Company ten or twelve in the Hundred, which is the absolute ruin of a Trade. To remedy this disorder there ought to be a Fiscal, or King's Proctor, in every of the chief Factories belonging to the Company, to act in the King's Name, and by his Authority. He is to be independent from the President and the Broaker, in the Exercise of his Office; so that he may have an eye, as well upon their behaviour, as upon the demeanour of the under Officers. He ought to be a person of good Credit, resolute and vigilant; and he must have a strength of men correspondent to his Employment, and a Deputy to act under him. He is to have good Information of the departure of all Ships when they are once laden, and when they are ready to set sail for the Port whither they are bound. When he hears of the Arrival of any Ship, he ought to go himself, or send his Deputy with a sufficient Guard, to take an Accompt of the Ship's Lading. If it be a place near to which there are any small Islands, or by-Nooks, it behoves him to take care that no Goods be privately convey'd ashoar in those private corners, where there are receivers a now ready: and whatever he finds thus privately unladen he shall have power to con∣fiscate. He shall also confiscate whatever he finds not Mark'd with the Com∣pany's Mark. He may also discharge any inferiour Officers to whom any such Bales
shall belong; and for the superiour Officers, he shall complain of them to the Company. He shall have pow'r to open all private Letters, to inform himself of Prohibited Goods, and Private Correspondencies. This Prohibition of Private Trading cannot be too severely impos'd, and it is observ'd with so much exactness in Holland, that when one of the Company's Ships is ready to set sail from Amsterdam, a Burgomaster gives the Captain and all the rest of the Seamen their Oaths, that they shall be contented with their Wages, and meddle with nothing of Trade. All the Officers of the Factory should be advanc'd by degrees, so that a sub-Accomptant may have hopes to be a President; that the hopes of Ad∣vancement may oblige them to live with more credit, and cause them to study to make themselves more capable of all the Intrigues and Subtilties of the Trade of the Country. It is of great importance not to shew any favour in this particular of preferment, unless he have pass'd through all particular Degrees and Offices beforehand. And thus much concerning the Discipline of the Factories.
OF THE COMMODITIES WHICH ARE Brought as well out of the Dominions of the GREAT MOGUL, as out of the Kingdoms of Golconda and Visapour, and other neighbouring Territories; And also of the Weights and Prices of the said Commodities. Of their Silk. KAsembasar, a Village in the Kingdom of Bengala, sends abroad every year two and twenty-thousand Bales of Silk; every Bale weighing a hunder'd pound. The two and twenty Bales make two millions and two-hunder'd-thousand pound, at sixteen ounces to the pound. The Hollanders usually carry away six or seven-thousand Bales, and would carry away more, did not the Merchants of Tartary, and the Mogul's Empire oppose them: for they buy up as much as the Hollander; the rest the Natives keep to make their Stuffs. This Silk is also brought into the Kingdom of Guzerat, the greatest part whereof comes to Amadabat, and to Surat, where it is wrought up. In the first place they make Carpets of Silk and Gold, others of Silk and Silver, others all of Silk: for the Worsted Carpets are made at Vettapour, some twelve leagues from Agra. In the second place they make Satins with streaks of Gold and Silver; others plain: with Taffata's after the same fashion. In the third place they make Patoles, which are a sort of Silk-stuff very thin, but painted with all sorts of Flowers, the manufacture whereof is at Amadabat. They cost from eight Roupies to forty the piece. This is a Commodity wherein the Dutch will not suffer any one of the Hollanders to trade in particular: for they transport it to the Philippine-Islands, to the Islands of Borneo, Java, Sumatra, and other neighbouring Islands. The raw-Silk of Kasembasar is yellowish, as are all the raw-Silks that come from Persia and Sicily; but the Natives of Kasembasar have a way to whiten it, with a Lye made of the ashes of a Tree which they call Adam's Fig-tree; which makes it as white as the Palestine-Silk. The Hollanders send away all their Merchandize which they fetch out of Ben∣gala,
by water, through a great Canal that runs from Kasembasar into Ganges, for fifteen leagues together; from whence it is as far by water down the Ganges to Ouguely, where they lade their Ships. Of the Calicuts: and first of the painted Calicuts, call'd Chites. CHites or Painted Calicuts, which they call Calmendar, that is to say, done with a Pencil, are made in the Kingdom of Golconda; and particularly about Maslipatan. But there is made so little, that though a man should employ all the Workmen that understand the Art of weaving Calicuts, he would hardly find enough to make three Bales. The Chites which are made in the Empire of the Great Mogul are all printed; and nothing so beautiful, neither for the figures nor the fine∣ness of the Linnen. Those which are made at Lahor, are the coarsest, and consequently the cheapest of all. They are sold by Corges, every Corge consisting of twenty pieces, which cost from 16 to 30 Roupies. The Chites which are made at Seronge, are sold from 20 to 50 Roupies the Corge, or thereabouts. These Chites serve for Coverlets for Beds, for Sofra's or Table-cloaths after the Country-fashion, Pillowbears, Handkerchiefs, but more espe∣cially for Wastcoats as well for the men as women in Persia. The fine Calicut-Chites are made at Brampour; and are us'd for Hand∣kerchiefs by those that snuff Tobacco. The women also, over all Asia, make Veils of these Calicuts, to wear over their heads, and about their shoulders, which Veils are call'd Ormis. The Basta's or Calicuts painted red, blue, and black, are carri'd white to Agra, and Amadabat, in regard those Cities are nearest to the places where the Indigo is made that is us'd in colouring. They cost from two Roupies to 30 or 40 a-piece, according to the fineness and the quantity of Gold at the ends, and sometimes upon the sides. The Indians have a way to dip some of these Calicuts in a certain water that makes them look like Water'd-Chamlets, which adds also to the price. That sort which is sold for two Roupies, and so onward till ye come to twelve, is transported to the Coast of Melinda, and it is the greatest Trade the Governour of Mosambique drives, who sells them to the Cafres, that vend them again among the Abyssins, and into the Kingdom of Saba: for those people not understanding the use of Soap, need no more but only to wash these Calicuts in water. That sort which is valu'd from 12 Roupies upward, is transported to the Philippine-Islands, the Islands of Borneo, Java, Sumatra, and other adjacent places. Where the women wear no other clothes, then a single piece of this Calicut. One part whereof, without cutting it, serves for a Petticoat; the other they wind about their stomachs and their heads. White Calicuts. VVHite Calicuts come partly from Agra, and about Lahor, part from Bengala: some from Brouda, Baroche, Renonsari, and other places. They are brought out of the Loom to Renonsari, and Baroche, where they are whiten'd by reason of the convenience of their Meadows, and the great store of Limons that grow thereabouts. For the Calicuts are never so white as they should be, till they are dipt in Limon-water.
The Calicuts that come from Agra, Lahor, and Bengala, are sold by the Corge, and they are of several prices, from seventeen Roupies to three or four-hunder'd, as the Merchant will have them wov'n. The Calicuts that come from Renonsari, and Baroche, are one and twenty cubits long, new out of the Loom; but in the whitening they shrink to twenty cubits. Those of Brouda twenty cubits from the Loom, and shrink in the whitening to nineteen and a half. All the Calicuts or Bafta's that come from these three Cities, are of two sorts: for some are broad, some are narrow. The narrow are those I have already mention'd, the prices whereof are various, from two Mamoudi's to six. The broad Bafta's are a cubit, and one third part wide; the whole piece twenty cubits long. The usual price of them is from five Mamoudi's to twelve: but a Merchant being upon the place, may cause them to be made much more large and fine, till they are worth five-hundred Ma∣moudi's a-piece. I saw two pieces sold for a thousand Mamoudi's. The English brought one, and the Hollanders another, each Piece contain∣ing eight and twenty cubits. Mahamed Alibeg returning into Persia out of India, where he had been Embassador, presented Cha-Sef the second with a Coco-nut, about the bigness of an Austrich-egg, all beset with Pearls: and when 'twas open'd there was taken out of it a Turbant that had sixty cubits of Calicut in length to make it, the Cloath being so fine, that you could hardly feel it in your hand: For they will spin their thread so fine, that the eye can hardly discern it, or at least it seems to be but a Cob-web. Twisted-Cotton. COtton twisted and untwisted comes from the Provinces of Brampour and Guzerat. Untwisted Cotton is never transported into Europe, being too cumbersome, and of little value; only they send it to Ormus, Balsara, and sometimes to the Philippine-Islands, and the Islands of Sinde. As for the twisted Cottons, the English and Hollanders transport a good quantity, not of the finest, but of that sort which is pric'd from fifteen to fifty Mamoudi's: It serves for wicks for Candles, for Packsaddles, and for the ground of Silk-stuffs. Indigo. INdigo comes from several parts of the Great Mogul's Empire; and according to the diversity of the places it differs in quality, and con∣sequently in price. In the first place, it comes from the Territories of Biana, Indoua, and Corsa a day or two's journey from Agra: which is esteem'd the best of all. It is made also eight days journey from Surat, in a Village called Sarquess, two leagues distance from Amadabat. Here the flat Indigo is made. There is also Indigo little inferior in goodness and price, which comes from the King of Golconda's Territories. The Mein of Surat, which contains 42 Serre's, or 34 and a half of our pounds, is valu'd from 15 to 20 Roupies. They make as good as this at Baroche. That which is made up about Agra is made up in half Balls, and is the most sought for in all India.
It is sold by the Mein, which in those places contains 60 Serres, or 51 and three quarters of our pounds. The usual price is from 36 to 40 Roupies. There grows also Indigo some 36 leagues from Brampour, about a great Village call'd Raout, and round about the neighbouring Towns in the road to Surat: Of which the Natives usually make above a hunder'd-thousand Roupies. There comes Indigo also from Bengala, which the Holland-Company transports for Maslipatan. But they buy this Indigo, and that of Brampour and Amadabat, cheaper by 24 in the hunder'd, then that of Agra. Indigo is made of an Herb which they sow every year after the rains are over: which when it is grown up, is very like our Hemp. They cut it three times a year; first when it is about two or three foot high; and they cut it within half a foot of the ground; the first cutting far exceeds the two latter. The second cutting is worse then the first by ten or twelve in the hunder'd. And the third worse then the second by 12 in the hunder'd. The difference is found by breaking a piece of the Paste, and observing the colour. The colour of that Indigo which is made of the first cutting, is a Violet-blue, but more brisk and lively than the two others: and that which is made of the second is more lively then the third. When they have cut the Herb, they throw it into Pits which they make with Lime, which becomes so hard, that you would judg it to be one intire piece of Marble. They are generally fourscore or a hunder'd paces in circuit; and being half full of water, they fill them quite up with the Herb. Then they bruise and jumble it in the water till the leaf, for the stalk is worth nothing, becomes like a kind of thick mud. This being done, they let it settle for some days; and when the setling is all at the bottom, and the water clear above, they let out all the water. When the water is all drain'd out, they fill several baskets with this slime, and in a plain Field you shall see several men at work, every one at his own basket, making up little pieces of Indigo flat at the bottom, at the top sharp like an egg. Though at Amadabat they make their pieces quite flat like a small cake. Here you are to take particular notice, that the Mer∣chants, because they would not pay custom for an unnecessary weight, before they transport their Indigo out of Asia into Europe, are very careful to cause it to be sifted, to separate the dust from it; which they sell afterwards to the Natives of the Countrey to dye their Calicuts. They that sift this Indigo must be careful to keep a Linnen-cloath before their faces, and that their nostrils be well-stopt, leaving only two little holes for their eyes. Besides, they must every half hour be sure to drink milk, which is a great preservative against the piercing quality of the dust. Yet notwithstanding all this caution, they that have sifted Indigo for nine or ten days, shall spit nothing but blew for a good while toge∣ther. Once I laid an Egg in the morning among the sisters, and when I came to break it in the evening it was all blew within. As they take the Paste out of the Baskets with their Fingers dipt in Oil, and make it into Lumps, or Cakes, they lay them in the Sun to dry. Which is the reason that when the Merchants buy Indigo, they burn some pieces of it, to try whether there be any dust among it. For the Natives who take the Paste out of the Baskets to make it into Lumps, lay it in the Sand, which mixes with the Paste, and fouls it. But when the Merchants burn it, the Indigo turns to Ashes, and the Sand remains. The Governours do what they can to make the Natives leave their
Knavery; but notwithstanding all their care, there will be some deceit. Salt-Peter. GReat store of Salt-Peter comes from Agra and Patna; but the refin'd costs three times more then that which is not. The Hollanders have set up a Ware-House fourteen Leagues above Patna, and when their Salt-Peter is refin'd, they transport it by water by Ogueli. A Mein of refin'd Salt-Peter is worth seven Mamoudi's. Spice. CArdamom, Ginger, Pepper, Nutmegs, Nutmeg-Flowers, Cloves and Cinnamon, are all the different sorts of Spices known to us. I put Cardamom and Ginger in the first place, because that Cardamom grows in the Territories of Visapour, and Ginger in the Dominions of the Great Mogul. And as for other Spices, they are brought from other Foreign parts to Surat, which is the grand Mart. Cardamom is the most excellent of all other Spices, but it is very scarce; and in regard there is no great store in the place where it grows, it is only made use of in Asia, at the Tables of great Princes. Five hundred pound of Cardamoms, are pric'd from a hundred to a hundred and ten Rials. Ginger is brought in great quantities from Amadabat, where there grows more than in any other part of Asia; and it is hardly to be imagin'd how much there is transported candited into Foreign parts. Pepper is of two sorts. There is a sort which is very small, another sort much bigger; both which sorts are distinguish'd into small and great Pepper. The larger sort comes from the Coast of Malavare; and Tuti∣corin and Calicut are the Cities where it is brought up. Some of this Pepper comes from the Territories of the King of Visapour, being vended at Rajapour, a little City in that Kingdom. The Hollanders that purchase it of the Malavares, do not give Money for it, but several sorts of Commo∣dities in Exchange; as Cotten, Opium, Vermilion, and Quicksilver; and this is the Pepper which is brought into Europe. As for the little Pepper that comes from Bantam, Afchen, and some other parts towards the East, there is none of it carried out of Asia, where it is spent in vast quantities, especially among the Mahumetans. For there are double the Grains of small Pepper in one pound, to what there are of the great Pepper; besides that the great Pepper is hotter in the mouth. The little Pepper that comes to Surat, has been sold some years for thirteen or fourteen Mamoudi's the Mein; and so much I have seen the English give for it, to transport it to Ormus, Balsara, and the Red Sea. As for the great Pepper, which the Hollanders fetch from the Coast of Malavare, five hundred pound in truck brings them in not above thirty∣eight Reals; but by the Commodities which they give in Barter, they gain Cent. per Cent. The Nutmeg, the Nutmeg-Flow'r, the Clove, and Cinnamon, are the only Spices which the Hollanders have in their own hands. The three first come from the Molucca Islands; the fourth, which is Cinnamon, from the Island of Ceylan.
'Tis observable of the Nutmeg, that the Tree which bears it is never planted, which has been confirm'd to me by several persons that have liv'd several years in the Country. They related to me, that the Nut∣meg being ripe, several Birds come from the Islands toward the South, and devour it whole, but are forc'd to throw it up again before it be digested. The Nutmeg then besmear'd with a viscous matter, falling to the ground takes root, and produces a Tree, which would never thrive were it planted. This puts me in mind of making one observation upon the Birds of Paradise. These Birds being very greedy after Nut∣megs, come in flights to gorge themselves with the pleasing Spice, at the season, like Felfares in Vintage time; but the strength of the Nutmeg so intoxicates them, that they fall dead drunk to the Earth, where the Emets in a short time eat off their Legs. Hence it comes, that the Birds of Paradise are said to have no Feet; which is not true however, for I have seen three or four that had Feet; and a French Merchant sent one from Aleppo as a Present to Lewis the Thirteenth that had Feet; of which the King made great account, as being a very lovely Fowl. But notwithstanding all the Hollanders Projects, you may buy Cloves at Macassar without purchasing them of the Hollander; in regard the Islan∣ders buy them of the Dutch Captains and Soldiers, which the Hollanders have in those places where the Cloves grow, giving them in exchange Rice, and other necessaries for the support of life, without which they would starve, being very sadly provided for. When the Natives of Macassar are thus furnish'd of Cloves, they barter them in Exchange for such Commodities as are brought them; some∣times they give Tortoise-Shells in exchange, and Gold Dust; by which the Merchant gains six or seven in the hundred, being better than the Money of the Island, though it be Gold, by reason the King oft∣times enhances the value of it. The places where Cloves grow, are Amboyna, Ellias, Seram, and Bouro. The Islands of Banda also, in number six, viz. Nero, Lontour, Poulcay, Roseguin, and Grenapuis, bear Nutmegs in great abundance. The Island of Grenapuis is about six Leagues in compass, and ends in a sharp point, where there is a continual fire burning out of the earth. The Island Damme, where there grows great store of Nutmegs, and very big, was discover'd in the year 1647, by Abel Tasman, a Dutch Commander. The Price of Cloves and Nutmegs, as I have known them sold to the Hollanders at Surat, was as follows. The Mein of Surat contains forty Serres, which make thirty-four of our Pounds, at sixteen Ounces to the Pound. A Mein of Cloves was sold for a hundred and three Mamoudi's and a half. A Mein of Mace was sold for a hundred and fifty-seven Mamoudi's and a half. Nutmegs for fifty-six Mamoudi's and a half. Cinnamon comes at present from the Island of Ceylan. The Tree that bears it is very much like the Willow, and has three Barks. They never take off but the first and second, which is accounted the best. They never meddle with the third, for should the Knife enter that, the Tree would dye. So that it is an art to take off the Cinnamon, which they learn from their youth. The Cinnamon Spice is much dearer to the Hollanders then people think; for the King of Ceylan, otherwise call'd
King of Candy, from the name of his principal City, being a sworn Enemy to the Hollanders, sends his Forces with an intention to surprize them, when they gather their Cinnamon; so that they are forc'd to bring seven or eight hundred men together to defend as many more that are at work. Which great expence of theirs very much enhances the price of the Cinnamon. There grows upon the Cinnamon Tree a certain fruit like an Olive, though not to be eaten. This the Portugals were wont to put into a Caldron of Water, together with the tops of the Branches, and boil'd it till the Water was all consum'd. When it was cold, the upper part became a Paste like white Wax; of which they made Tapers to set up in their Churches, for no sooner were the Tapers lighted, but all the Church was perfum'd. Formerly the Portugals brought Cinnamon out of other Countries, belonging to the Raja's about Cochin. But the Hollanders have destroy'd all those places, so that the Cinnamon is now in their hands. When the Portugals had that Coast, the English bought their Cinnamon of them, and usually paid for it by the Mein fifty Mamoudi's. Drugs that are brought to Surat, and brought from other Countries, with the price of every one by the Mein. Salt Armoniack, according to the usual price, costs by the Mein twenty Mamoudi's. Borax, comes unrefin'd from Amadabat, as does Salt Armoniack, and costs by the Mein thirty-five Mamoudi's. Gum-Lack, seven Mamoudi's and a half. Gum-Lack wash'd, ten Mamoudi's. Gum-Lack in sticks of Wax, forty Mamoudi's. There are some of these Sticks that cost fifty or sixty Mamoudi's the Mein, and more when they mix Musk in the Gum. Saffron of Surat, which is good for nothing but for colouring, four Mamoudi's and a half. Cumin White, eight Mamoudi's. Cumin Black, three Mamoudi's. Arlet small, three Mamoudi's. Frankincense, that comes from the Coast of Arabia, three Mamoudi's. Myrrh, that which is good, call'd Mirra Gilet, thirty Mamoudi's. Myrrh Bolti, which comes from Arabia, fifteen Mamoudi's. Cassia, two Mamoudi's. Sugar Candy, eighteen Mamoudi's. Asutinat, a sort of Grain, very hot, one Mamoudi. Annise-seed gross, three Mamoudi's and a half. Annise-seed small and hot, one Mamoudi and a half. Oupelote, a Root, fourteen Mamoudi's. Cointre, five Mamoudi's. Auzerout, from Persia, a hundred and twenty Mamoudi's. Alloes Succotrine, from Arabia, twenty eight Mamoudi's. Licorice, four Mamoudi's. Lignum Aloes, in great pieces, two hundred Mamoudi's. Lignum Aloes, in small pieces, four hundred Mamoudi's. Vez-Cabouli, a certain Root, twelve Mamoudi's. There is a sort of Lignum Aloes very Gummy, which comes to, by the Mein, four thousand Mamoudi's.
Gum-Lake for the most part comes from Pegu; yet there is some also brought from Bengala, where it is very dear, by reason the Natives fetch that lively Scarlet colour out of it, with which they paint their Calicuts. Nevertheless, the Hollanders buy it, and carry it into Persia for the same use of painting. That which remains after the colour is drawn off, is only fit to make sealing Wax. That which comes from Pegu is not so dear, though as good for other Countries. The difference is only this, that it is not so clean in Pegu, where the Pismires foul it, as in Bengala, where it grows in a heathy place, full of Shrubs, where those Animals cannot so well come at it. The Inhabitants of Pegu never make any use of it in painting, being a dull sort of people, that are in nothing at all industrious. The Women of Surat get their livings by cleansing the Lake after the Scarlet colour is drawn from it. After that they give it what colour they please, and make it up into Sticks for sealing Wax. The English and Holland Company carry away every year a hundred and fifty Chests. The price is about ten Pence the pound. Powder'd Sugar is brought in great quantities out of the Kingdom of Bengala; it causes also a very great Trade at Ougeli, Patna, Daca, and other places. I have been told it for a very great certainty, by several ancient people in Bengala, that Sugar being kept thirty years becomes absolute poison, and that there is no Venom more dangerous, or that sooner works its effect. Loaf-Sugar is also made at Amadabat, where they are perfectly skill'd in refining it; for which reason it is call'd Sugar Royal. These Sugar-Loaves usually weigh from eight to ten pound. Opium is brought from Brampour, a Town of good Trade between Agra and Surat. The Hollanders buy great quantities, which they truck for their Pepper. Tobacco also grows in abundance round about Brampour; sometimes there has been so much that the Natives have let vast quantities rot upon the ground, for want of gathering. Coffee grows neither in Persia nor in India, where it is in no request; but the Hollanders drive a great Trade in it, transporting it from Ormus into Persia, as far as Great Tartary, from Balsara into Chaldea, Arabia, Mesopotamia, and the other Provinces of Turky. It was first found out by a Hermite, whose name was Sheck-Siadeli, about twenty years ago, before which time it was never heard of in any Author either ancient or modern. Deceits in Silk Wares. PLain Silk Wares may be alter'd in length, breadth, and quality. The quality shews it self when they are of an even thread, when the weight is equal, and when there is no Cotton thread in the Weft. The Indians not having the art of gilding silver, put into their strip'd Wares threads of pure Gold, so that you must count the quantity of Gold threads to see whether the Silk have its due number. And this also you must observe in your Silks wov'n with Silver. As for Taffata's, you are only to mind whether the pieces be all of a fineness, and to see by unfolding some of them, that there be nothing within to augment the weight, and then weighing all the pieces by themselves, to see that they all agree.
The colours of those Carpets which are made in India, do not last so long as the colour of those which are made in Persia; but for the work∣manship it is very lovely. The eye of the Broaker is to judge of the large∣ness, beauty, and fineness of those Carpets which are wrought with Gold and Silver, and whether they be fine and rich. But whether they be Carpets, or other Stuffs mix'd with Gold and Silver, it behoves the Buyer to pull out some of the Gold and Silver Threads, to see whether they be of the right value or no. Deceits in the White Calicuts. THe deceits usually put upon Calicuts, are in fineness, length, and breadth. Every Bale may contain two hundred pieces; among which they will juggle in five or six or ten, less fine, or less white, shorter or narrower than according to the scantling of the Bale, which cannot be found out but by examining them piece by piece. The fineness is discern'd by the eye, the length and breadth by the measure. But the Indians practise a more cunning way, which is to count the number of threads which ought to be in the breadth, according to the fineness of the scantling. When the number fails, it is either more transparent, more narrow, or more course. The difference is sometimes so difficult to be perceiv'd, that there is no way to find it out but by counting the threads. And yet this difference in a great quantity comes to a great deal. For it is nothing to cousen a Crown or two Crowns in a piece that comes but to fifteen or twenty Crowns. Those that whiten these Calicuts, to save charges of a few Limons, will knock the Calicuts excessively upon a Stone, which does fine Calicuts a great injury, and lowers the price. As for their Calicuts dy'd blew or black, you must take care that the Workmen do not knock them after they are folded, to make them look sleek; for many times when they come to be unfolded, you shall find holes in the creases. As for your painted and printed Calicuts, which are painted and printed as they come out of the Loom, the Merchant must take care that what he bespeaks be finish'd before the end of the Rains, for the thicker the Water is where they are wash'd, the more lively will the printed and painted colours appear. It is easie to distinguish between the printed and the painted Calicuts; and between the neatness of the work: but for the fineness and other qualities, they are not so easily discern'd; and therefore the Broaker must be more careful. Cheats in Cotton. THe cheat in the weight is twofold. The first, by laying them in a moist place; and thrusting in the middle of every Skain some∣thing to add to the weight. The second, in not giving good weight when the Broaker receives it from the Workman, or Merchant that delivers it. There is but one cheat in the quality, that is by putting three or four Skains, of a coarser Commodity then that which is uppermost, into one Mein. Which in a great quantity mounts high; for there are some Cottons that are worth an hunder'd Crowns the Mein. These two cheats
being often us'd by the Holland-Company, there is no way but to weigh your Commodity in the presence of the Dutch-Commander, and his Councel, and to examin every Mein Skain by Skain. When this is done, they who are order'd to be at his examination, are oblig'd to fix to every Bale a ticket of the weight and quality: for if there be a faileur, they who fix the ticket are engag'd to make good what is wanting. Deceits in Indigo. I Have told you, that when the Work-men have made up the Indigo-Paste into lumps, with their fingers dipt in Oil, they lay them in the Sun a drying. Now those that have a design to cheat the Merchants, dry them in the sand, to the end that the sand sticking to the Indigo, should encrease the weight. Sometimes they lay up their Paste in moist places, which makes it give, and consequently renders it more heavy. But if the Governour of the place discovers the cheat, he makes them severely pay for it: and the best way of discovery is to burn some pieces of Indigo, for the sand will remain. Indian Broakers. THe Broakers are as it were the Masters of the Indian Families; for they have all Goods at their disposal. The Work-men choose the most aged and most experienc'd, who are to endeavour equal advantages for the whole Tribe they undertake for. Every evening that they return from their business, and that; according to the custom of the Indians, who make no Suppers, they have eaten some little piece of sweet-meat, and drank a glass of water, the eldest of the Tribe meet at the Broaker's House, who gives them an account of what he has done that day, and then they consult what he is to do next. Above all things, they caution him to look to his hits, and to cheat, rather then be cheated. FINIS.
CATALOGUS LIBRORUM. FOLIO. CAtalogus Impressorum Librorum Bibliothecae Bodleianae in Academia Oxo∣niensi per Tho. Hide. Oxonii è Theatro Sheldoniano, 1674. Charletoni (Gualteri) M. D. Exercitationes de Differentiis & nomini∣bus Animalium, quibus accedunt Mantissa Anatomica & quaedam de variis Fossilium Generibus, deque Differentijs & nominibus Colorum. (Figuris) Oxoniae è Theatro Sheldoniano, 1677. Ferrarij (Jo. Bap.) Lexicon Geographicum, Vol. 2. Cum Additionibus Ant. Baudrand. Isenaci 1677. Historia & Antiquitates Universitatis Oxoniensis, Vol. 2. Oxoniae è Theatro Shel∣doniano. 1674. Jamblicus (Chalcidensis) de Mysterijs Aegyptiorum, G. L. Interprete & notis Thomae Galei T. C. C. S. Oxonij è Theatro Sheldoniano. 1678. Marmora Oxoniensia ex Arundelianis, Seldenianis, aliisque conflata; cum Com∣ment. Humphredi Prideaux, Seldeni & Lydiati annotationibus. Oxonij è Theatro Sheldoniano. 1676. Theatri Oxoniensis Encoenia, sive Comitia philologica, Jul. 6. Ann. 1677. Celebrata. Aelfredi magni Anglorum Regis Vita, à Dom. Johanne Spelman conscripta, & anno∣tationibus illustrata, Oxonij è Theatro Sheldoniano. 1678. Dr. Henry Hammond's Sermons. 1675. A Table of Ten Thousand square Numbers, by John Pell, D. D. 1672. The Commentaries and Life of Julius Caesar, with the Notes of Clemens Ed∣monds. 1677. Pocock's (Edw.) Commentary on Micha and Malaohi. Oxf. at the Theater. 1677. Tavernier (Jo. Bapt.) Travels through Turkey into Persia, and the East-Indies, (with Cuts) Lond. 1677. Charas (Moses) Royal Pharmacopoeia Galenical and Chymical. Lond. 1678. Webster (John) Displaying of supposed Witchcraft. 1677. The Natural History of Oxford-shire, being an Essay towards the Natural History of England, by R. Plot, L. L. D. Hugo. Grotij opera Theologica, Vol. 4. 1679. Episcopij opera, 1678. An English Bible in Folio, now in the Press at the Theater in Oxford. Judge Hales Origination of Mankind, 1677. QƲARTO. HIstoria Jacobitarum in Aegypto, Lybia, Nubia, Aethiopia tota, & parte Cypri insulae habitantium, per Jos. Abudacnum, Oxonij è Theatro Sheldoniano. Votum pro Pace Christiana, Aut. Andr. Sall, D. D. Oxonij è Theatro Sheldo∣niano, 1678. Lightfoot (Jo.) horae Hebraicae & Talmudicae in Corinthios. Pariss 1677. Joannis Bonae (Cardinalis) Opera Theol. 1677. Binchii (M. Joan.) Mellificium Theologicum. Amst. 1666. Seldenus (Jo.) de Nummis. Londini 1675. Mercurialis (Hier.) de Arte Gymnastica, (cum Figuris.) Amst. 1672. Moses Maimonides de Jure Pauperis & Peregridi apud Judaeos. Heb, cum Notis Humph. Prideaux Oxon, 1679.
Horroccii (Jer.) opera Astronomica, nec non Wallisii Exercitationes tres. 1678. Paladius de Gentibus Indicis & Bragmanibus G. L. Londini 1665. Ferrarij (Alex.) Euclides Catholicus. Londini 1676. Testamentum Graecum. Genevae. Duporti Gnomologia Homerica. 1660. Bonham's (Josua) Sermon at the Visitation held at Leicester, April 29. 1674. Sermon Preached before the Artillery-Company, by William Durham. Les Motiss de la Conversion à la Religion Reformée Du Francois de le Motte. A Londres, 1675. Pharmacopée Royale, Galenique et Chymique, par Moyse Charas. Paris. 1676. An English Bible, with the Liturgy, Apocrypha, and Singing Psalms. Oxford at the Theater, 1675. and in small 4o, 1679. Cook (John) Sermon before the Mayor, Decemb. 19. 1675. on John 8. 34. 1676. Luzancy's Abjuration-Sermon at the Savoy, July 11. 1675. on John 8. 32. 1676. Pell (John) Introduction to Algebra. 1668. Senault (Jo. Fr.) Christian Man. 1650. A Sermon at the Marshal Turenne's Funeral, Decemb. 15. 1675. 2. Sam. 3. 32. 1677. Tillotson's (Jo.) Sermon before the King, April 18. 1675. Psal. 119. 60. 1675. Twisden's (Sir Roger) Historical Vindication of the Church of England. 1675. Wilkins (Jo) Sermon before the King, March 7. 1669. on Prov. 13. 16, 17. 1674. Sermon before the King, March 19. 1670. on Ecclesiastes 12. 14. 1671. Cole (Gilbert) Conferences against the Church of Rome. Oxford, at the Thea∣ter, 1674. Allestrey's (R.) Divine Authority of Scripture, a Sermon, 2 Tim. 3. 15. 1673. Character of the Last Day, a Sermon before the King, 2 Pet. 3. 3. by John Fell Lord Bishop of Oxford. 1675. Clarendon (Edward Earl) Survey of Hobs's Leviathan. Oxford, at the Theater, 1676. OCTAVO. TEstament English for Children: Printed at the Theater, Oxon. 1679. Homeri Ilias Graecé Cum Scholiis Didymi. Oxonii è Theatro Sheldoniano. Archimedes Arenarius cum notis Jo. Wallis. Oxoniae è Theatro Sheldoniano. 1676. Oughtred (Guil.) Opuscula hactenus inedita notis Jo. Wallesii. Oxonii è Theatro Sheldoniano. 1677. Eugalenus (Seres) de Scorbuto. Hagae-Com. 1658. Grammar English and French, by the Messieurs of the Port Royal. 1674. Lydiati Canones Chronologici. Oxonii è Theatro Sheldoniano. 1675. Mayern (Theod. Torq.) de Arthritide. Lond. 1676. Gregory's Nomenclator. 1675. Needham (Gualt.) De Formato Foetu. Londini, 1667. Parei (David) Chronologia Sacra. Amst. 1641. Ruarit, Groii, &c. Epistolae. Amst. 1677. Rhetore, Selecti. Gr. Lat. per Tho. Gale. Oxonii è Theatro Sheldoniano. 1676. Psalterium Graecum juxta M. S. Alexandrin. cum versione vulgata. Oxonii è Theatro Sheldoniano. 1678. Sandii (Chr.) Interpretationes Paradoxae Quatuor Evangel. Cosmop. 1670. —Historiae Ecclesiastae. Cosmop. 1669. Smith (Tho.) De Ecclesiae Graecae Hodierno Statu Epistola. Londini 1678. Theocratus cum Scholiis Graecis, è Theatro Sheldoniano. Georgii Diaconi Epitome Logices Aristotelis Oxonii. Art of Speaking, London, 1676. Boyl (Rob.) against Tho. Hobs. Lond. 1674. —Of Effluviums. Lond. 1673. —Of Gems. Lond. 1672. Barbets (Paul.) Chirurgery (with Cuts.) Lond. 1676. Barnets (Gilb.) Mystery of Iniquity. Lond. 1676. Basilius Valentinus of Natural and Supernatural things. Lond. 1670. Fourneil's Discourse, with the General Systeme of the Cartesian Philosophy. Lond. 1670. FINIS.
