W1284 13523657 99950
The Well-wishers to the ROYAL FAMILY. To a New Play-house Tune. NOw the Tories, that Glories in Royal Jemmy's return, the Tavern shall roar it, and score it, your Caps and Bonnets burn: Let the Lads and Lasses set foot to foot in their turn; and he that passes, his Glasses, may he never scape the Horn: Royal Iames is come again, there's for Honest Men; Room again, the true Heir is come again; Fop-pretenders we scorn, then Hey Boys laugh it, and quaff it let Whiggs and Zealots mourn. [2] Let Impeachers and Speechers be with the Authors pull'd down; And all that Preaches or Teaches against the Heir of the Crown: No more the Zealous shall tell us of the Succession of the Throne; Till the Rebellious, so zealous, his Lawful Intrest own: Monarchy is got up again, Every Man take his Cup again, Till we make the Whiggs stoop again, who our Peace wou'd Inthrall: And every Rebel that Libel'd, do at his Foot-stool Fall. [3] Let's be Loyal and Joyal, spite of each Factious Caball, Who dayly Deny all, Defie all, that we can Loyalty Call; Who Smoaking, and Soaking, with the return of the Rump, Sadly Looking, sit Croaking, to see it Wore a Stump; Then Set the Glass Round again, For our Time let's not spend in Vain, But let us now Drink A-Main, Fill it Up to the Brim: Come Round Boys lets Trowl it, and Bowl it till Our Joys they do swim. [4] For HIM Out Choices and Voices, shall all Hereafter be Free, Whilst each one Rejoyces, our Noise shall Defend the Raging o'th Sea; We'l Attend HIM, Befriend HIM, let Malice Vote what it will; Coyn we'l Lend HIM, Defend HIM, we'l Rejoyce in HIM still: Then let Us no Mirth Refrain, Since that Now HE is Safe again, Well having Escap'd the Main; From the Salt Waves set free, Then Hey Boys Laugh it, and Quaff it, And let Us Merry be. [5] Though the Zealous, grow Jealous, and Create much Needless Fear, By which means they'd Drill Us, and Will Us like Themselves to Appear: But no Wonder, since Plunder, is That at which They do Aim, That the Whigs Wander under Religious Guile, which they Shame: But at last we have found them, And from their Bottom Unwound them, So that each Man may Sound them, and Laugh at the Old Cause, Which was the Ruine and Undoing, of King and Kingdoms Laws. [6] Then let's Rout 'um, and Flout 'um, who Rail at the Succession, That would Rout HIM whom We so Esteem, beyond all Expression: Fill Clarret, whose for it? and let each Bumper go Round, Who doth Bar it, or Spare it, may he with Goats Horns be Crown'd: Here's a Health to the Dutchess, Grant her Long Life, Health, & Riches And a Young Prince is all Our Wishes, whilst all the Factious Repine, Then come away wi't, ne'r stay it, let no man Baulk his Wine. FINIS. Printed for P. Brooksby, in West-smithfield, 1682.
