W1644 R10315 11990456 52020
A Golden Topaze, OR, Heart-jewell. Namely, A Conscience purifi∣ed and pacified by the Blood and Spirit of CHRIST. Written by FRANCIS WHIDDON Pastor of Morton-Hampsted in Devon. Unicnique liber esse propria Conscientia, & ad hunc librum discutiendum, & emendandum omnes alii inventi sunt. S. Bernard. OXFORD, Printed by Henry Hall. 1656.
TO MY FAITHFULL Flock, who love the Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity. Mercy unto you, and peace, and love be multiplied. MY Deare Children, for so I am bold to call you, though you have had many teachers, yet not many fa∣thers; if I may credit your owne tongues, there is a number of you will say, that in Christ Je∣sus I have begotten you through the Gospell, 1 Cor. 4.15. Let God have the glory: for what is Paul? or what is Apollos: or what am I? But the weake Instrument by whom the all-sufficient God hath wrought faith in your hearts. I therefore according unto my
Duty do here present unto you a tender of my true Affection to∣wards you; in this plaine and short Tract of Conscience. The subject is worthy of all Acceptation, Though the Author bee the mea∣nest of all his Brethren. You may consider it as an Object both to your eare and eye, your eare hath heard it preached, and your eye may see and read it, and if your heart Affect it, the Jewell is your owne. And I who am your Pastor may take the Boldnesse and say. I need no Epistle of Commendation to you, or Epistle of Commendation from you: you are mine Epistle knowne and read of all that have spirituall eyes, and are acquainted with you, yea, you are the Epistle of Christ written not with Inke, but with the spirit, Not in Tables of stone, but in the
fleshy Tables of the heart. I hope I shall not be ashamed of this my foolish Boasting, But that when I am gone from you, this pretious Jewell which now I present unto you, will then be found still to abide within you, and if at any time through carelesnesse, this Jewell of a good Conscience with in you, shall gather Dust and lose it's lustre: Let this little Tract, if better be wanting, be Assumed by you, Read it once and againe humbly and advisedly, so may you have hope, that your Dull and Dusky Consciences will Recover it's former lustre, with more peace and Purity. And Now my deare children, knowing that shortly I must put off this my tabernacle of Flesh, 2 Pet. 1.14. and be brought to the house appointed for all living,
Job. 30.23. I shall endeavour to give you some few Advertismēts before I goe hence and be seene, no more. Know (Deare soules) we are the people on whom the ends of the world are Come, and our daies very perilous and Dangerous, as saith the Apostle, 2 Tim. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. In which we find Iniquite to Abound and Damnable Errors & Heresies to Superabound. What Enthusi∣asticall fancy, what Anti-Scriptu∣rall opinions? What Immaginary Raptures and Revelations have we now Amongst us? so that now to Refraine from their evill opinion and practises, is to make our selves a prey. Never were the times more Contagious; Opinions more Infectious, & practises more Dangerous. So that every pious soule had need to be a Spirituall
Physician, and still to have Cor∣dials to fortifie his soule within, and Repercussives to beate back the Infectious Venome of Sin and Error without. Preservatives. I. Be constant and sincere in the preformance of all holy Duties, both publike and private in the Congregation and the Family. Let your holinesse appeare unto all, Be holy abroad and at home. Despise not ordinances neither in whole or part. But receive them with all thankfulnesse as Love-tokens from your Father, and acknow∣ledg a Necessitie of them all, and that as long as you are Below Temptations, you cannot be above Ordinances, which will be as long as you carry your Fraile Taberna∣cles about you. They are more necessary then your Appointed food; More to be Desired then Gold, yea
then fine Gold; And sincere milke sweeter then the hony or hony Comb, without which, you cannot be nourished up unto everlasting Life. 2. Keepe close to your God in a way of Prayer and prayses. Be Constant in Both: pray alwaies and in all things give thankes. What Grace you want get it by Prayer, and what good you enjoy weare it By Prayse. If you thus draw neare to God in a way of Duty God will be still neare unto you in a way of Mercy. The least Dropp of the wine of mercy, should Inflame your hearts with true thankful∣nesse, and fill your Mouths with constant prayses. So that you lay new Ingagement on the god of mercy to bestow more mercies; Not only to preserve you from the evill of evils, But ever to In∣rich
you with the blessing of bles∣sings. 3. Give not way to a customa∣ry Dulnesse in Duty, but performe every Duty with all your power, with sincere Intention, with heate of Affection, and with Diligence, and Delight. Especially be not slight in secret prayer, meditation, and reading. Doe not the worke of the Lord deceitfully or negligently, least the curse of God fall on you, Jer: 48.10. Mal: 1.14. but zea∣lously and heartily; watch to these duties, Eph. 6.18. Keep your hearts in a good frame for them, undefiled with sin, untainted with the world; Endeavour to feele all Duties at your hearts, inlivening, inlarging, and inflaming your affe∣ctions. Lay not out the chiefe of your zeale on Externals, opinions, and the smaller things of Religion,
but let soule-saving worke be your maine and daily imployment. Ex∣ercise your selves in selfe-examination, looke daiely into your owne bosomes by a serious scruti∣ny, and spare not those beloved Dalilah's, and cursed Achans which are the troublers of our Israel. 4. Get true light in your Under∣standings, not only a speculative, but spirituall light; not a notionall, but experimentall light, the light of the knowledge of God in the face of Jesus. Such a light whereby you may be inabled to see sin to be the greatest evill, and God himselfe to be the cheifest good. Such a light that melts the soule, that humbles the soule, that enlivens the soule, that quickens the soule, and that quiets the soule. Nourish not an head-light, but an heart-light. Let the word of truth dwell in you plen∣teously.
Weake judgments are easi∣ly misled both in opinion and pra∣ctice, but a sound judgement will preserve you in both. So fly one error that you do not fall into an∣other; it is easy to run into ex∣treames, but very difficult to keep the golden Meane. 5. Keep your hearts with all dili∣gence. (4. Pro.) Watch daily to prevent him, which watcheth ever to mischeife you, I Pet. 5.8. And let yours praiers be frequent and fervent, Lord lead us not into temp∣tation. Your enemies are many, mighty, and malicious, which still lye in waite to breake your peace, wound your consciences, lessen your comforts, impaire your gra∣ces, blurre your evidences, and dampe your assurances; and unlesse you stand upon your Guard, & set your selves in battell-array, to
fight with those strong, subtile, sedulous Goliahs, which come out to upbraid Gods little Champion. They (I meane the Divell and his Agents, viz: the world and the flesh) will not only rage but raigne; not only assault, but take your soules captive at their will. There∣fore (as you love your owne soules and the welfare of them unto all e∣ternity) Get unto you the whole ar∣mour of God. Eph. 6. 13. Be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might. Give no faire Quarter unto foule tempations: make up speedily every Breach between God and your owne consciences, and let not conscience loose its Tendernesse, but shun every evill and the appea∣rance of it. 6. Let thy life be the life of faith. Saith Paul, the life that we now live in the flesh, we live by the
faith of the Son of God, who loved us, and gave himselfe for us. Keep fresh the sense of his love, and al∣waies acknowledge a continuall need of his Bloud, Spirit, and In∣tercession, and how much you are beholding and ingaged unto him. Labour to draw and derive from Christ by the powerfull attractive force of faith, spirituall ability, suf∣ficient for every dayes worke. Act your faith dayly in the promises of grace and strength. Go unto Christ still for his wisdome to counsell you; for his righteoussness to cover you, for strength to resist tempta∣tions; for the shoulder that must beare our Crosses; for ability to performe all duties as duties. 7. Resolve with david Ps. 101. that you will not know a wicked person (i.e.) approve of him. If out of your families, have not fellow∣ship
with them, but reprove them; if in your families, let them not a∣bide within your doores, but re∣move him or her as persons most infectious and dangerous. We have sins enough and too too ma∣ny of our owne, therefore let us not encrease them by a base conni∣vency at others mens sins. Especi∣ally avoid that generation of men whose grand designe it is to under∣mine the Gospell, to ruine the Mi∣nistry, and to robb them of that maintenance, which is due unto them by the law of God, and by the Law of Nature, and by the law of Nations. These croaking frogges have overspread our Aegypt, so that they have made it stinke with their damnable Opinions & devi∣lish practises. They creep into hou∣ses and lead aside silly women, 2 Tim. 3.11. and by their faire speeches
deceive the hearts of the simple, Rom. 16.18. And shall, if it were possible, deceive the very elect, Mark 13.22. 8. Affect a faithfull and power∣full Minister, who doth carefully look both to himselfe and his Do∣ctrine. Adscribe neither too much, nor too little to your Teachers. Neither despise them, nor deify them, as the manner of some is. Esteeme him not as a principle Au∣thor, but as a subordinate Actor; not as a Lord, but a Steward; not as a Master, but a Minister, and yet account him more then an ordina∣ry Servant, even a man of God, A servant of the most high God, that sheweth you the way of Salvation. Look on him not only as a Seer, but Over-seer, a Steward of Gods high secrets, a messenger of the Lord of Hostes, by whose Embas∣sage
peace is concluded, and recon∣ciliation ministerially made up be∣tween God and man. He is Gods mouth to you by preaching, and your mouth to God by praying. On that in speciall place standeth before God, and ministreth to him upon earth, as the Angels do it in heaven.Woodnots Aphorisms 1. Cens. p. 42. The Jewes say, that he that di∣eth in the displea∣sure of his Rabbi, shall never be forgi∣ven in this world, nor in the world to come. i.e. of his tea∣cher that hath the charge of his soule. Therefore take heed you fall not out with your Teacher, whome the most wise God hath thought fit to make your Pastor; forsake not the Levite as long as thou livest u∣pon the earth, Deut. 12.19. Doe not desire such a Teacher as thou mayest rule him, but such as may rule you, Magistrates are chosen to governe the people, not the peo∣ple to governe them. So Ministers you are not to command them but obey them. Therefore obey them that have the Rule over you, Heb. 13.17. And submit your selves, for
they watch for your souls, as they that must give an account, that they may do it with Joy and not with greife. I beseech you in the bowels of Christ, let Death and Judge∣ment possesse your most serious thoughts, waite for the one, and provide for the other. Dye daiely, (with Paul) and you shall dye well. Have thine end ever in thine eye, and sweeten the bitter cup of Death by a dayly preparation. Get your tackling all in readinesse, that you may faile over the Sea of mor∣tall miseries in safety and security to the Port of happinesse. You shall all of you ere long lye gasping for death on your dying beds, and there lye grappling with the King of feares, attended with Terrors. Therefore (as you love your soules) let the whole course of your lives be a conscionable preparative
to dye comfortably. Look on eve∣ry day as your last. So live that you may say with David, Though I walke through the Valley of the shaddow of death, I will not feare. Oh that you would be wise and consi∣der your latter end, before you go downe to the chambers of death, whence you shall never returne. Would you dye willingly? would you dye well? Then get a part in Christ, a Title to him, an Interest in him. Worke out your salvation with feare and trembling. Give all diligence to make your calling and election sure. So live, that you may not be ashamed to die. So number your dayes, that you may apply your hearts to true wisdome. So cast up your Accounts, that you may give them up with joy and not with greife. Judge your selves for your daiely Deviations, and you shall not be
judged; condemne your selves, and you shall not be condemned. 10 Lastly. Let this little Book be in your hands, heads, and hearts. Let a good conscience be written on your soules with Characters inde∣lible never to be razed out, so that when death shall appeare, thou mayest be able to say, I have lived in all good conscience before God un∣till this day. Now whereas dull spirits are more quickned by Examples then Precepts. This place hath had a great advantage above other pla∣ces adjacent. Mr. John Southmead who is now a glorious Saint in heaven, and his Soule made happy with the Spirits of just men made perfect. You know he was an old Disciple, and served his Master faithfully in his generation for ma∣ny yeares, zealously striving for
the inlargment of the Kingdome of Christ and demolishing the King∣dome of Satan. A great Curb he was to prophanesse, witnesse his great paines and travell in over∣throwing those Heathenish sports and pastimes, which were too common even upon the Lords day. God made him the Instru∣ment to abolish Wakes, Revells, Maypoles and May-games, with their Apurtenances, Fidlers and superfluous Ale-houses, not only in his owne, but in many other Pa∣rishes adjacent. So that not only the Practice, but even the Name of these sinfull Vanities is almost forgotten. Againe, as he was a strong Curb to prophanesse, so was he as sharp a spurr unto holi∣nesse. Witnesse his great cost and paines in getting a faithfull Tea∣cher to instruct the people. Very
carefull abroad to warne the unru∣ly, to comfort the feeble minded,1 Thes. 5.14. and to support the weake. And at home in his Family in repeating Sermons; reading, opening, and applying Scriptures unto such as were under him; constantly pray∣ing for a Blessing on them, and as carefull in returning Praise to God for every Blessing both publick and private. But at last when the evill dayes came on him, so that the Keepers of the house began to trem∣ble,Eccle. 14.3, 4. the strong man to bow, the grin∣ders to cease, and the windowes to be darkened, he was willing for a Desolution, very ready to goe hence, often saying, It is time for mee to be gone, my Master hath no more worke for me to do here upon earth. Now shall we forget such a worthy servant of God? by no meanes. Let his memory be ever
blessed, and his Name as precious oyntment powred forth. And let us honour his remembrance in an ho∣ly imitation of his vertues. But should we forget him, yet his God would not forget his place, his person, his zeale, his labour of love: The Lord shall count when he writeth up his people, that this man was borne there. Ps. 87.6. even in the family of Wrey, within the Pa∣rish of Morton, and in the County of Devon. Now you having such an excellent Patterne and Presi∣dent, let it be your earnest desire and endeavour to run on and not be weary, walke on and not be faint in those waies (paved ith holinesse) in which he hath walked, that so your end may be everlasting life. To conclude, looke on this small Tract as a Dowry which your dying Pastor hath bequeathed unto you,
whom he loves in the Lord. Re∣ceive this provision which he hath made for you of wholsome meat, not caring for concealed Cookery, or the vaine enticing words of mans wisdome. As it was intended for your Instruction, delivered to your Attention; so let it be digested by your Meditation, and practised in your Conversation. So both Pastor and People shall behold each others face with joy at the Barr of Christ; and have a most happy admission into his most glorious presence, where there is fulnesse of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore, Amen. Your most affectionate though unworthy Teacher, FRANCIS WHIDDON.
To the READER. Christian Reader, HEre is presented unto thine eye a little small Tract, which in it's front doth promise great things, as precious Stones and Jewels: Possibly if thou with an humble heart shalt call and cry, seek and search, thou mayest find that which will be better thē Gold, more excellent then refined Silver, namely a good Conscience. Let not any prejudice of person or partes cause thee to cast it a∣side, as not worthy thy view, neither cry thou, Tush what is this Pamphlet unto those many large and learned Volumes of those able and holy men, that have for∣erly written upon this subject. I doe ingenuously confesse, it is very meane, my vintage lesse then others gleanings. But what of that; if thou be an humble Chri∣stian; thou wilt acknowledge that Paul
and Apollos are but iustruments, and can do nothing without their principall Efficient, also we find by dayly experi∣ence, that the lesse of man, the more of God; he can worke as well by the weakest as ablest instrument, & draw as strongly with an hair, as with a Cable rope. I must acknowledge the discourse is very short and very plaine, and both very needfull: in these full and surfeiting times; who seeth not that great volumes are little re∣garded, & large discourses are easily laid aside: men find much reading to be wea∣risome to the flesh, I therefore affect brevity with perspicuity. Should I be long in my discourse, I am confident thou wouldest not read it over. But in so much as it is very short, an houres labour or so; I may have hopes that thou wilt read it over and over, and the oftner the better. As for plainenesse of the stile, I would have thee to know the Author is a very plaine man, and hath written it for a
very plaine people in his owne Congre∣gation. This was never intended to go a∣broad into the world, but to be confined to the place and people where it was first preached; a people that desire the plaine evidence of the Spirit, & not the vaine enticing words of mans wisdome. Therefore if thy Braine run over with vain speculations, high notions, & frothy expressions, and wilt be wise above what is written, 1 Cor. 4.6. remember that of Austin, Multi propter arborem scientiae amittunt arborem vitae. Many with Adam so eagerly strive for the tree of knowledge, that they lose the tree of life. A good caveat for such as are all for new discoveries, new lights, but not new lives. To you therefore that with the A∣thenian cry, quid novi? what new thing? I must answer, nec nova, nec novè,The∣ophi∣lus. here is nothing new, but vetus veritas iisdem verbis & iisdē syllabis. The old truth in its owne words and syllables. If this
do not like you, then lay it gently aside, and it will not harme you. But unto you that heartily desire to have and to hold, to use and exercise, alwaies, in all things, and to all persons, a Conscience void of offence: if you want better helps take this for present. And because this little Book must with little Benjamin,Gen. 43.14 be sent into Egypt, I shall with old Jacob, desire that it may find favour where it comes. If others desire the like with mee; I hope that nei∣ther they in Reading, nor I in Writing shall lose our labour. Thine as thou art Christ's F.W. June 11. 1656. Imprimatur GERARD LANGBAINE Pro-Vicecan. OXON.
The TOPAZ. HEB. 13.18. For we trust we have a good Con∣science, Willing in all things to live honestly. I Find it reported of Saint Austin long since that a great desire pos∣sessed him of hearing Paul to Preach. Another like affected with him, seconds his desire with this of his own: which was, that his Theam or Text might be Conscience. Doubt∣lesse these good men were friends to Conscience, they saw how the Cause stood with her, namely that she was in a languishing condition, and ready to die: what their thoughts were we can onely guesse: but in these dayes of ours, these last and worst dayes, if we ponder the wayes and workes, the o∣pinions and practises of the most, we have just cause to complaine, that
Conscience is not onely sick and dying, but dead and buried in the grave of habituall sin, with the stone of hard∣nesse rolled on the grave, and that she hath laid so long in the dust of oblivi∣on, that her name is become unsavory, & the very mentioning of Conscience, is nauseated by every prophane Beli∣alist. It's high time, therefore, to crave the help of an Angel, yea the Angel of the Covenant Jesus Christ the Saviour; to roll away the stone, and to raise up our dead friend Conscience, as sometimes he raised up his dead friend Lazarus. This worke of raising the dead is pro∣per unto God onely, yet may an omni∣potent God use impotent man in such a worke; as Elisha in raising the Shuna∣mites dead son to life,2 King. 4.34. Act. 9.9. Act. 40. Paul in resto∣ring Eutychus, and Peter in reviving Tabitha (aliàs) Dorcas. Now he that imployed men then, in raising dead bodies, can and will imploy men still in raising dead soules, dead conscien∣ces; who knoweth what God may do, if we do our parts? if the Hebrews
pray, & Paul preach, and God come in with a blessing on both, what shall hin∣der but that the dead conscience should be revived, the drowsie awakened, the weake confirmed, the troubled quiet∣ed, the good bettered, and every e∣lect soule returne to his rest with some measure of Pauls considence, and say, I trust I have a good Conscience, wil∣ling in all things to live honestly? The occasion of Pauls pleading a good Conscience, I find to be thus;Occasion. there were certaine ill-affected persons among the Hebrewes who calumniated Pauls doctrine,Theophilact in h. l. as tending to the sub∣version of Moses law; so that many, who had formerly given their Names to Christ began now to draw back from Paul as a Seducer and false Tea∣cher, and so their Affections alienated from him. He therefore (to cleare himselfe from such false aspersions and calumniations, and to confirme and establish the Hebrewes in the truth,) gives them to understand, that he had not dealt fallaciously, but faithfully
with them in what he had taught them: and therefore adviseth them to continue constant in their obedience unto their Teachers, and in servent prayer unto God for them. For saith he, we are assured we have a good Con∣science, willing in all things to live ho∣nestly. You may terme this Text Pauls Tri∣umph, or his choice Jewel, with which the whole world compared and weigh∣ed in the Ballance, will be found as light as drosse and vanity, and with∣out this, all things are but losse, dung, and vexation of spirit. 1.Analysis. Pauls Conscience. 2. Pauls Considence. In the first note the quality, it is a good Conscience. In the second the propriety, it is his owne good Conscience, I have a good con∣science. In the second, viz. his confidence, you have 1. his Assurance, (we trust) 2. the grounds of it built on foure firme pillars, 1. His will, (desiring.)
2. The Extent, (in all things.) 3. The Constancy of his will, (to walke or live.) 4. The Syncerity of it, namely (ho∣nesty.) First of conscience in generall; it would be very tedious to shew you the opini∣ons of men upon the definition of con∣science, all varying in terme,Habitus multis dis∣positionibus acquisitus: Habitus in∣tellectualis, quâ talis, officium est unicum, in∣clinare ad promptè a∣gendum; Conscientia verò mul∣tas habet o∣perationes, quas imme∣dtatè exer∣cet, ergo non Habi∣tus. Ames de Conscien. and some in truth. Much adoe there is amongst Divines to find out the Genus or gene∣rall terme of it, as also the difference. Some calling it an act, some an habit, some a faculty, some a power. As for the two former, they are liable to just exception, that call it an act or habit. 1. It cannot properly be called an act, because conscience many times doth not act, as in sleepy men and seared consci∣ences. 2. It cannot be properly termed an habit, because conscience is innate, not acquired. The two latter, a faculty, or power, are generally imbraced, but especially the last. Some leave out faculty, because the Scripture hath not yet determined
it to be a distinct faculty, but calling it sometimes the spirit of a man, and some∣times the spirit of the mind of man, there∣fore to avoid all exception, I shall pitch upō the last terme, namely power, as the true genus, and so define it. Conscience is an inbred light in the mind of man, teaching him to follow what is good, and to eschew that which is evill: and it is called conscientia, quasi concludens scientia; and it hath a two-fold Act, the first is to give Testimo∣ny to things, whether we have done well or ill; if we have done them well, then it giveth testimony for us, Rom. 9.1. My Conscience also bearing me wit∣nesse; and if we have done evill, then it testifieth against us. Therefore Na∣zianzen used to call the Conscience Pe∣dagogū animae; for as a Pedagogue wai∣teth upon a Child, and commendeth him when he doth well, and on the contrary whippeth him when he doth evill; so the conscience, when a man sin∣neth, it stingeth him like Hornets, Deut. 7.20. But when he doth well, it allow∣eth him, bids him go on, maugre all
opposition, and to rejoice and sing, though in a prison with Peter, or in stocks with Paul. (vid. Weemse divine exercitations.) But to define it more plainly and fully. Conscience is a Relative power in the reasonable Creature,Definition which upon de∣termination through the light of Gods law, doth either excuse or accuse. 1. A power, because of the many ope∣rations and workings which it dayly exerciseth in us. 2. Its a Relative power, not absolute,Conscientia i.e. scientia cum alia scientia. 1. Cum Deo scire. 2. Cum se∣ipso scire. 3. Cum ali∣is scire. 4. Cum re∣bus ipsis conscire. because what Conscience doth, it doth it in Relation to another, and there∣fore called conscience, because it know∣eth with another, with one that is of familiarity with it, and witnesseth the truth with it, and this is God alone, who only knoweth the heart, and tri∣eth the reines. Hence it is that Paul calleth the spirit of God to second his conscience, I speake the truth in Christ, I lie not, my Conscience bearing me wit∣nesse in the holy Ghost: where you may see 3 witnesses produced by the Apo∣stle, and all of them without exception,
namely Christ, the holy Ghost, and Conscience, which is mille testes a thou∣sand witnesses. 3. The subject in which conscience is seated, it is in the reasonable Creature, I doe not say it is in the Creatour, for God being holinesse and righteous∣nesse it selfe, needeth not Conscience to order, governe and direct him. Nei∣ther do I say it is in the unreasonable creature, because Beasts and Fowles wanting reason, must needs want con∣science: but this I affirme; conscience is in the reasonable creature only, whe∣ther they be men or Angels, good or evill, Saints or sinners, blessed Angels or collapsed Divels, this power of Con∣science is in them all. Q. In what part of man is this power seated? A.Tota in toto & tota in qualibet parte. I will say of conscience in the soule, as Philosophers of the soule in the bo∣dy. It is in every part or faculty of the soule. 1. It hath the understanding for its Throne and Pallace, where it is cheifly resident, and keepeth a compleate
Court in the whole soule, commonly called forum conscientiae, and there as a Judge sits determining and prescribing, absolving and condemning de jure. 2. Its in the memory, and there it acteth as Register or Recorder, readily minding and recording, witnessing and testify∣ing de facto. 3. Its in the will and affections, and there Conscience carries it selfe like a Jaylour or Executioner, rendring, re∣warding, plaguing and punishing eve∣ry one sine respectu, without partiality. The 4th. thing in the definition of conscience is determination; Conscience determineth what is good, what evill, what is to be done, what not to be done, and so excites or diswades accor∣dingly. If conscience say, this must be done, then must we do it for conscience sake. If conscience tells us it is evill,Rom. 13.5. then must we forbeare for conscience sake, i.e. out of an holy feare of God, whereby our conscience may be preserved pure before him. 5. The rule by which conscience a∣cteth, namely, the light of Gods law;
I do not say by the light of the word, Gospell, or written Law, but more largely by the light of Gods law, I meane the law of Nature, written in mans heart before the word was writ∣ten, or Gospell revealed. For as man had a conscience from the beginning, so he had light from the beginning to re∣gulate conscience, which was the law of Nature written in his heart.Rom. 2.15. 6. The last thing in the desinition of conscience is her acting or working upon the light received; which is twofold, either acquitting, or condemning: when by her light she determines what is done, that it is good or evill; she accor∣dingly doth excuse or accuse, Rom. 2.15. And thus have you conscience in gene∣rall defined and explained. Having shewed you what conscience is, and in whom, namely, in the reasonable Creature; now in so much as every man hath reason, I may safely conclude that every man hath conscience: The point of Doctrine is clearly this. There is in every man a power or faculty called Conscience.
1. That there is in man a conscience, let our Apostle cleare up this truth in himselfe, how often doth he call and appeale unto conscience upon all occasi∣ons, when he was convented before the Coūsell, & greiveous things charged upō him, he appeals to conscience. Men and Brethren, I have lived (saith he) in all good Conscience before God untill this day. Againe when Ananias commanded them that stood by to smite Paul on the mouth,Act. 23.1.2. and Tertullus with all his Rhetoricke before Foelix besmeares him, calling him a pestilent fellow, a mover of sedition, a maintainer of the sect of the Pharisees, a polluter of the Temple, and what not? He hath no way to cast off all this filth, but by flying unto consci∣ence, shewing his enimies how far and free he was from these base aspersions, that it was his constant practice to keep a Conscience void of offence toward God and toward men.Act. 24.16. And that you may not think it to be Pauls peculiar, but common to others with him, we approve our selves to every mans Conscience in the sight of God.2 Cor. 4.2.
Ob. Though good men have a con∣science, yet wicked men have not. A. It is an usuall saying indeed a∣mongst men here, when they meet with such as are very hard in their dea∣lings, or very vitious in living, to say this man hath no Conscience. But you must understand their mea∣ning, when they say he hath no consci∣ence: they meane no good conscience, or no working conscience. Be you therefore assured, that there is a Conscience in every man and woman, be they good or bad. not only in Paul, but also in Pilate, not only in John, but likewise in Judas.John. 8.9. Rom. 2.15. The accursed Jewes, wicked Pharisees, and Heathenish Ido∣laters will all acknowledge the being and working of Conscience in them. To hold therefore that some men have no Conscience, is both dishonou∣rable to God, and injurious to man. 1. A dishonour to God, as if he had given man not a perfect, but imperfect soule, defective in its principall power or faculty, we confesse that the body of man being generated, may be mai∣med,
wanting a part or member,Gen. 2.7. as an eye, an eare, a hand or foot,Anima in∣fundendo creatur, & creando in∣funditur. Tho: Aqu. 2. d. 3. q. 1.4.1. because it comes mediately from man: but as for the foule, being created and infused by God, this cannot be defective but com∣pleat in all this powers and faculties, and therefore a great dishonour to God to question his workmanship, as men do if they deny man to have a conscience,Anima hu∣mana non e∣seminis tra∣duce propa∣gatur, sed immediatè à Deo cre∣atur. which is a speciall power or faculty in the soule. 2. An injury to man. 1. Deny man con∣science, you deny him reason, and so confound him with a beast: but grant him a conscience, and you grant him reason, and set him in his proper place as a Lord or master over beasts.Ps. 8.7. 2. Againe deny him Conscience, you deny him a Soule, one of his Essentials, and so confound his manhood, which were a great injury to him. We ac∣knowledge sin hath brought us to a great losse, but not to such a losse as to loose our being: we have by Adams sin lost our innocency, but not our es∣sence; our Excellency, but not our exi∣stence; our soule is defiled, not annìhila∣ted;
our powers depraved, not destroyed; man is man still, hath body and soule, partes, members, powers and facul∣ties, all good quoad bonum naturale; all naught quoad bonum morale. The truth then still stands cleare, that there is in every man a power or faculty called Conscience. 2. The Reasons why God hath plan∣ted this power of conscience in man are two. 1. R. To shew his Justice, that he will judge righteously. God commands judges here on earth to execute righ∣teous judgment,Deut. 1.16 to proceed secundum al∣legata & probata, to do nothing but upon good evidence and witnesse. Now shall not the Judge of all the world do right? God hath therefore set this power in man, that when God comes to judge him, he may have sufficient e∣vidence in himselfe, his owne Consci∣ence witnessing for him or against him before Gods Tribunall. For God will not condemne without a witnesse. 2. R. Is to shew his mercy unto man: He knowes man is very fraile, & labi∣lis
memoriae, apt to forget his God; and to forget himselfe. Sometimes he goes forth and forgets to pray unto God for protection and direction, sometimes he returnes home and neglects his duty of praise to God for his preservati∣on, therefore God hath placed in him this power of conscience as a remembran∣cer unto him. Againe sometimes mens Passions are very high, as in Jonah,Jonah 4.9. who is rea∣dy to quarrell with God, and to fall out with him, as if he had greatly wronged him; God saith unto him, do∣est thou well to be angry? yea (saith he) I do well to be angry even unto death. His words are very high, words of a passio∣nate spirit, blinded with anger, rather then with any expresse rebellion. Very needfull therefore is it that such should have conscience as a Controuler to check them. Againe, others their Affections are disorderly placed on wrong objects, like∣ing those whom they should dislike, and loving those whom they should loath; such was the blind Affection of
Jehoshaphat to Ahab, I am (saith he) as thou art,2 Chron. 18 3. 2 Chron. 19.2. my people as thy people: its needfull therefore that conscience say to such as Jehn to Iehoshaphat, shouldst then love them that hate the Lord? Lastly many mens appetites are very wanton, wholsome meates and drinkes content them not, their meates must be mixed with hurtfull condiments, and their drinke with noxious ingredients, therefore it is very requisite that consci∣ence play the Monitor, and advise them not to looke on the wine when it spar∣kles,Prov. 23.30, 31. nor to seeke after mixt wine: though it goe downe pleasantly, yet at last it will bite like a Serpent, and hurt like a Cock∣atrice. And thus you see how just and how mercifull God is, to plant such a power as conscience within us. Is there such a power or faculty as conscience in every man, then let every man learne to magnify his maker, not barely for being his Creature, but for being such a Creature as none is like him. First look upon thy meanest part, namely, thy body, view that well, and
thou shalt see such an exellency in it, that no visible creature is comparable unto mans body. If we look unto our first Creation, we find them very ex∣cellent creatures. 1. God made them with consultati∣on and deliberation,Gen. 1.26. (let us make man.) His advice argueth a worke of great weight and moment, and this word of plurality (us) intimates the Trinity,Galen though a meere Na∣turalist, when he saw the ad∣mirable frame and structure of mans bo∣dy, was so taken with it that he could not but adiudge the honour of an Hymne to the wise Creator of it. and mindes us of the mysterie of the three persons in one Godhead. God the father seemeth to speak, as commu∣nicating by way of consultation with God the Son, and God the holy Ghost in the worke of Creation. 2. The wonderfull endowments of the body in beauty, strength, nimble∣nesse, activity, without deformity or mortality. 3. All other bodies made for the good of mans body, the heavenly to give light unto it, the earthly bodies to nourish, cherish, and comfort it. Againe, if we consider the recreation or regeneration of our bodies, we find them more excellent.
1. Purchased by Christs bloud, 1 Cor. 6.20. 2. Sanctified by Christs spirit, 1 Cor. 6.19. 3. Assumed by Christs person, Phil. 2.7. When he took our nature, he took our body, and was made like unto us in all things, sin only excepted, so that we are as neer to Christ, as our bodies to our soules. Having thus viewed our meanest part, namely, the body; let us in the next place consider our best part, name∣ly, our soule. What the soule is: The soule of man is a spirit distinct, invisible, immortall, infused by God. 1. A spirit. Thus much the Originall word declareth, as in John 11. 33. and John 12. 27. we find soule and spirit promiscuously used by our Saviour, my soule is troubled, my spirit is trou∣bled. 2. A distinct spirit, because it hath its being not only in the body, but al∣so out of the body,Eccl. 12.7. as it had its time of entrance into the body, so its time
of returne out. As it is in us, so it can be without us, and will be after us. 3. Invisible. Because no more to be seen then an Angel or God himselfe. 4. An immortall spirit. Eccl. 12.7. And Christ tells us, that men may kill our bodies, but not our soules, which made Anaxzarchus bold to speak un∣to his Tormentors, who did beat him with clubs, laye on my Sachel, meaning his body, you cannot hurt Anaxzar∣chus, meaning his soule. 5. A spirit infused by God, Gen. 2.7. How Adam came by his soule we all know, namely, by inspiration, but as for our owne soules we are at a great stand. Some think by participation,Chrysip∣pus de na∣tur â. lib. 3. as one Candle lighteth another. Some thinke by generation,Tertul∣lian l. de a∣nim â ch 5. that a man begets a man compleat. Others say it is by infusion,Thom. Aquin. 1 q. 75.6. 1 m. by a peculiar in∣spiration, when the child is first quic∣kened in the womb. Much is imagined little concluded concerning this que∣stion,St. Austin hath writ 4 bookes of the origi∣nall of the soule, in which he leaveth this question undecided. And his se∣cond booke of Retra∣ctions doth witnesse that he con∣tinued in that doubt unto his death. cap. 56. and no marvell, for who knoweth the way of the spirit, Eccl. 11.5.
The Scripture seems to warrant the last opinion, calling God the Creator of the Spirit, Zach. 12.1. The giver of the Spirit, Eccl. 12.7. The Father of our spirits, Heb. 12.9. It is not with∣out consideration, if God by a peculi∣ar elegy and stile, is called the father of spirits, that he might be opposed to the father of the flesh; for if the soule be by traduction, then those that are the fa∣thers of the flesh would also be the fa∣thers of the spirits: neither would God by this title be distinguished from the father of the flesh, if he wrought alike in both, and did not forme mens soules otherwise then their bodies. So then consider well your bodies & soules, and you may safely conclude that of all the creatures that ever God made, there is more to be seen of God in man then in them all, and in man, much in his body, more in his soule, but most of all in his conscience, (as one saith) this smelleth more of God, then the hea∣vens, the Sun, the Stars, or all the glo∣rious things of the earth, gold, preci∣ous stones, Rubies, or sweetest herbs,
roses, or lillies. Oh how should we magnifie our maker,Ps. 139.14. and with David say, I will praise thee O Lord, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made; marve∣lous are thy workes and that my soule knoweth right well. Ob. Our conscience were at first ve∣ry pure and excellent, but now like our selves they are most sinfull, yea our Soules and Consciences are defiled,Tit. 1.15. there∣fore nothing worthy praise in them. A. Its very true that our conscien∣ces which were pure and excellent at first, are by Adam's sin become defiled and uncleane. But let me tell you there is no part, power or faculty in the whole man, that retaines so much of its excellency in it as conscience doth, though the whole soule were defiled, and every part and power depraved, yet conscience had so much life left in it, as (with Iobs messengers) to tell sad ty∣dings of mans great losse. There re∣maines in it scintilla rectae rationis, a lit∣tle spark to shew what great light hath been extinguisht, but now this also through affected blindnesse and wil∣full
malice is so smothered and suffoca∣ted through a daiely custome of sin∣ning, that I may say of conscience in ma∣ny as the Psalmist of an Idol, it hath an eye and cannot see, an eare and cannot heare, a mouth and cannot speak. Thus stands the cause whith many a hardned sinner. The eye of their conscience is as the eye of a mole, which serves only to decore the body, but not to guide the way. Their eares but as the eares of an Addar, wilfully stopt at the best coun∣sell that the messenger of Christ can bring unto it, and the mouth of it as the mouth of a viper, that sucks in and sends out nothing but poison and poi∣sonous expressions. Yet notwithstan∣ding the naturall Conscience will hold an excellency beyond all other powers & faculties in the soule. So that thy Maker still deserveth praise from thee. Have all a conscience, then let all acknowledge it and not dare to con∣ceale what God hath given them. Its very dangerous to hide any Talent that God gives us in a Napkin,Luk. 19. what God bestowes on man, man is to imploy and
use it to the honour of him that gives it: therefore let conscience appeare in a conscientious walking before him, be holy to thy God,Tit. 1.12. upright to thy neigh∣bour, and sober in thy selfe, walke so circumspectly in thy place and calling, that all may say thou art a man of con∣science. But woe unto us we sojourne in Mesech, our habitations are in Kedar, we live among such as are enimies to conscience, yea open and professed eni∣mies unto it: yea the very naming of conscience is very hatefull unto them, aske them where their conscience is, and they will desperately answer, what tell you me of conscience? Conscience (say they) was hanged long ago. But let me tell thee thou wretched Belialist, that saiest that conscience is hang'd, wast thou the Hangman? If so; then know God will be avenged on thee for this cruell act, he will one day revive con∣science, and then assure thy selfe thy conscience will hang thee. But hear me (thou foolish man) that thus talkest of hanging conscience, thou speakest not only prophanely but most
ignorantly thinkest thou it is in the power of any man to hang conscience, know thou, it is impossible, the worke is too hard for all the hangmen in the world. The Hangman may hang thee as he did Haman, or thou mayest hang thy selfe as did Judas, but neither he nor thou art able to offer such violence to conscience. Wer'st thou to live as long as Methusalem, it will outlive thee; go where thou wilt, it will go with thee, nec fugere nec fugare poteris, go up to Heaven, or go downe to Hell, 'twill never leave thee nor forsake thee. Againe I find some who are so ma∣liciously bent against conscience, that they resolve, if they cannot hang con∣science, they will beat out her teeth, and pluck out her tongue, so that she shall neither bite nor barke, if the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, the pride of life, if all the pleasures of sin will do it, they will surely effect it. They will call for the harp with Saul, for their Cup with Nabal, and their Harlot with Herod, and all to drowne
the cryes and complaints of conscience: but let me tell such, that thus labour to make conscience dumb, possible it is that by a long custome in sin, or greedy practice of it, men may prevaile so far, as to silence her for the present, so that she shall not speak: but know this, though you keep conscience from spea∣king, yet not from writing, she will act the part of a Recorder and Register, put downe exactly every daies deviati∣ons and aberrations, and when shee sees her time, will produce her Bill and read it aloud, making thine eares to tingle, now a lie, and then an oath, this time drunkennesse, that time un∣cleanesse, such a day thou tookest a∣way thy Brothers goods, by oppression and theevery; another day his good name, by slaunder and calumny. In fine the Bill will be so bigg, so black, that thou wilt not be able to endure to heare it read. And then thy conscience whom thou hast thus wronged, will be avenged for all her wrongs, and act the part of a Judge, a Jaylour, and a Tormentour, and joine with her God
in that black and most just sentence, take him, bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darknesse, where there shall be nothing but weeping, wailing, gnashing of teeth, and that for ever. Oh consider this ye that abuse Conscience, lest she teare you in pieces, when none shall deliver you. 3. Use of Conviction unto all Athei∣sticall persons that dare say with their tongue, or in their heart, there is no God. Tell me thou Atheist, hast thou a con∣science in thee, and yet no God over thee? how can this be? if thou wilt suf∣fer thy selfe to be lead by common rea∣son, thou then wilt be forced to say there is a God. Consider the operation of thy conscience, if it be not seared; and thou shalt find that upon some grosse sin, it will be a witnesse and give testi∣mony against thee, but to whom? to men or Angels? that cannot be, for they cannot heare the voice of consci∣ence, nor receive consciences testimony, neither can they see what is in the heart of man, It remains therefore that there is a spirituall substance, most wise, most
holy, most mighty, that sees & knows all things, to whom conscience beares record, and that is God himselfe. Let Atheists bark against this as long as they will: they have that in them that will convince them of the truth of the Godhead (will they, nill they) either in life or death. Let the dreaming A∣theist consider the great affliction that that severe Governesse of the life of man brings upon their soules by af∣frighting horrors of Conscience, by puz∣zeling and befooling them in the free use of their Reason; by curbing them in their naturall and kindly injoyments in the life present, and making bitter all the pleasures and contentment of it by some checks of Conscience: by anxious cares and disquieting feares concerning their state in the life to come. Besides those ineffable agonies of mind, dampes and deadnesse of spi∣rit that they sometimes undergoe, so that to be buried quick were lesse tor∣ture by far, then such dark heart-sin∣king privations of all the joyes of life. And they cannot chuse (did they not
shut their eyes against the light) but see that there is a superintendent princi∣ple over nature, which is all one as to confesse that there is a God. If thou be not convinced by the working of thine owne conscience, then consider the workings of conscience in others: what makes Adam to run into the thicket, sarah to stand behind the Tent door, Jonah to lurke downe in the side of the ship, Cain to feare a mortall blow from every man he meets,1 King. 20 1 King. 22 25. and Ben∣hadad and Zedekiah to be a terror unto themselves, and to run from chamber to chamber to hide themselves. It was their conscience, and nothing but conscience accusing and testifying unto God a∣gainst them. Againe consider, how is it, that when God is pleased to give out unto us a notable signe of is power and maje∣sty, as in thunder and lightning, that the very sound of the one, and the ve∣ry sight of the other (though these be but from Naturall causes) should make a Barbarian, a contemner of God, to shake and tremble. Againe whence is it
that there is a Religions Adoration and propension to the worship of a Deity even in those Heathens themselves, who sacrifice , to the un∣known God. There being no nation un∣der heaven, that does not do divine worship to some thing or other, and in it to God as they conceive. So that they worship many of them but stocks and stones, and some particular piece of nature, as the Sun, Moone, or Stars, knowing that there is somewhat to whom worship belongs. Therefore ac∣cording to the ordinary naturall light that is in all men, there is a God. Oh therefore blush and bewaile thy damnable Atheisme. Consider well these things, know and understand, see and say, verily there is a God that judgeth the earth. thus far of conscience in ge∣nerall. Having spoken of the faculty, name∣ly, conscience, we now proceed unto the Qualitie, namely, a good conscience. Had Paul onely said, I have, or I am assured I have a conscience, he had said no more then a Reprobate or Devill might have said.
But in that he saith, he hath a good conscience, and that he is fully perswa∣ded of the same, in this he goes beyond all reprobates and Devils, who neither have, nor ever shall have such a bosome friend within them. We must now distinguish conscience into two species, namely, good and evill. 1.Honestè bona, paca∣tè bona. A good Conscience, 1 Tim. 1.19. Holding faith and a good Conscience. This good Conscience is sometimes quiet, sometimes unquiet. 2.Vitiosè mala, mole∣stè mala. Bern: Ames. An evill Conscience Heb. 10.22. having our hearts sprinkled from an evill Conscience. This is likewise peaceable or turbulent. Now how these two do differ both in their peace and their trouble, I shall hereafter shew you. I am now to speak of the first, name∣ly, a good conscience, and more especial∣ly of Pauls good Conscience. 1. What a good conscience is? I an∣swer. 1. A good conscience is a Conscience rightly informed and principled by the word, so that it can truly judge and de∣termine
evill to be evill, and good to be good. 2. By a good conscience I understand a conscience sanctified by the holy Spi∣rit of God, whereby we are incited to good, and diswaded from evill, and doth readily excuse us for doing well, but accuse us for doing evill. 3. By Pauls good conscience in the Text, I understand a conscience both purified and pacifyed by the blood and spi∣rit of Christ, so that upon a true sight and sorrow for sin, and a full perswa∣sion of the remission of the same in and for Christ, he enjoyed that peace which passeth all understanding,Phil 4.7. 2 Cor. 1.12. (i. e.) a true spirituall and incomprehensible rest and quietnesse of mind, wrought by Gods spirit in his heart, and so preserving him from terror, anxiety, and trou∣ble. But to draw unto some profitable point of Doctrine, you heare Paul glo∣rying in a good conscience; not as his pe∣culiar, as if he only were the man thus blessed of God, but doth acknowledge the like mercy to be shewed by God
unto others, and therefore mentioning those that laboured with him in the Gospell, speaketh in the plurall num∣ber (we) are assured we have a good con∣science. So that we may safely conlude that as all men have a conscience, so there are some that have a good consci∣ence. Some there are,  who have not on∣ly a Conscience, but also a good Con∣science. Of this some, I find Noah a just man and perfect in his generation,Gen. 6.9. and one that walked with God (i. e.) sincerely in his profession of Religion without hypo∣crisy. Moses the meekest on the earth,Numb. 12.3. one that despised the vaine and vani∣shing honour, riches, pleasures of the world, choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God,Heb. 11.25. then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Job a none∣such, none like him on the earth,Job. 1. so per∣fect, so upright, that feared God and es∣chewed evill; David a man after Gods owne heart; Nathaniel, a true Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile (i. e.) a man of simple integrity.1 John. Paul a continuall
practitioner of a good Conscience, ma∣king it his daiely practice to keep a con∣science void of offence both towards God & towards man.Act. 24.16. Thus might I tire you out with a long Catalogue of blessed Saints, who lived in all good conscience from their conversion unto their dissolution.Act. 23.1. Q. How came these to have a good conscience, seeing all by nature have their consciences defiled. A. 1. They had the bloud of Christ ap∣plied unto their consciences, whereby they were purged from the impurity of dead workes,Heb. 9.14. it being the fountaine for sin and for uncleannesse, (Zach. 13.1.) in which poor loathsome, leperous soules wash and are cleansed: they were put into this poole of Bethesda, and came out cleane, being made white in the blood of the Lamb. 2. They had the righteousnesse of Christ imputed unto them, whereby they were discharged from the debt of sin, all hand-writings of accusations being cancel'd, and they esteemed holy and unblameable in the sight of God, Rom. 5.1. Not for any thing wrought
in them and done by them, but for Christs sake alone. Not by imputing faith it selfe, or any other Evangelicall obedience, but by imputing the obedi∣ence and satisfaction of Christ as their righteousnesse, received and rested on by faith. 3. They by diligence in Christian watchfulnesse do maintaine their Cove∣nant with God, and if casually by any slip they seemed to break the peace, they were carefull to renue their Cove∣nant by true humiliation and reforma∣tion, earnestly doing their first works and redeeming their former negligence with double diligence.Rev. 2.5. 2. Q. Whether a man may not have a good conscience, yet the same to be ve∣ry unquiet and much troubled? Answ: You must know that there is a 4 fold conscience. 1. Good and quiet. Purifyed and pacifyed, which rests in a sweet feeling of the mercies of God in Christ. Such a conscience had Paul that testifyed unto him, that in simplicity and Godly sinceri∣ty he had his conversation. And Hezekiah
when he was upon his death bed (as he thought) his conscience gave him a testi∣moniall that commended him to God better then all the men in the world could, that he walked before the Lord in truth and in a perfect heart, and did that which was right in his sight. Is. 38.3 This sweet peace of a good Conscience flowes from a certaine inexpressible assurance, that we are the sons of God, a certaine secret manifestatiō that God hath receiv'd us & put away our sins. 2. Neither good nor quiet. When the heart is as full of sin, as hell of darknesse, and lies under a serious ap∣prehension of Gods wrath, and a cer∣taine looking for of vengeance and fiery indignation to devoure, Heb. 10.27. and is in a forlorn condition, not knowing where to go for help, but God is to him as the burning fire to the withered stubble, and as the scorching flame to the melted wax. Thus the cause stood with Judas, who after he had committed that cursed fact of betraying his Ma∣ster, he was so gnawed by the worme conscience, that nothing but an halter
could ease him; he hang'd himselfe. And certainly had not Hell gaped for him, he had got by the bargaine. This made Cain go in continuall feare of killing, and the persecuting Tyrant to cast up his bowels towards heaven and say, vi∣cisti Galilaee, thou hast overcome O Gali∣lean. 3. Quiet but not good. This is com∣mon to the best of men, and they blesse themselves in it, that they never had a bad word from conscience all their daies, it doth not trouble nor terrify them; certainly such a Conscience is seared with an hot iron, and who ever is thus stigmatiz'd, is marked for a Rebbell against God. They sleep in their sins like Jonah in the storme, though they are in greatest danger to be cast into the gulfe and sea of Gods everlasting wrath. 4. Good but not quiet. And such doubtlesse a child of God may have; Examples are many, as in Job chap. 6. 4. The Arrowes of the Lord are within me,Rev. 2.3. the poison whereof drinketh up my spi∣rit: the terrors of the Lord do set them∣selves in array against me. So David,
thine arrowes stick fast in me, and thy hand presseth me sore,Job. 6.4. there is no soundnesse in my flesh, because of thine anger: neither any rest in my bones, because of my sin.Conscien∣tia bona & turbata. Bern: For mine iniquities are gone over mine head, as an heavy burden they are too hea∣vy for me. Thus Ezekiah and others. But at such times though they have a good conscience, yet do they faile in As∣surance,Ps. 38.2, 3, 4. they have Paul's conscience, but not Pauls confidence, it is the latter, not the former that makes it quiet and inoffensive: and such was Pauls consci∣ence not only good, but quiet and inoffensive. Christians have somtimes Cleare Sunshini dayes, and sometimes darke cloudy daies, sometimes they are under a cloud, and the light of Gods countenance doth not shine on them; sometimes they behold the face of God in righteousnesse, and his favour is better to them then life. Sometimes (like Han∣nah) they are in the bitternesse of their soules,Conscien∣tia & ho∣nestè bona, & pacatè bona Ames. and drinke of the bitter waters of Marah, which makes them go mour∣ning all their daies; so then it may stand with a child of God to have a disquiet,
troubled Conscience. 1. Use for Tryall, whether we be of that some that have a good Conscience, he that will not try, wants it; he that tries superficially, hath cause to doubt it; but he that is exact and sincere may safely conclude, I am assured I have a good Conscience: therefore search your selves as with Candles and Torches, whether you can find this precious Jewell of a good conscience treasurd up within you, yea or no. And the better to incite you to a true and diligent Triall, take these 2 Motives. 1. The neer resemblance between a Naturall and Spirituall Conscience,Motives to a diligent Triall. and that in divers respects. They both have their conflicts, both their loathing of sin, they both seeme to turne a broad-side against sin, and to complaine against it. The Naturall conscience saith I see the better, but I follow the worse; The Spirituall conscience saith, the good which I would do, I do not, but the evill which I would not do, that do I. See here the difference, in the latter, there is a will striving against sin: but in the for∣mer
no will, no striving at all. 2. The Naturall conscience is prin∣cipled only by some generall grounds of Nature, acting and making consci∣ence; so far as his rules and principles will carry him, and so deceiveth the Naturall man, making him to boast of what he hath not, namely a good consci∣ence. Whereas the spirituall Conscience rightly principled by Gods word, and sanctified by his Spirit makes the per∣son to have a good Conscience in all things, Heb. 13.18. making conscience of all that God commands or forbids, Ps. 119.6.101. Be therefore carefull in trying your selves, 2 Cor. 13.5. And that you may not be deceived take these 5 markes. 1. He that hath a good conscience,Notes of a good Con∣science. can truly say, that what he doth, he doth it for Conscience sake; Cōscience stirrs him up unto the duty, and he cannot satis∣fy conscience, if he neglect it: He sub∣jects himselfe to God, and he subjects himselfe to man, and this not for wrath but conscience. See well there∣fore to this, and the rather,Rom. 13.5. because
Many there are, whose Actions are very specious, and yet without any re∣gard to conscience. Salomon describing a good man, saith, he is one that feareth an oath; he doth not say that he is one that sweareth not, but one that feareth an oath: possible it is that a man may not sweare and why, because he hath been well educated, or he standeth in awe of his Parents or Governours, or feareth some mulct from the Magi∣strate; this is no testimony of a good Conscience But if a man sweare not, be∣cause he feareth an Oath; this argueth that the man feareth the commande∣ment, and to feare the commandement is a sure note of a good conscience.Prov. 13.13. The least haire makes the eye weep, so the least sin makes the heart smite. Now as in avoiding of sin, so in practising piety, a man reads the Scripture at home, hea∣reth the word preached in publick, per∣formes duties in his family. But why doth he thus? if to satisfy conscience in obedience unto God tis well; but if base and sinister ends to please and sa∣tisfy his owne carnall desire, this is base
and far from a good Conscience. We find the Shechemites grosse hypocrites in this, they will joine with Gods people, and doe as they doe; be circumcised as they are; had this been done out of conscience, it would have rejoyced the hearts of all godly ones; but here is no such thing, they will be circumcised in∣deed, but not to please God, but to please Hamor and Shechem their Rulers, and to enrich themselves, (shall not their goods and their cattell be ours?)Ge. 34.23. Thus many now adaies amongst us will make some shew of religion, per∣forme holy duties both publikely and privately, not out of conscience but out of carnall policy. They have learned Matchiavels maxime, to seem religious is a credit, but to be neligious is a cumber. Its only a forme without power, a shew without substance. They set not God be∣fore their eyes, neither do they with Moses see him that is invisible: they look only unto men, and all their ayme is how they may please men, and advan∣tage themselves in earthly things. Therefore if you will be sure your Con∣science
is good, do what you do, for Conscience sake, not because man thinks it fit, and you think it profitable or ho∣nourable, but because God commands it. 2. Note. If you have a good conscience then will you suffer what you suffer, for Conscience sake, yea to satisfy Con∣science. This is praise worthy saith the Apostle,1. Pet. 2.19. 1 Pet. 2.19. when a man for conscience towards God endures greife, suffers wrong, and as his precept, so his practice; had rather be punished for do∣ing well, then praised for doing evill. See this in Daniel, he will suffer hun∣ger, feed upon Pulse, rather then de∣file his conscience.Dan. 1.8. The three Children will chuse rather to have their bodies burned in schorching flames, then to have them bowed to a base Idol. And Paul had rather that Ananias should smite him, then that his conscience should smite him. Try thy selfe therefore by this Note, doest thou suffer, and doest thou so suffer as to satisfy conscience, patiently bearing it, because God will have it so,
as David in the railing of Shimei, he curseth me, because God hath said unto him, curse David. Not that God said so much by word, but by a command of providence, so ordering and dispo∣sing of Shimei his malice, as to make it a rod to correct and chastise David for his sin;2 Sam. 16.20. but as a Scorpion to Shimei to sting him to death and destruction. Thus did Job in all his troubles, beare with them with wonderfull patience,Job. 1.21. he will not charge God foolishly, but saith the Lord giveth, the Lord taketh away, praised be the name of the Lord. But alas how many now amongst us would be accounted men of a good conscience, and yet will suffer nothing for conscience. They will suffer no greife, no paine, no losse for it. See this in Amaziah King of Judah, he hires an Army of an 100000 men of valour out of Israel,2 Chr. 25.6. for an hundred Talents of sil∣ver, but God dislikes his hired men, and sends a Prophet unto Amaziah to dismisse them. The King tells the Pro∣phet, what shall I do for the 100 Talents? as if he should have said, I have disbur∣sed
a great summe of monyes, & shall I now loose all? You may see how loath he is to loose his money, 100 Talents of silver a great summe. But alas what is 100 Talents to a good conscience? yet look abroad in the world, and you may then descend from Talents to pounds, from pounds to pence, and from pence to farthings, and find some yea a mul∣titude, that if a farthing and a good con∣science stand in competition, they will loose their Conscience to save their farthing. Heare this you Tradesmen, Typlers, Retailers, and all that have any com∣merce in buying, and selling, witnesse this truth with me; how often have you, and that upon the Lords day pre∣ferred your owne houses before Gods house? your tpling guests and pro∣phane Customers before Gods mini∣sters and servants? chusing rather to gaine a Trisle at home, then to gaine salvation abroad in attending on Gods holy ordinances. Yea let me say yet more unto you, how often hath your conscience blamed you for so doing, and
you, whereas you should have hearke∣ned unto conscience voice, have stopt your eares and blamed conscience for too much strictnesse, too much tender∣nesse; what mean these words of yours? If I should be so strict in my dealings as Preachers would have me to be, I might soon pluck down my signe, shut up my shop, & sit still and do nothing. Let me tell such, these words savour not of a good, but an evill Conscience. God puts none of his into such streights, as that they cannot live except they live unholily, unjustly. Believe it, as there is no calling, be it never so high, that must call thee from God, so there is no calling be it never so low, that must give thee a dispensation to dishonour God. And as in the greatest calling men may live both fully and faithfully; so in the meanest calling, if men use di∣ligence with conscience, they may live honestly and yet comfortably. Oh there∣fore my Beloved cast off such gaine, as filthy lucre; such customers, as your great enimies: and take up this holy re∣solution never to make hast for wealth,
nor to use any unlawfull meanes for this transitory Trash, but say, if I begg I begg, if I starve I starve, I will loose all, rather then loose a good conscience 3. Note of a good Conscience is bold∣nesse for God and in Gods cause. The righteous are as bold as a Lyon.Prov. 28.1 Prov. 28.1. When the conscience is good, the courage is great, it will make a man to have a Lions heart and an Angels face; such an heart had Paul, when he looked on the Councell, Act. 23.1. such a face had Stephen the Proto-Mar∣tyr,Act. 23.21 & 15.6. Act. 6.15. All that sate in the Councell looking stedfastly on him, saw his face as if it had been the face of an Angel. This good conscience will make a mans face as a flint against such as re∣bell against God.Ez. 3.8, 9. Ezek. 3.8, 9. Let but God call upon such,Is: 41.10, 13.14. saying, feare not worme Jacob, for I am with thee, be not afraid, for I am thy God: or let him stand by them,Act. 23.11 as he did by Paul, and bid him be of good cheer: They pre∣sently take such courage unto them, that having God for them, they feare not who are against them.Ps. 3.6. David will
not feare an hoast of men, Athanasius a world of men, andFox in the story of Martin Luther. p. 849. Luther will not feare a multitude of Divels, were they in number as many, as there were Tiles upon the houses of Wormes. But alas where are these valiant ones become? we have many very couragi∣ous for themselves, and in what makes for their owne interest: but as for God and in his cause they are very Co∣wards. They are bold for sin, but bashfull for sanctity; they can plead for Baal, but not for God: And yet such would be accounted men of a good conscience. But let me tell such they do much deceive themselves, as they have not Pauls courage, so neither Pauls consci∣ence, and as they are strangers to a good conscience, so are they strangers to a most good God, who will be so far from blessing them, that he will surely curse them, and give such timerous and fear∣full persons, which want the fire of zeale, their part in the lake that burneth with fire and brimestone, which is the se∣cond death. Rev. 21.8.Rev. 21.8.
A Childlike heart can never be pati∣ent under Gods dishonour, though he is alwaies silent under his displeasure. Moses was coole in his owne cause, but hot when Gods credit lay at stake. When the children of Israel had wrought folly in the golden Calfe, the zeale of God did so eat him up, that he could as well con∣taine fire in his bosome, as be patient, when Gods glory suffer'd. Oh therefore try your selves upon this Note, and before you find your selves more bold for God, be not so bold as to boast of a good conscience. 4. Note of a good Conscience is to love a Conscientious Teacher and In∣structer: he desires not to live under a cold, man-pleasing ministry, which preaches liberty, not strictnesse of con∣science; which soweth pillowes under mens armeholes, and cryeth peace, peace, so that none departeth from his evill way. The good conscience desireth such a Prea∣cher, who is not shaken with feare, nor seduced with flattery, whose voice is the voice of a cryer; his sound as the sound of a trumpet;Vsai 58.1. his words like
sharp nailes and piercing goads;Eccl. 12.11. Heb. 4.12. his prea∣ching an heart-pricking; his dividing of his Text and matter the dividing asun∣der of soule and spirit, of the joints and marrow. Such we find amongst the Prophets, that cryed aloud and did not spare to tell the people of their transgressi∣ons, and the house of Judah of their sins. Such were amongst the Apostles, who were sons of Thunder, and threatned judgments against the wicked and re∣bellious: Yea Christ himselfe, who had the tongue of the learned to speake the word in season to him that was weary,Isai. 54.4. was also as a polished shaft,Isai. 49.2. and his mouth as a sharp sword, his eyes as a flame of fire, and his comming into the Temple none was able to abide: he was as a Refiners fire, and Fullers soap,Mal. 3.2. Isa. 11.4. and with the breath of his lips he did slay the wicked. Is. 11.4. Such are the Teachers that a good conscience loveth and delights in. But our age can no more endure this kind of preaching, then the Israelites could endure the shrill sound of the Trumpet, sounding louder and louder;He. 12.19. and that ter∣rible
fire, and that voice of words, which they desired they might heare no more. Christs Ministers now are be∣come Antichristian (say they) their do∣ctrine only legall; though indeed they trace Christ and his Apostles, and ob∣serve their method, who first com∣manded Repentance to be preached,Lu. 24.47. and then remission of sins to be promised: and Paul drawes all his doctrine unto these 2 heads, first repentance towards God; the second faith in Jesus Christ.Act. 20.21. Yet men are now become so tender, that they will not have their Dalilahs toucht, you may not come unto them, as the good Samaritan, with wine to search and cleanse, but only with smooth oyle to heale and comfort; it must be all the riches of Christ, and a naked faith in Christ. If you touch with Obe∣dience, you are legall, and Phisitions of no value. But let me tell such as follow such Doctors, their cause is dangerous; when the blind lead the blind,Isa. 9.16. you can easily conclude what will follow. The leaders of this people cause them to erre, and they that are lead of them, are destroi∣ed.
Wherefore would you be assured that your conscience is a good conscience, do not with Ahab hate Micaiah, nor with Ananias smite Paul, do not vilify those whom God doth honour; I meane zealous, honest and consciencious mi∣nisters, who labour in the word and do∣ctrine, and are examples to the flock in faith and love, in spirit and purity; if you do, we are bold to challenge you for men of an evill conscience, but on the other side if you honour them, as men sent of God, and highly esteeme them for their workes sake, and readily obey their wholsome doctrine, following them as they follow Christ, you may then safe∣ly conclude, we are assured we have a good conscience. Last Note of good Conscience is universall Obedience. This is an excellent distinguishing note between truth and error, a good and an evill conscience. God calls for this, saying, in all things that I have commanded you, be circumspect.Exod. 23.13. Caute estote 1. magna God will have conscience to be good to all persons, Act. 24.16. and good in all things, Heb. 13.18. and to be good at
all times.attentione. servate va∣tabl. It must be our exercise daily to keep a conscience void of offence both towards God and towards man. He that hath a good conscience his heart is moul∣ded into obedience, his will is cast into Gods will. He is ready to do what God commands, and to leave undone what God forbids. Like the slower that opens and shuts with the Sun. So it o∣pens to God and shuts to sin. He de∣sires to do Gods will on earth, as the Angels do it in heaven, readily, sincere∣ly, constantly. Let us now try our selves by this note, and we shall find a good conscience to be very rare, we may run (with Jeremie) to and fro to find such a man;Jer. 5.1. we may goe into many families, townes & parishes & perchance misse him at the last. The prophane and vitious will not owne such good conscience; and the Civill Justitia and formall Hyprocrite care not. These two last have high conceits of themselves, but yet upon tryall will be found too light.
First the civill man thinks well of himselfe because he is kind unto his neighbour, defrauds no man, but payes every man to a penny, and as for the poor & needy, he is open handed ready to supply their wants at all times: and therefore doubts not but his conscience is very good, but let me tell thee thou ci∣vill man, thou art much deceived, if thy Conscience were good, thou wouldest be holy to God, as well as upright to man, how is it that thou art so ignorant in the things of God and of thine own salvation, that thou makest no consci∣ence of prayer in thy Familie, of reading the Word, of hearing it preached unto thee: no conscience of an Oath, of a lie, and of keeping the Sabbath day, surelie if thy conscience be not good to God as well as to man, it is void of goodnesse. Secondly, The formall Hypocrite is as high, if not higher, in his conceits of self worthinesse, He is one that labours to know God and to serve him, both publikely in the Congregation, & private∣ly in his Familie, hee is a professed oni∣mie,
unto Ignorance and prophanes and prayseth God that he is not as other men and so concludes that he hath a good conscience. But I must tell thee thou Hyporite, thou art as much deceived as the former.Tit. 2.12. The Grace of God that bringeth salvation teacheth thee to be righteous as well as holy. If thy conscience be good, how isit that thou art so deceitfull in bar∣gaining; so false in promising; so un∣faithfull in paying: what is thy disho∣nest religion better then the civill mans irreligious honesty, you both come short of a good conscience and if you thus persist will come short of heaven & all true happinesse, let me threfore advise you to beware of others harmes, look upon Saul, Jehu, Hered, and the high priests, These in their owne eyes were very conscionable men.1 Sam. 14.34. Saul will not have the people to sin against the Lord in eating with the bloud: Jehu will be Zealous for God in rooting out Ahabs posteritie.Mark. 6.26 Herod makes conscience of his Oath to Herodias, the HIgh Priest will not put the price of bloud into the treasury.
See and behold a Messe of Notorious Hypocrites, ahd these been syncere their consciences would have been good to all, in all, and alwaies. If saul had truly made conscience of beast bloud he would not have been so prodigall of mans bloud, as to destroy 85. of the Lords priests that wore the lyn∣nen Ephod. If Jehu had truly made conscience of pulling downe Ahabs Idols, he would not have left Jeroboams Ca∣lues. If Herod had truly made conscience of an Oath, he would not so easilie have granted John Baptists head unto his Herodias. If the High priest had trulie made conscienceof taking the price of bloud, they would not have beene so readie to give a price for bloud as 30 peices to Iudas to betray his Master, but as they sowed, so they reaped: They sowed sin and reaped shame, and so shall all that answer Gods com∣mands in parte but not in whole.
If therefore: thou wilt beapproved of God, approve thy selfe to God in an universall Obedience, be good to all, be good in all, or not good at all, and thus much of this first use namely the use of Triall. 2. Use, is for reproofe unto the ignorant and prophane, who though they never tryed, nor yet intend to try themselves, by these fore-mentioned Notes or marks, yet will boldly tell you, they have a good Conscience. But will you know upon what ground they build this bould Asser∣tion? Answer: It is upon a very false ground, and upon a very sandie foun∣dation. That is upon the stillnesse and quietnesse of their Conscience. Though they sweare, lye, steale, oppresse, be drunke, and act uncleanesse and all manner of villanie; yet their conscience doth not molest or trouble them. They do not check, or say unto them what hast thou done?Jer. 8.6. and therefore are ready to blesse themselves to be most happie, and to condemne others whose
consciences do trouble them to be most unhappy. But let me tell such, that Quietnesse or unquietnesse are no infallible cha\racters of a good or evill conscience: possible it is that a quiet Conscience may carrie a man merrilie to Hell, and on the other side an unquiet Conscience may carrie a man crying to Heaven. The one may never dreame of Hell afore they fall into it, The other never be assured of Heaven before they have the possession of it. The old world were eating and drinking, revelling and making merry, when the floud came and swept them a∣way, Zimri and Cosbi in the very Act of uncleannesse, were thrust through with a Iavelin, and how many in these unhappy warrs have suddenlie perished and come to a fearfull end, when they dreamed not of it. Their drunken health being their last draught, & their blasphemeous Oaths their last words: so that we may trulie say they went merrily to Hell.
Againe on the other side, if men professing Christ may dye without assurance and yet be saved (as Mr Chambers in Leicester, who cryed out that he was damned,Perkins Hildersham and Francis Spira who would change his Condi∣tion with Cain, Sanl and Judas) If such might be saved as some in Charity think, then may we say and that safe∣lie that some go crying unto hea∣ven. Wherefore my Advise to such, is not to presume upon a still and quiet con∣science, but to see from whence this stil∣nesse & quietnesse ariseth, if from a true knowledg of Gods holinesse and their owne vilenesse, if from a true sight and sence of thier sin and an unfained hu∣miliation for the same, with an Assu∣rance of Gods free pardon in Christ, then is their peace and quietnesse of the right kind, such a Quietnesse as neither doth nor can accuse, them but gives a Comfortable testimonie of their holy walking before God since their conversion. Examples of such, we find in Obadi∣ah
who told Elijah,1 Kin. 18.12. Heb. 11.5. Hujusmodi conscientia est instarfe∣rae alicujus quae quādin dormit vi∣detur esse cicur, & ne∣minē laedit, Sed excitata in bominem involat & dilace∣rat. Sic con∣scientiacau∣teriata, aeg∣ritudine aliâ gra∣viore, vel ctiam morte appropin∣quante exci∣taturà Deo, & trucu∣lenta suâ immanitate hominē ter∣ret. Alst. Thecl. Ca∣suum. c. 2. that he feared the Lord from his youth, and Enoch who before his translation had from God more then an ordinary Testimo∣ny, that he pleased god, so Paul I Have lived (saith he) in all good good Consci∣ence before God, untill this day. these had good Consciences indeed, such as speak peace with Gods allow∣ance. But if thy quietnesse or stilnesse which is in thee, do arise out of an Ignorance of God and of thy selfe, not knowing the mind and will of God and how Crosse their waies and workes have been unto the same. Or if out of impenitency, not regarding sin, nor humbling thy selfe for sin. Then let me tell thee thy conscience is not good but evill, thy quiet conscience is a sleepie Conscience, a dull and drowsie Conscience, and if not timelie preven∣ted will prove a dead, a seared & a caute rised conscience, 1 Tim. 4.2. & though for the presentit sleep like a churlish mastife and neither bite nor barke, yet at last it will be awakened and fly in thy
face, and tare thee, as the Divell did the man in which he entred Mark. 9.22, He rent him and threw him into the fire. Belshazer was drinking wine in Bowles: But there came out Fingers on the wall and his countenance changed, Dan. 5.5. When the eye of your conscience shall be opened, and thou shalt see a dismall hand-writing against thee, hell gaping, and the just Judge preparing Venge∣ance for thee, what prodigious horror will surprize thee? hadst thou a world of worlds in thy possession, thou wouldst count them of too small Va∣lue to purchase a freedome from these first fruits of Hell. As a member that is Benumb'd with sleepe, is senlelesse and seems to be voide of all life. But yet when it gathers blood and awakens againe, it Shoots and pricks, and feeles as big as Ten. So conscience may be past feeling; Ephes. 4 19.  Remor∣selesse, Stupid, like a member that is benumm'd, and hath no sense in it (as the word signifies) like a dead man that feeles not the heaviest Burden that is
laid on him. But when it is awakned, Oh that Infinite unexpressable tor∣ments, that will surround thy pretious soule! At thy Right hand, thy sins will be accusing thee. At thy Left hand In∣finite Devills expecting thee. Ʋnder thee the fulnesse of hell bur∣ning; Above thee an Angry Judg, and within thee hty Conscience tormenting. So that to live will be a torment, to dye will be an Hell. Yea God himselfe will rowse it up, if not by his word as he did Ahabs Conscience, or by his rod as he did Pharaohs, yet by his terrible presence when thou shalt stand before his Tribunall, then shalt thou call unto the mountaines to fall upon thee, and the Hills to cover thee from the presence of the Lord: Yea then shall thy conscience like a vulture gnaw upon thy heart, and like a Scorpion sting thy very soule, and that rigorouslie, without Commsseration: constantly, without intermission: and continually, without cessation: then shalt thou feele that worme that never dyeth, and that fire
that never goeth out. Oh therefore do not content thy selfe which a false peace, but labour for the peace which God appro∣veth, give no rest to thine eyes or slumber unto thine eye lids before thou hast gotten a good conscience. namely A Con∣science both purified and pacified by the bloud and spirit of Christ.1 Cor. 6.11. 3. Use for Comfort to such as have tried and upon a truetryall have found themselves to be enriched with this precious Iewel namely a good conscience, let such magnifie God & say, the Lord hath dealt most bountifullie with me, praised be his great Name for his uuspea∣kable gift. Elkanah could say to Han∣nah that he was better unto her then ten sonnes. But thy good conscience may tru∣ly say to the that she is better then ten thousand sonnes then a world of earthlie freinds, for under God and his Christ, conscience is the friend of friends the truest, sweetest, constanst and most faithfull friend. 1. The truest Friend, which will deale most truly with thee, earthly Frinds come short both in reproofes
and comforts, they doe what they do by halfe, speak a little to thy face, but more behind thy back, and many times deale untruly with thee; when thou doest good, they will say thou doest evill, and when thou doest evill, They will say well done, but thy good conscience will not do so, will not daub with untempered morter nor call good, evill, nor evill good; but will deal very plainly with thee, accusing thee when thou doest ill, and so excusing thee when thou doest well. 2. The sweetest friend,Phil. 4. that will make thee ever merry, and alwaies rejoyce. to laugh under the whip, to sing in the stocks, to joy even then when thy goods are spoyled, yea in the sharpe tryalls to rejoyce that thou art accounted worthy to suffer for Christ and to Com∣pleat thy Joy, thy Conscience will feast thee, nor once or twise but every day, it will be a continuall feast unto thee. 3. The constanst friend, In time of distresse, when carnall friends fayle thee, this will abide with thee. Art thou in disgrace which men, hated tra∣duced,
accused, condemned, do the Abjects mock thee, the drunkards make songs upon thee, do Beliaste charge thee with lies and Falsities, doth Tertullus withall his Art render thee an odious and pestilent fellow. Againe, do thy own friends account thee an hypocrite as Iobs friends did him, and the world value thee as the filth and of-scouring of all things,Job. 16.19. yet comfort thy selfe in this; that thy testimony is on high, and thy witnesse in heaven, yea thy witnesse is on earth, in thine owne conscience, say with Job, not with standing all their spite and lies against me, I will hold fast my righteousnesse and will not let it go,Job. 27.6. my conscience shal not reproach me whilst I live. 4. The faithfull'st friend, that will help at a pinch, and when thou art in greatest need; Job tells us that he had friends, but they were unfaithfull, They deceived him as a brook deceiveth the wearie and thirstie Traveller, he comes unto it in Summer to quench his thirst and then behold it is dried up:
againe he seeks unto it in the Winter season, and then behold it is frozen, so that he is still disappointed of his hope. Thus deale my unfaithfull friends with me saith Job, when I have most need of their help, then they faile me.Job. 6.15. Solo∣mon compares such to a broken Tooth,Prov. 25.19. and a foot out of joynt, which will surely deceive such as trust unto them; for when they go to eate, their tooth will hinder them; or when to walke, their foot will paine them, and so to be of no use or profit unto them. But a good Conscience is no such false friend, no thou mayest trust unto it in the grea∣test pressures, in times of disgrace, po∣verty, sicknesse, death, and judgment: when all forsake thee, then will thy conscience like a faithfull Jonathan stand by thee.Ruth. 1.17 Ruth's resolution to stick to Naomi in all changes was more then ordinary to tell her that nothing but death should part them: But here behold a better freind, death shall not part thee and thy Conscience, she will be with thee in sicknesse and in health, in life and death, in judgment and before
Gods Tribunall. Therefore rejoice, and let thy God be ever magnified. 4. Use is to exhort all such as have not this Heartejewell of a good conscience, to labour above all things for the en∣joyment of it. This is that unum neces∣sarium, though generally neglected. Every man voluntarily of himselfe de∣sires a good Wife, good Children, good Servants, good Cloathes, good hou∣ses, yea all good; but as for a good con∣science which is worth all, and without which all these outward blessings will be but so many curses unto us, yet alas how carelesse are most in the getting of the one, how earnest and laborious in the other. Let me therefore advise you in the first place to labour for a good conscience, so shall all these out∣ward blessings be sweetned unto you. Now that you may not be deceived in this rich commodity, I will briefly shew you what it is. A good conscience is a conscience both purified and pacisied;What a good Con∣science is. mistake me not, I deny not but that Conscience may be good, if only purified: but it cannot be
well compleated, except it be also paci∣fied, for without this latter, there is many a sad soule so troubled, that they will not beleive they have what indeed they have, viz. a good Conscience. They are so far from Pauls assurance of a good conscience, that they rather be∣leive their consciences to be very evill and defiled Therefore strive to get them both, namely a conscience truely parified, and truly pacified.Meanes. Now followes the meanes both to purify and pacify conscience. 1. For the purifying of conscience, it is the part of every one professing Christ, to consider that his conscience naturally is defiled,Tit. 1.15. and that there is a necessity of taking off this defilement, if we would be saved, namely the igno∣rance, error, and hardnesse of consci∣ence wherewith it is polluted. The principall meanes are two. 1. The first means to effect it,Principall meanes. is the bloud of Christ: by this bloud we must have our hearts sprinkled from an evill conscience.Heb. 10.22. & 9.14. This is a singular way to have our Consciences purged from dead works
to serve the living God. 2. Meanes is the Spirit of Christ. This is that mundifying water menti∣oned Ezek. 36.25. I will sprinkle cleane water upon you, and ye shall be cleant from all your filthinesse. These two, Christs bloud and Christs spirit will cleanse the foulest sinner and the most defiledst conscience. Paul writing unto the Corinthians tells them what filthy creatures they were,1 Cor. 6.9.10. namely Fornica∣tors, Idolaters, effeminate, abusers of themselves with mankind, Theeves, Co∣vetous, Drunkards, Railers, Extorti∣oners, and then shewed them by what meanes they were cured and cleansed, namely by the blood and spirit of Christ.v. 11. But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. This is the refiners fire and fullers sope,Mal. 3.2. this is that hysope which will make us as white as snow, yea more white then snow, Ps. 51.7. Other meanes there are, which though not comparable to the first, yet as subservient, are likewise requisite
to this purifying of Conscience, namely the Word, Faith, Repentance.Lesse prin∣cipal meanes. 1. The Word. Now are ye cleane (saith Christ) through the word that I have spoken unto you, John. 15.3. That is to say, the word accompanied with the power of my Spirit. 2. So Faith is of a cleansing nature, it will purge the heart and cleanse the conversation, Act. 15.9. 3. And as for repentance, we find that when Judah had defiled her selfe with sin, God calls her to repentance as a way of cleansing. Wash ye, make you cleane, put away the evill of your do∣ings from before mine eyes, cease to do e∣vill, learne to do well, and then though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow.Is. 1.16. Thus you see how a de∣filed conscience may be purified. 2. Next followes how conscience may be pacified. Consider first of all what it is that troubles conscience.Meanes. It must be one of these three, either sin, or Sathan, or Gods anger. It was sin that so trou∣bled Paul, the law in his members that warred against the law of his mind, that
so disquieted him, that it made him to cry out,Rom. 7.24 O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me. 2. It was Sathan that winnowed Peter, and withstood Jehoshus 3. Gods anger that so molested David, as to make him cry out, Lord rebuke me not in thy wrath, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure, there is no soundnesse in my flesh because of thine anger. Therefore unto such as are troubled with the sight of their sin, the assaults of Sathan, or sence of Gods displeasure, if their con∣sciences be unquiet because of these, either one or all, be carefull in the use of such meanes as God hath ordained for pacifying conscience. Now that I may not be tedious, re∣member what were the meanes to pu∣rifie conscience, and thou shalt find the very same meanes will pacify consci∣ence. I told thee before that the bloud of Christ and the Spirit of Christ as prin∣cipall. 2. The word, faith, and repen∣tance as lesse principall. These would make a defiled conscience to become pure.
So now I must tell thee againe to make thy conscience quiet thou must have 1. The bloud of Christ. Paul tels us that Christ by the bloud of his Crosse,Col. 2.20 i. e. by his bloudy oblation made upon the crosse, hath made peace and reconci∣led all things. Now rightly to under∣stand this Text, you must know that by sin, heaven and earth were set at vari∣ance, and the creatures in them: but by Christ there is unity set, not only be∣twixt God and man, but also betwixt men and the Angels that are in heaven, as also the creatures that are upon the earth, now if Christs bloud be such a Catholicon to take off all enmity be∣ween God and man, between men and Angels in heaven, men and creatures on earth, and to make peace, then let us acknowledge it an excellent means to pacify conscience. This was typifi∣ed in the bloud of the Pascall lamb: where this bloud was sprinkled upon any door-post, there was peace and security against the destroyer. So where the bloud of Christ is sprinkled upon the
soule, their conscience is at peace, and hath security against all the remaining guilt and corruption of sin, the rage of Sathan, & danger of Gods displeasure. This bloud givves the soule all bold∣nesse to enter in into the holiest of all by a new and living way,Heb. 10.19. and gives us assu∣rance before God. 2. Meanes to pacify conscience is the spirit of Christ, As his bloud is the procuring cause, so his spirit the producing cause. For this cause Christ and the ho∣ly Ghost are called by one and the same name, because their end and businesse is the same, namely to procure peace to the soule. They both are called  or Advocates, Christ is our Advocate and and the spirit is Gods Advocate. Christ is our Advocate to the father to procure us peace: The spirit againe is Gods advocate to us to produce peace. As the one prevailes with God for granting peace, so the other prevailes with us to entertaine peace. See this cleared in 1 Joh: 2.1. If any man sin we have a Paraclete with the father Jesus Christ the righteous. Here
Christ is our advocate: againe Joh. 14.16. I will pray the father and he shall give you another Paraclete. In this place the holy Ghost is Gods advocate, so you plainly see how the bloud and spirit of Christ must make up this true and full peace. Now for the causes or meanes lesse principall and subservient, as the word, faith, repentance. First the word, it is a word of reconci∣liation and pacification. Thus Peter to Cornelius and his company tells them, ye know (saith he) the word which God hath sent to the children of Israel,Act. 10.36 prea∣ching peace by Jesus Christ which is Lord of all. Now as the Scripture in gene∣rall may be said to be a word of peace, so more especially the Gospell: This is called the word of peace. The Author of it the Prince of peace. The minister the Messenger of peace,Rom. 10.15. and his preaching the gospell, the ministry of reconcitiati∣on,2 Cor. 5.18. yea as one saith it is Gods procla∣mation and our Charter of peace, con∣taining the largest concessions of peace. It is Gods act of oblivi∣on
and his act of indemnity. Scheffeeld on conse: p. 42. 2. Meanes of pacifying conscience is faith. As the conscience cannot speak peace with Gods allowance before it be purged, so not peace after it is pur∣ged without faith; This is a grace that will doe both, i. e. purify and pacify. 1. That faith will purify is cleer, Act. 15.9. Faith purgeth the heart and clean∣seth the conversation. 2. That it will also pacify, this appeares Rom. 5.1. Being justifyed by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Iesus Christ. Peace is the daughter of faith: This is that Dove that brings an Olive branch of peace in its mouth, aed presents God a pacified and reconciled father unto us. O how sweet is that peace which faith breeds? It is a Christians heaven upon earth. A bunch of Grapes that growes on the true Vine, joy in life, peace at death, prosperity in adversity, staffe in affliction, ankere in desperation, there∣fore Christ calls it , An∣ticipation of heaven. 3. The third and last subservient
meanes is Repentance. The Apostle tells us our consciences must be purged from dead workes,Heb. 9.14 and we must have re∣pentance from dead workes. We must still acknowledge that it is the bloud of Christ that must purge our conscien∣ces from dead workes, and so worke peace; yet know this, that this peace is not wrought in our apprehension, nei∣ther do we feele this faith without further act. Therefore to our faith must be joined repentance, though not ma∣king of our peace, yet for the, feeling of this peace. Let us now then breifly enumerate the causes principle and lesse principle. 1. Christs bloud procuring. 2. Christs spirit producing. 3. His word proclai∣ming. 4. Faith assuming. 5. Repen∣tance declaring and evidencing. All these in their order, not in a way of coordination, but in a way of subordina∣tion do effect the sweet peace of consci∣ence, which passeth all understanding, Phil. 4.7. And is the sweetest compa∣nion that ever accompanied man in this vale of mortality.
Hitherto of the goodnesse of Conscience and how it becomes good, namely by the bloud and spirit of Christ, where∣by it is both purified and pacified. In the next place I must commend unto you these 3 things as specially to be minded and endeavoured by you. 1. Having of Conscience. 2. Holding of Conscience. 3. Well using of Conscience. 1. First let it be your speciall care to have this good conscience, and that you may have it take these few directi∣ons. 1. Be senseable of the want of it, al∣beit naturally we are all destitute of this jewell, yet very few complaine for want of it. Some are pure in their owne eyes,Prov. 30.12. yet were never purged from their filthinesse, their consciences as defiled as ever. Others openly profane and wic∣ked, that adde drunkennesse to thirst, yet when a curse is pronounced against them, they will blesse themselves saying, we shall have peace: I must say to such, they are whole & need not the Physician.
Thele are not as yet in a capacity of receiving this blessing. Therefore I advise you, first to see the filthinesse of your consciences, how defiled with ignorance, error and har∣dinesse: and having seen it, with the leper confesse it, and say Master, I am uncleane, I am uncleane: when thy disease is knowne, the cure is halfe wrought,Tit. 1.15. therefore I say by all meanes to see how thy soule and conscience is de∣filed. 2. Seek out an able Physician that can cure thee, thinke not to find him here on earth, thou must go to heaven for him, it is God that first made thy conscience, and he alone it is that can remake it: and therefore ad∣dresse thy selfe unto him, humbly and faithfully acknowledging his power, and in the lepers phrase expresse the desire of thy heart and say, Master if thou wilt thou canst make me cleane. And to quicken thee in this, I will say unto thee, as the Disciples unto the blind man, go he calleth thee.Mark. 10.49.
1. Christs invitation; Come unto me ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will refresh you. All ye that more and more feel the burden of sin, and can find no way to remove it, come you all to me, and I will ease you of your bur∣den of sin past, Ps: 32.1, and free you from servitude of it hereafter. Sin shall not have dominion over you. Rom. 6.14. Therefore as blind Bartimeus, when Christ called him, forthwith cast off his garment, rose up and went to Christ; so thou who hast an evill con∣science make no delay, shake off all im∣pediments and run to Christ the true Phisitian, and he will heale thee of thy disease, and give thee a pure and peace∣able conscience. There is water enough in Iordan; there is balme enopugh in Gi∣lead to poure into your wounds. And there is a Phisitian there too, and de∣sires thee to come, and will heale thee without money or moneyes worth. Tis but looking on this brazen serpent and be whole. 2. Motive. His promise is to cure thee, he hath said he will give thee on heart,
put a new spirit into thee, take away thy stony heart out of thy flesh,Ezek. 11.18, 19. and give thee an heart of flesh. Now what is this lesse then to cure thy soule and conscience, therefore thou mayest boldly go unto the Lord, plead the covenant between God and thee, tell him thou hast it to shew under his hand, and so hold him to his promise. Lord thou hast said thou wilt give me a new heart, a new con∣science, therefore Lord create in me a new heart and renew a pure conscience within me, let old things be done away and let all things become new. 3. Direction is to observe what thy Phisitian shall advise thee, his directi∣ons are plainly set downe in his large Phisick book, namely the book of Scrip∣tures, there thou shalt find what thy disease is, the nature and symptomes of it, the meanes to cure it also, what diet thou must keep in the time of thy disease to be freed from it, and what diet afterwards to prevent a relapse. Take heed therefore when thy great Phisitian hath advised thee what meanes to use to take off this leprousy
from thy soule. Doe not slight it as Naaman did Elisha's advice about the leprousy of his body: when he advised him to wash in Jordan and be cured, the text saith he was wroth,2 King. 5.9.10. preferring his owne waters of Abanah and Pharpar rivers of Damascus as better then all the waters of Israel. Take heed bee not wiser then thy Doctor, credas medico ut valeas, follow his directions and thou shalt be healed. Eate and live, wash and be cleane. Thus far by way of preparative, proceed we now unto the Physick it selfe, in which we find many simples compounded, as Naturals and Spirituals added. 1. We are to adde light to light, i. e. the light of Scripture unto the light of Nature, without knowledge the conscience cannot be good, but as a blind man drinke poison as soon as wholsome liquor, and stand as secure∣ly upon the brinke of a deep dungeon, as upon a broad pavement, and why, because he seeth not the venome of the one, nor yet the danger of the other. Even so the blind conscience drinks ini∣quity
as water, and stands fearelesly upon the brinke of hell, without any fear of falling into it, and all because he seeth not the vilenesse of the one, nor yet the mischeife of the other, into which he runneth, therefore adde I say unto the light of nature the light of scripture. 2. Adde bloud to bloud, i. e. the bloud of Christ, to thy sin-bleeding soule, this is that bloud which must cure thee and no other bloud can do it. 1. Beasts bloud will nto heale thy conscience, the bloud of buls and goats cannot purge away sin. 2. Mans bloud will not as the bloud of Abel, or the bloud of Mar∣tyrs. 3. Thine owne bloud will not cure thee, Saul having an evill conscience might thinke to ease him selfe by falling on his owne sword, and shedding his owne bloud; but alas this will not cure but kill. Ther's nothing can cure our sick polluted consciences, but only ba∣thing in the poole of Bethesda. There is nothing can make us white, but the bloud of the lamb. It is Christs bloud on∣ly;Zach. 13. this is that fountaine for sin and for
uncleanesse; this is the bloud that must cleanse thee from all sin, 1 John 1.7, 8. See therefore thou adde unto thy blee∣ding soule this precious blood. 3. Adde spirit unto spirit, i. e. unto thy spirit Gods spirit. When Gods spirit comes into thy spirit, it will not only regenerate thy spirit, but witnesse with thy spirits that thou art healed, and make thee with a joyfull voice to cry out Ab∣ba father, Rom. 8.16. 4. Adde faith to faith; unto thy ge∣nerall faith an applicative faith, thou then wilt not only beleive that these former simples and ingredients thus compounded, and as it were mixed, will cure an evill conscience, but will boldly say, my evill conscience by these meanes is purged and quieted. Where these principles and simples are thus com∣pounded and happily joined together, there is a perfect cure; the evill consci∣ence is become a good consceence, the de∣filed conscience a purged conscience; the troubled conscience, a peaceable con∣science: thou art made whole, therfore as our Saviour unto the Adulteresse,
when she had received merecy, gave her this caveat, to sin no more: so say I to thee that hast a pure and peaceable con∣science, go sin no more, but observe thy Physitians rules in keeping a good diet: be holy to God, upright to man, & sober in thy selfe; if not, thou wilt fall back in∣to thine old disease, & so thy condition will be more desperate then ever. Now for preservatives, that consci∣ence may keep its purity and peace. 1. Abstaine from all appearances of evill. Account no sin little, but remem∣ber that a little leake may sinke a ship, and one spark of fire may burne a city, it was but a wanton glance at first in David, when he looked on Bathsheba, but if you mark it, many sins and ma∣ny sorrowes followed upon that glance of his, so that which James speaketh is here most true, behold how great a flame a little fire kindleth, therefore abstame from the appearance of sin. 2. Beware of intimacy with any un∣godly person, take heed whom thou makest thy companion, the sweetest dispositions are soonest sowred by e∣vill
society, wicked Ahab is no fit com∣panion for godly Jehoshaphat, nor Cerinthus (the Heretick) for John the Divine. Take heed of such as are either erroneous in judgment, or vitious in conversation, wilt thou joine with those that are enimies unto God? doest thou not know that one diseased sheep may infect an whole flock, so on corrupt man may corrupt a multi∣tude: as we find in Alexander,2 Tim. 2.17. Hy∣meneus, Philetus, Phigellus, Hermo∣gines, and others, whose word did eat as doth a Canker, which if not seasonably prevented will grow incu∣rable. The Originall word is gangrene,. which signifies to eate, as the disease called a wolfe or a canker doth, which consumeth not only the part where it is, but spreadeth farther in the flesh. Such is the Nature of Hereticall do∣ctrine, if it be not stopt in the be∣ginning & cured by solid confutati∣ons and Ecclesiasticall censures, upon those that are obstinate; it will spread far, and run over the whole body of
the Church. Beware of such, a man that is an Heretick,Tit. 3.10, 11. after the first and second admonition reject: knowing that he that is such, is subverted, and sinneth, being condemned of himselfe, i. e. convinced in his owne conscience, that he shuts his eyes against the light, and resisteth and opposeth the known truth. The like I say for prophane and vi∣tious persons; though they entice thee, consent thou not: and if they say, come with us, or be one of us, oh come not into the way of sinners,Prov. 1.10 nor enter into the counsell of the ungodly,Prov. 3.34 lest thou sit in the seat of the scorner, and at last become a scorne and a derision unto God and the godly. 3. In doubtfull things take the surest and safest way. All men have flesh, and so consequently error in them. Great differences arise in things practicall, one holds recreations on the Lords day, and another denies it: This man for usury, that man against it; some say Faith and Troth are no Oathes, others will tell thee that they
are more then yea and nay. The Mul∣titude are for Cards, Dice, drinking of healths,Math. 5.37. long haire in men, and naked backs and breasts in women, but the fewest and wisest are against all these. Judge thou therefore which is the sa∣fest way, to use all these, or to refuse them, heare what the Spirit tells thee, abstaine from all appearance of evill: have no fellowship with the unfruitfull workes of darknesse, but rather reprove them. Doubtlesse it will be safer for thee to deny thy selfe in forbearing,Eph. 5.11. then to take liberty in using them. Give no of∣fence to tender consciences, but follow Paul, who was so wary of giving of∣fence to Gods people, that even in things lawfull he would deny himselfe, resolving to eate no flesh while the world standeth, rather then to make his brother to offend (i. e.) to put a stumbling block before him,1 Cor. 8.13. or give an occasion of sin unto him. Wherefore walke on sure ground, and be warranted from God for what thou doest. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just,
pure, lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any vertue,Phil. 4.8. if any praise, thinke on these things. 4. Take heed of false and phantasti∣call Teachers, who boast of the spirit of God, when it is only their owne proud and lying spirit.Ezek. 13.3 They are foolish prophets that follow their owne spirit and have seen nothing, i. e. they do medle with prophecying of their owne proper moti∣on, being driven thereunto by their owne carnall affection, and declare no∣thing but their owne vaine imaginati∣on, and frothy inventions. They would be accounted Physicians for sick soules and wounded consciences, but as Job saith they are Physicians of no value. For they heale the hurt of Gods people slightly, saying, peace,Jer. 8.11. when there is no peace: they preach generally freedome and liberty, as freedome from confession of sin, and freedome to the commission of sin, but whilst they thus preach liber∣ty unto others, they themselves are the servants of corruption, beware of such: And beg of God Pastors according to his owne heart, that may feed you with
wisdome and true understanding, whose lips may preserve knowledge,Jere. 3.15. and ye may sack it at their mouth, who may be en∣samples unto the flock in life and doctrine, faith and love, spirit and purity. Eng∣land could glory she had such Prophets such Pastors, and blesed be God she can yet say she hath such still; true it is they lie under a cloud, but it is not ma∣ny yeares since that they were highly esteemed, thought worthy of double honour, and consulted with upon mat∣ters of greatest importment both in Church and State: yea Parliament and People invited them to come into Mace∣donia, namely London, to help on the great worke of Reformation: but now are cast aside as of no value, and by ma∣ny accounted Antichristian, and eni∣mies to the Kingdome of Christ, and to the power and purity of the Gospel. A sudden and strange change, but we will lay it upon that envious one, whose rage is specially against Gods faithfull Ministers. You therefore that love a good conscience make much of such, and have them in high esteeme for
their works sake, because it is the Lords. Thus far of having:2. Holding now followes the holding of a good conscience.. 1 Thes. 5.2. The Spirit of God doth frequently presse us to this holding. Try all things, and hold fast that which is good, i. e. try ex∣actly all doctrines concerning faith or manners, and as thou findest them sound and saving, so hold them.Tit. 1.8, 9 Againe hold fast the faithfull word,Heb. 4.14. hold fast your Profession, hold fast till I come, hold fast lest another take thy crowne,Rev. 3.11. i. e. the honour and glory promised to such as shall persevere. So say I, (ye not I, but the spirit of God) hold faith, and a good conscience, 1 Tim. 1.19. yea above all hold these,  hold against all ad∣versaries that would withhold. 1. R. Because the labour is as great in holding as having, non minor est virtus quàm quaerere, parta tueri. It cost Paul deare to get a good conscience, and so it did to hold it. Twas his daiely exercise to keep a good conscience, void of offence toward God and man. Act. 24.16. 2. R. Because many have made ship∣wrack
of conscience as Hymeneus and Alexander who giving the reines to a licentious course of life against the di∣ctates of their owne conscience, God punished them accordingly, by taking away the light of his spirit, that in the middest of their course they should lose their most precious spiritual mer∣chandise, and be drowned in error and heresy,1 Tim. 1.19, 20. as those who in a sea-tempest suffer ship-wrack. 3. R. Because the world cannot a∣bide a good conscience, as we may see in Zedekiah his behaviour toward Micai∣ah, and Pashur toward Ieremie, how un∣civilly and rudely do these men carry themselves,1 King. 22, 24. Zedekiah he smites Michai∣ah on the cheeke, impudently and re∣proachfully before the King and whole assembly; saying unto him, which way went the spirit of the Lord from me to speake to thee? pretending that himselfe had the spirit of God, and thereupon inferres that Micaiah had it not, be∣cause it could not be shewed how it should passe from the one unto the o∣ther. So Pashur smites Ieremie, and puts
him in the stocks, and herein shewes him∣selfe a prime instrument of Sathan, per∣petrating that against the Lords Pro∣phet, which neither King, nor Princes, nor people durst formerly attempt.Jer. 20.2. Thus Amaziah the priest with Amos, and A∣nanias with Paul commands them that stood by to smite Paul on the mouth:Am. 7.10. what was the cause of this their rage and fu∣ry? had these men cōmitted any grosse offence? surely no; it was only the good∣nesse of their conscience that did thus ex∣asperate their rage against them. These were the faithfull servants of the Lord, that boldly declared the mind and will of God unto them, as in conscience they were bound, and therefore could not endure them. There is an irreconcile∣able Antipathy between the men of the world, and the Saints of God, they can no sooner mingle, then oyle and water; nor better agree then light and dark∣nesse. The Spirit that is in you the world cannot receive, saith Christ, John 14.17. they are convinced that they are consci∣entious men, but as they were wont to say in former times, CAIUS SEIUS was
a good man, but he was a Christian. So now,Caius Seius bonus vir¦sed Chri∣stianus. such are good men, but they are too strict, too conscientious, and there∣fore cannot away with them. Thus you see how the men of this world can∣not endure a good conscience. 4. R. Because the Devill doth more envie a good conscience then any other thing. Let men be never so high in ho∣nour, great in wealth, abound in wit and policy, the Devil dislikes it not, he knowes the better how to make use of them to serve his turne, as we sind in Pharaoh, Zenacherib, Achitophel, He∣rod, and others: who in their Pomp and power were higher then their brethren by head and shoulders, and accordingly more active and ready to do his work: That man I say have abundance of these outward things, it doth not dis∣quiet but please Satan; But when any have a good; a pure and a tender conscience, this madds the Divel and makes him to set all his instruments on worke to bereave such of their Heart∣jswell, namely a good conscience; we
may see this in Luther, his pure consci∣ence did vex both Pope and Devill;Melchior Adam in vitâ Luth. what would not they have done to have strangled his conscience, if honour, wealth, preferment, or any outward thing could have prevailed, the Pope would have collated all these upon him, but one tells the Pope, that all these would not doe, for (saith he) Germana illa bestia aurum non curat, that German beast (meaning Luther) will not be won by any or all of these. And at ano∣ther time when great gifts were sent to him, he refused them with this most brave and excellent speech. Valdè pro∣testatus sum me nolle sic satiari ab eo: I did earnestly protest that God should not put me off with these things. Meaning that he would not be satisfyed with a∣ny thing here below: his spirit was too noble to be tempted with Gold to the losse of a good conscience. Here then you see what need there is to hold a good con∣science, yea to hold it fast, as Cynegrius his ship, with tooth and naile. Meanes how to hold a good Consci∣ence.
1. Get more light into thy under∣standing, thou hast already a double light, namely the light of nature and the light of Scripture, be carefull to en∣crease this latter light. There is and hath been many a tender hearted Christian who for want of Scripture light hath neglected many a good duty, and so lost much sweet solace and comfort, which they might have enjoyed in the performance of it As for example; ma∣ny of the 'Fatriarchs for want of a grea∣ter light fell into that sin of Polygamy, not understanding that place of Scrip∣ture, Lev. 18.18. Thou shalt not take a wife to her Sister to vex her. They under∣standing this only of a Naturall si∣ster, and not of a Nationall) took unto themselves the liberty of many wives, and so it is amongst us to this day, for want of a greater light, not only what we ought to do is omitted, but often∣times what we ought not to do is pra∣ctised, therefore labour for a greater light in thy understanding, let the word of God dwell in you plenteously. hide it within you even in the middest of your heart.
2. Beware of multiplicity of imploi∣ments, be not a busie body in other mens matters, or as the Proverb, desire not to have an Oare in every mans Boat, such busie persons are great enimies to their owne consciences, and by their superflu∣ous wit and needlesse activity, their heads are filled with Queries, and their hearts with cares. 3. Beware of unruly passions and dis∣orderly affections: these if let loose are like wild horses, which will never leave running till they have unhorsed their Riders, and given them a dangerous, if not a deadly fall. Thus Sauls passion towards 'David, and Ammons affection to his Sister Thamar, they were so un∣ruly, so disorderly, that they made them lose all working of conscience, dri∣ving them headlong into sin and Shame. 4. Beware of wounding conscience afresh with any allowed sin: if thou be healed, sin no more, lest a worse thing do befall thee. Relapses are very dange∣rous; Bones, twise broken augment the paine, and difficilitate the cure: so
shalt thou find in conscience. Hath thy conscience been formerly wounded, and hath God in mercy cured thee? take heed of wounding it againe, lest thy paine be double, and thy cure made more difficult, and thou find in thy selfe no difference between thee and a reprobate. Oh therefore take heed of every sin, free thy conscience every day from the burden of sin, know that a pure conscience can better beare a moun∣taine of misery, then a mole hill of sin; if thou carefully use these meanes, thou shalt be sure not only to have but also to hold a good conscience. I told you formerly of 3 things which were especially to be minded & endeavoured by us. 1 The having of a good conscience. 2. The holding of a good conscience. 3. The using or exercising of a good conscience. Of the having and hol∣ding, we have already spoken: now in the last place we are to speak of the exercising of a good conscience. Paul having spoken of the goodnesse of his conscience and a assurance of the same lest any should judge him a vaine
Boaster, and that it was some phantasti∣call opinion or fanaticall vision, and no well grounded assertion, he goes to cleare it by 4 sound Characters of a good conscience, set down in the latter part of my Text, I know I have a good conscience, and upon this ground I stand firme, because I am willing in all things to live (or walke) honestly. 1. His will (he saith he is willing) 2. The extent or latitude of his will (in all things.) 3. The constancy of his will, (to walke or live.) 4. The syncerity of his will, (to walke honestly.) If any shall come to Paul, as the Pha∣risees to Christ, saying, what doest thou do, that we may beleive thee, thou talkest much of the goodnesse of thy conscience, whereby doest thou demonstrate the same, that we may beleive thee: to such Paul readily answers, I am sure of a good conscience, for I am willing in all things to live honestly. The first Character of his good con∣science is his will; you may not under∣stand his naturall will, for this being corrupt and carnall cannot will any
thing pleasing unto God, it being like himselfe altogether abominable. Mans naturall will is to please himselfe or o∣thers like himselfe, but not to please God, it is not subject unto the will of God, neither indeed can be. Examples hereof are many. 1. First in Sauls Courtiers, they had a will to please themselves but not God, our tongues are our owne,Ps. 12.4. say they, and we will speake, we have still power and liberty to speak and are able to per∣swade to whatsoever we take in hand. The like we find in those worldlings that James mentions,Jam. 4.13. to day or to morrow we will go into such a city and continue there a year, and buy and sest, and get gaine: Thus you see their will was wholly to please themselves. 2. Their will is to please others like themselves: as Pilate,Mark. 15.15. how willing was he to please the prophane multitude in releasing Barrabas and delivering Jesus to be crucisied. So was Foelix very wil∣ling to please the Jewes, and to give them all content that so they might not follow him with complaints, his will
was to leave Paul bound.Act. 24 27. Thus you see what our owne wills are, very corrupt, apt to please our selves, but not God; and therefore such a will can be no character of a good conscience. Know therefore that Pauls will in the Texe is better principled, a will sanctified by the spirit of God, a will freely willing to do what God requi∣reth. Such a will we find in Joshus, who assembling the Tribes at Shechem and declaring a briefe history of Gods be∣nefits towards tehm,Josh. 2.4 14. even from the daies of Terah, exhorteth them to the service of this God, and to renew their covenant with him, saying, heare the Lord and serve him in syncerity and in truth, put away the Gods that your Fa∣thers served, and serve the Lord: If your wills bind not to the true God, know yee that my will doth; I am resolved that I and mine houshould shall serve the Lord. Such a will was in David,Ps. 119: 106. I have vowed and will performe it to keep thy righteous judgments. And by this will came Paul to be assured of the goodnesse of conscience.
Now Beloved, let us examine our selves whether there be such a will and willingnesse in us as was in Paul to please God. Me thinks I heare you say, I would please God; you say you would, but tell me is it the very bent of your heart and your constant endea∣vour so to doe? if not, I must tell you, your woulding is but a vaine wishing and nothing worth. There is not the poorest person, but he would be rich, the veriest Bankrupt, but he would be thrifty, nor the vilest person, but he will say, he would be honest; but will you beleive such, because they say they would be such, when you see the bent of their heart and course of life is con∣trary? surely no; neither may we be∣leive such to have a good conscience, which have only a woulding without endeavouring. 2. The second Character of a good conscience appeares in the extent of his will; Paul doth not barely say: that he is willing in this or that particular to please God, or with Herod willing to doe many things, but he is willing in all
things, i.e. in all duties divine & hu∣mane of piety and charity. This uni∣versall Obedience is an excellent distin∣guishing note between truth and error, yea between a good and an evill consci∣ence.Cauti e∣stote. i.e. magnam attentionē servate. 1. God requires it, Exod. 23.13. saying unto his people, In all things that I have said unto you be circumspect, i.e. be carefull to observe withall atten∣tion,Audacia est de bo no divini praecepti disputare, nec qula bonum est auscultare debemus, sed quia Deus praecepit. Ter∣tul. de poenit. (Vatablus in H. C.) whatsoever I shall command you. There is reason enough in Gods will, and his meer command requires absolute obedi∣ence. 2. Christ shewes us a necessity of it, and tells us that whosoever is unjust in the least, is unjust also in much: and James saith, if he offend but in one point, and allow himselfe in it, he is guilty of all, and he shall be the least in the king∣dome of God; i. e. be of no account in Gods Church here,Luk. 16.10. Jam. 2.10 Mat. 5.19. nor have any part in heaven hereafter. So that you see that it is not enough to be willing in something, but we must be willing in all things.
3. What is done for God must be done equally. If you doe this dutie and neglect that duty, they both being commanded by the same wise, and ho∣ly God,John 2.5. there is no equality in it, nei∣ther is it accepted. Therefore as Mary to the servants that waited on Christ, said unto them, whatsoever he comman∣deth, see that you do it: So say I to all, that who so will have a sure character of a good conscience, his obedience must be universall, whatsoever he commands we must endeavour to do it. Quicquid propter Deum fit aequaliter fit. You must have an equall respect to all Gods com∣mandements, Ps. 119.6. You must (with David) fulfill all his will.. The Origi∣nall word is in the plurall number; all his wills. This then may serve to undeceive all halfe hearted Christians, who com∣ming into Gods Tabernacle here below, doubt not but they shall ascend his ho∣ly mountaine hereafter; and why, be∣cause they are willing to heare many truths, and willing to performe many duties. I tell thee if thou be not wil∣ling
to heare all, and doe all, thou wilt deceive thy selfe at last. Look upon Herod, Ananias, and Saphira, were they not Professors, did they not heare much, and doe much, how was it then that they became such sad spectacles of Gods vengeance, that the one was ea∣ten up with wormes, and the other smit∣ten with sudden death? I answer, though they were willing in many things, yet not in all things:Act. 5.2. Herod will keep his Herodias, and Ananias will keep back part of the price, and by reserving a part lose all. Oh take it to heart all civill men and hypocrites, you both are but halfe Chistians, you answer Gods voice but as the Eccho doth answer the voice of a man, only in part not in whole, but God will not be so answered, he will have all or none. Do not say with Na∣aman, The Lord be mercifull unto me when I goe into the house of Rimmon: The Lord be mercifull unto me if I sweare rashly, commit Adultery, oppresse my Brother., or act this or that wicked nesse. Know God will have no reserva∣tions, he will not have thee swallow a
Camell, nor yet a gnat. As he will have thee to tremble at wounds and bloud. so will he have thee to feare faith and troth: As to abhorre Adulterie, so to hate Daliance. As to loath the shedding of bloud, so to shun the taking away of any part of thy Brothers livelihood. One speaking of conscience tells us it is a Bo of precious oyntment, that must not be corrupted with the least Fly.Sam: Ward Soe I say, take heed of any thing that may offend God an conscience, and let it be thy care with Zachariah and Elizabeth to walke in the commandements of God without reproofe, Luk. 1.6. so shalt thou discover the goodnesse of thy con∣science with Paul, when thou art not only willing, but willing in all things. 3. Character of a good conscience is constancy in wel-doing: Paul doth not say that he is willing to make a step or two in holinesse, and then leave off: no he is resolved to walke on, to make it his constant practice, yea to live alwaies in and with a good conscience. A little child may go a step or two before he fall, yea a very drunkard may seeme togoe
steddy at first, and yet if you observe him, he will at last reele and tumble, this is no argument of strength or strea∣dinesse. Even so if men shall do good duties for a fitt once or twice &c. and give over and fall off, this is no signe of a good conscience, as there must be an universality, in all things, so a con∣stancy, alwaies: as in Paul Act. 23.1. & 24.16. He lived in all good conscience unto the last; he kept his conscience in∣offensive alwaies, he walked without tripping, without stumbling, ever the same in all actions and in all conditions. Consider this you hypocrites and time-servers who are constant in no∣thing but in inconstancy, now for God, and then for Baal; this day holy, to mor∣row prophane; to day you will make a step or two towards heaven, to morrow as many & more large strides to hell. Will the hypocrite pray alwaies? will he be obedient in all things? surely noe: he is a stranger to universall obedience, a stranger to constant obedience, and so a stranger to a good conscience. Oh therefore as thou desirest a
good conscience, so desire of God a right way to walk in, begge of him to teach thee his way, i. e. such a course of life as might be pleasing unto him, and to lead thee in a plaine path,Ps. 27.11. that thou mayest walk in it without tripping and stumbling. This way of God in which thou art to walke in, it is the way of Gods statutes, if therefore thou once get into this way, take heed of going out of it, let that resolution be in thee which was in David, Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes and I will keep it unto the end, Ps. 119.33. Resolve to be constant without tripping or turning either to the right hand or to the left: so shalt thou be assured that thy conscience is good. 4. Character of a good conscience is sincerity, the word in the Originall is , and our Translators read it, ho∣nestly, the word is very comprehensive and containes within it as much as any, or all other Adverbs in Scripture, namely worthily, decently, accurately, circumspectly, lively, famously, and praiseworthy. It notes unto us the lustre
of an action, and tells us that a good conscience stands not so much in verbs, as in adverbs; not so much in doing, as in Welldoing; if a Magistrate, he rules diligently; if a Minister, he preacheth willingly; if a hearer, he heareth atten∣tively; if a supplicant, he prayeth fer∣vently; yea whatsoever he does in the worship of his God he doth it faithful∣ly, Rom. 12.8. Phil. 2.20. Consider this you carnall men and women, who content your selves with the bare doing of a duty, without res∣pect to the manner of doing. If you eare the word, read, pray, and practise some good duty of piety or charity, you thinke you have done all, and all well: Oh remember that if it be not done honestly, (that is) syncerely, in obedience to God both for matter and manner and end, your conscience is not good. Let me therefore advise you in every duty that you do performe, observe an honourable decorum, I speake to Jew and Gentile, bond and free, male and fe∣male, of what ranke and condition so∣ever: rest not satisfied in your doing of
any duty, except it be done honestly, faithfully, and praise-worthily. 1. Magistrates be you in the highest place of Judicature, or in the lowest place of office: minde your Oathes, your places your trust,Jer. 48.10. doe not Gods work negli∣gently, least a woe befall you, and Gods curse seize upon you, but have respect unto your owne conscience, and unto the consciences of others, that your owne may be preserved: and the consci∣ences of others rectified. 2. Ministers, I must speak to you as the Colossians were to speak to Ar∣chippus, Take heed to the Ministry which you have received,Gol. 4.17. that you fulfill it, see you doe your whole worke in delivering the whole truth, and in being an exam∣ple in all holinesse unto your flock, preach in season and out of season, do the worke of an Evangelist so fully and honestly, that you may appeare to be men allow∣ed of God to preach the Gospell: and that your preaching hath not been to please men but God which tryeth the heart.1 Thes. 2.4. Thus shall you evidence a good consci∣ence, when you seek to satisfy your con∣science
in every duty of your calling. 3. Governours of Families, think it not enough that you have so many un∣der your command, and that you can say to this servant goe, and he goeth, and unto that servant come and he cometh; see well unto it that your commands and countermands be all honest, doe that which is just & equall unto them. Doe you first with Joshua serve God your selfe,Josh. 24. and then resolve that your Fa∣mily shall doe the like. If any be igno∣rant, see with Abraham that you teach them. If any be unteachable, untracta∣ble, see with David you exclude them, let them not abide in your house, so shall your houses be Bethels, houses of God, and your selves men of God, and men of a good conscience. 4. Private persons, be you not Chams but Jonathans, Be you carefull of your owne consciences, & then be carefull of the consciences of your Brethren, hate not your brethren in your hearts, but reprove them plainely, & suffer not sin to rest upon them, Lev. 19 17. Yea thou must love thy neighbour as they selfe v. 18. there must be a conformity in quality, though
not a correspondence of equality, thy love to thy brother and to thy selfe must be like in kind for sincerity with∣out deceit, and for efficacy without de∣fect. If thou do thus love thy neighbour as thy selfe,1 John 3.18. thou lovest thy God, and thou lovest a good conscience. 5. Lastly to every one of what sex or condition soever, whether rich or poor, let conscience be your Totum, all that thou hast to do is to look well to consci∣ence. Art thou rich, let conscience be thy bagg: if poor, let conscience by thy cruse, if a wife, let conscience be thy glasse; if a wayd, let conscience be thy attire: what∣soever thou art, submit to conscience, let that command thee, be ruled by it, and it will not wrong thee, be familiar with it, and it will never deceive thee. Thus you see what is to be done in the exercise of a good conscience. 1. A willingnesse to please God. 2. To please him in all things. 3. To please him al∣waies. and 4. to do all this truly, sincere∣ly, and honestly. Thus to doe is the very life and soule of all practicall piety. As thou lovest thy soule, misse not
one of these charecters, they are so ma∣ny golden linkes fastened by God him∣selfe, that he that hath one of them, hath all, and if but one be wanting, as∣sure thy selfe the rest are missing. Ac∣knowledge a necessity of them all, for as in a sound body there must be a due mixture and composition of all the 4 elements and Humors: so in a sound con∣science there must be a due composition of all these 4 characters. 1. Use to such as have, hold, & thus ex∣ercise a good conscience, to proclaime Gods bounty, that they with others may mag∣nify God, we read that the 4 Lepers in Samaria, having found a sudden & hap∣py change from penury to plenty; they blamed themselves for being silent and not divulging this great mercy:2 King. 7.9. We doe not well (say they) this day is a day of good tydings, and we hold our peace. So shall I say unto you that have found this great and gracious change in your selves, that your evill conscience is be∣come a good conscience. You shall not do well to be silent, but with David, it is your part and duty speedily to com∣municate
unto others. Come unto me all you that feare God. and I will tell you what God hath done for my soule. Ps. 66.18. I say againe its your duty and you are very faulty if you doe it not. Acknowledge your misery by nature, and likewise your happinesse by Grace; say with all humility & thankfulnesse, I was by nature as vile as the worst, as deeply guilty in Adams sin as any; as fouly polluted with Originall sin as the veriest Reprobate, and had in me the seed of all sin, apt to be drawne unto the foulest and grossest transgressions, and to run to the same excesse of riot with the worst,tit. 1.15. yea my very soule and consci∣ence was defiled. But blessed by my good God that hath striken Covenant with me in my blessed Saviour Christ Jesus,Ezek. 11.19. & hath put into me a new Spirit, given me a heart of flesh, and hath changed this defiled conscience,Heb. 9.14. into a pure conscience, a conscience both purified and pacified by the bloud and spirit of Christ.Col. 1.20. My greatest foe is now become my greatest friend, a most true friend, that will not flatter me, but deale plainly with me,
a most sweet freind that will comfort me in the saddest and darkest times and seasons, yea a friend that will make me to laugh under the whip. Sing when my feet are in the stocks and rejoyce when I fall into many Temptati∣ons; In a word, a most constant friend, that will never leave me nor forsake me neither in this life nor in the life to come. Death may part Naomi and Ruth. David and Jonathan, but death shall never parte thee and thy conscience, she will be with the in reproach and povertie, in sicknesse and distresse, in prison and restraint, in lyfe, in death, in Judgment, and before Gods Tribunall. Oh therefore relate thy happie and blessed change unto others that so thou, and they may unani∣mously prayse God: Soe shall thy God be magnified and thine owne thank∣full heart reallie and faithfull expres∣sed. 2 Use; to such as have a good con∣science to be such a friend unto them, that they would be very Carefull, to deale friendly with this friend, It is
Solomons Advise; Prov. 18.24. That he that hath friends must deale friendly: and that there is a friend that sticketh closer then a Brother. Now conscience is this close friend, let Father, Mother, Husband, Wife, Child, and Neigbour, all leave thee, This friend will never leave thee nor forsake thee, as I told thee formerly; Oh therefore deale friendly with thy Conscience, give not the least offence unto her, but remem∣ber she is very tender and will be sen∣ble of the least wrong or injury done unto her: The Injurie of a friend doth stick closer then the wrong of an Eni∣mie. David could say, had it been an Enimie, that had done me this wrong, I could have borne it, but it was thou my friend,Ps. 41.9. yea my familiar friend, we tooke sweet counsell.Ps. 55.13. Take heed there∣fore do neither disuse conscience, nor misuse conscience (1) I say doe not dis∣use consciene by estraunging thy selfe from her and refusing her Advise and counsell. 2 Doe not misuse her (1) Some by making her a cloak for any errone∣ous opinion or sinfull practice as too to
many doe in these our daies, who dare to set Gods Image and Supscription up∣on their owne base coine, Are there not many amongst us who impudently, and blasphemously affirme, that their Mission, Message, Doctrine, and Spirit are all of God. They will tell you, they are sent of God, the Doctrine they teach is the mind and will of God The Spirit by which they teach,Is. 8.20. it is the Spirit of God, But come you to the law and to the testimonie, consult the word of God and you shall find, there is no light in them. They are very Tray∣tors to the King of heaven, abusing his Image and Superscription, read but the 23 of Jer. and 13 of Ezek. and you shall find that notwithstanding their great Braggs, they are but grosse impostours and seducers. God tels them He never sent them, never spake unto them, & calls them Dreamers whose Doctrine is but chaffe, and their Spirit, is not Gods Spirit, but their own proud, lying, and deluding spirit. 2. Others make conscience a Cloak, for ungodly practices, that they may
the more clossely oppresse, defraud and injure others, to the satisfying of their ambitious lusts and Covetous desires, such were the Scribs & Phari∣sees of old, of whom our Saviour gives us a Caveat, that wee beware of them and then describes them, that people might the better know them. They are men saith Christ that carrie a great shew of Pyetie and holinesse, they pray,Math. 23.14. yea make long prayers and per∣forme other godlie exercises,Luk. 20.46. and all this they doe not syncerely but hypo∣critically, that they may the more easi∣ly devoure widdowes houses, and con∣sume their estates, who entertaine them: and doubtles many such there are amongst us at this time, who have very faire pretences for most foule practices; as Jezabel had, who was never more zealous in prayer and fasting then when she intended to to take away the life and livelihood of innocent Naboth; now what are these but great abusers of Conscience. 3. To these I may Adde a third sort who having abused conscience;
by some ungodly Art of whordome, drunkennesse, blasphemy or the like, will call for mercy and so be friends. It is reported of Lewes the eleventh King of France, that he wore in his Hat a Crucifix, and when at any time he had blasphemed God or acted any wickednesse; He would presently take downe his Crucifix and Kisse it, and then he had thought he had made satisfaction for all wrongs; even so is it amongst us, There are many when they have done any thing a∣gainst their conscience, thinke it e∣nough to Kisse Conscience and cry God have mercy and all is well: but let me tell such, they are enimies to consci∣ence, and let them be assured that at last they will find Conscience an enimie to them, yea their greatest eni∣mie: Not only a witnesse, But their Judge and Tormentor. Use of Exhortatiō unto all to be very carefull how they deale with Consci∣ence not to dare to injure it in the least degree, conscience I must tell you is verie tender, soone sensible of the least
wrong: if therefore you will hold friendship with her you must resolve to be tender also, and that with an holy tendernesse, I say an holy ten∣dernesse, and the rather because there is too much tendernesse in the world which is very hatefull unto a good Conscience. 1. Some are very ready for the practice of sin,Unholy Tender∣nesse. but they are so tender, as they cannot endure the least touch of reproofe for sin, They are like those whole bodies being full of boyles and botches cry out unto such as come neer them: Oh do not touch me and all because of the soares and and the ulcers they beare about them. Thus is it which many a wicked man and woman who having many ulcers of sin running upon them will not indure their Christian friends nor yet their faithful ministers and Tea∣chers but cry out, like those in Isaiah, who said to the seers see not, & to the pro∣phets prephesie not unto us right things, but speak smooth things,Is. 30.10. prophesy deceit,
They cannot indure to heare the truth of God, but a lie, not to have Gods Judgmēts threatned, but them∣selves to be slattered, though it turne unto their owne ruine: Such tender persons were Amaziah the prince,2 Chr. 25.16. and Amaziah the priest. The first was reproved by the prophet of the Covenant: for setting up of false Gods: but the King tells the Prophet that he should hold his peace, least he were smitten, he was so tender he could not beare it. The like temper we find in Amaziah the priest when Amos prophesied the rejection of Israel and the destruction of Jeroboams house by the sword, presentlie. Amaziah goes to incense the King against Amos, and tells him that the land was not a∣ble to beare his words, and bids him slee away and not to come againe unto Bethel, for it was the Kings chappell,Amos 7.10. a place that he had Consecrated to the worship of the Calves, & therefore not safe nor fitting for Amos to prophesie against him in that place.
2. Some are naturally tender, of such a soft and tender Temper, that they readily yeeld unto any com∣mand of man, though countermaun∣ded by god. Thus was it with Ephra∣im. Hos. 5.11. Ephraim is broken in Judgment: because he willingly walked after the Commandement, what Com∣mandements, the wicked comman∣dements of their Idolatrous Kings and princes, therefore the Lord Threatens them that he would be to Ephraim as a Moth, & to the house of Ju∣dah rottennesse. i.e. He would consume them by little and little as a Moth doth a garment, or as a worme doth a peice of Timber, and surely this may be said to be our case: our preferring mans mandates before Gods Cōmands, hath broken us of this land in peices, and if God be unto us as he was to Ephraim a Moth and a worme gra∣dually to ruine us, it is but His Justice. 3. Others there are which are scrupelously tender, They will stick at strawes and leap over blocks,
make that a sin which God never made a sin, and stirr most in that, in which God is silent, Thus the Priests scruple their going into the Praetorium, the house of an Heathen man, least they should be ceromoniallie defiled and soe held from the Passeover, but yet made no matter of de filing them∣selves morally with the guilt of innocēt bloud: againe, they are troubled in put∣ting the price of bloud into their holy Corbam, but not troubled to give a price to shed innocēt bloud. How carefull are they in washing of hands, of cups, pots, and platters, how carelesse in wa∣shing their hearts and insides from sin. One saith well: such as these, they can dance amongst thornes and yet know not how to walke upon even ground; Herod had too much of this render∣nesse, when he had passed his word & given his oath to grant his wicked He∣rodias her unreasonable request, which was, to have John Baptist head in a char∣ger. Note the tendernesse of this man, he may not breake his Oath, and therefore concludes that to go back
from his word, would be perjurie: but to go on, though it were to shed the bloud of an innocent, this he ac∣counts pietie. Many such we have amonst us who doe more scruple an egg then an Oath, and like Esops dogg doe so greedily catch at shadowes, that they loose the substance, therefore I would such would be more wise, following the Advice of Paul, who in unnecessarie and vaine scruples will have us to asks no Question for consci∣ence sake,1 Cor. 10.25. Beware of all such evill and sinfull tendernesse, as enimies to a good conscience, and labour for such a tendernesse as is holy and faultlesse which will make you watchfull a∣gainst every sin, that may any waies molest or disquiet conscience, thus far of an unholy tendernesse, which cannot stand with a good conscience, Now followes an holy tendernesse which suits well with conscience and keeps us and our consciences at peace. Holy tendernesse is such a tendernesse as is wrought in us by the holy spirit of God,Holy Tendernesse. Sheff. whereby we are made very
watchfull against whatsoever may mo∣lest or disquet conscience. Such a tendernesse we find in Joseph, who when his Mistresse tempted him to lye with her, he presently refused it, and said unto her, behold my Master wotteth not what is in the house with me,Gen. 39.9. and he hath committed all to my hand, and there is none greater in his house then I, neither hath he kept any thing from me but thee, because thou art his wife, how then can I doe this great wickednesse and sinagainst God. As if he should have said unto her, your desire is very wicked and I may not yeild unto it, I may not act the least sin against God; how then may I commit so great a wickednesse as to defile my Masters bed? is it not A∣dulterie, a complicated sin that contains many evills within it. In so doing, 1. I should be a Theefe in stealing from him the best jewell in his house, name∣ly his wife. 2. Most injurious in mixing a bastard brood with his legitimate chil∣dren. 3. I should be sacrilegious in ta∣king my body which is the temple of the holy Ghost, and to turne it to carnall pol∣lution.
4. I should be most ungracious toward my God and most ingratefull to my kind Master. The like we find in Job, a man very fearefull to offend con∣science, he was a Nonsuch by Gods owne testimony,Job. 1.8. not any one like him upon the earth, soe perfect, soe upright, fearing God and eschewing evill. He was one that resolved not to give conscience the least offence, and that it should not reproach him all his dayes. Though men did reproach him as Eliphas, Bildad, Zophar, who charged him with hypos crisy, yet his conscience which was more privy to his waies, and could testify more truly,Job. 27.6. that should not reproach him, so tender was he. Such must be our tendernesse; the like was that in Ioseph, Job, and others: and that we may not be deceived, know how it shewes it selfe to God, to others, and to our selves. 1. To God, he that hath an holy ten∣dernesse in him will stand for God in what shall make for his truth, honour, and glory of his name, if he see any thing unto which God is intitled or
hath interest in, such a one will not see his God wronged in the least de∣gree, but he will stand upon an hoof with Moses, & upon an iota or title with Christ, he, will manifest his tendernesse in all things. As 1. to his precepts. 2.Exod. 10.26. To his Threats. 3. His Judgments. 4. His Mercies. Of these in their order:Math. 5.18 and First of the first, namely, Gods pre∣cepts.Cauti esto te. Vatab. in h. l. 1. He that hath this holy tender∣nesse in him will readily yeild unto Gods precepts, whatsoever he com∣mands he will do it circumspectly,conscien∣tia bona non solúm attendit quid prae∣cipiat De∣us, sed quid velit, quae sit vo∣luntas Dei bona, be∣neplacens et perfect. Bern. de virâ solita∣riâ ad fra∣tres de monte Di p. 10 20. i. e. warily and with attention, Exod. 23.13. Thus Moses is said to be faithfull in all his house, i. e. the Church of God in his time, and wherein God was pleased to dwell; Moses was in all things very exact to obey Gods precepts: Againe we find Josias very tender in the obser∣vation of whatsoever the Lord comman∣ded, soe that there was never a King be∣fore or after him that so turned unto the Lord with all his heart according to the law of Moses. The like may be said of Hezekiah and Nehemiah; the first
walked before God with an upright heart; the latter shewed himselfe a most zea∣lous man against sin and sinners. How tender was he for the honour of his God, in the observation of the Sabbath, in the maintenance of the Priests, and howsoever against the prophaners of the Sabbath, and such as oppressed their bre∣thren by usury. Read the 5th. of Nehe∣miah, and the 13th. of Nehemiah. 2. He that hath this holy tendernesse, will quickly yeild, melt, and break under any threat of Gods word or sence of Gods displeasure. If Josias doe but heare the book read, in which the threats and menaces of Gods wrath are recorded; he presently melts and thaws, he rents his cloathes,2 King. 22 19. mournes and weeps, shall the Lyon roare, and the Beasts not tremble? or a trumpet sound, and the peo∣ple not feare? Soe if God roare against a Nation and people, shall they not quake?Jer. 36.24. Let hard hearted Jehoiakim re∣maine obstinate, yet good Iosiah will rent his cloathes. 3. This holy tendernesse will make a man to mourne under Gos judgments:
He that melts under Gos threats, will surely cry out under his judgments: He∣zekiah if hee feele gods rod upon him,Js. 38.14. he will mourne like a Dove, and chatter like a Crane. Let God take Job by the neck anà shake him, and cause his Ar∣chers to compasse him about, i. e. many afflictions and troubles, it will make him to sow sackcloth upon his skin,Job. 16.12 15. and defile his horne in the dust, yea it will make his face foule with weeping, and cause the shaddow of death upon his eyelids, i. e. to wax dimme and darke as if they were dying, and puts upon him such a stamp of true sorrow, as it makes him to cry out, I abhorre my selfe in dust and ashes. But on the contrary it is neither threat, nor judgment, that workes upon the uncircumcised heart, he refuseth the pu∣nishment of his iniquity,Job. 36.23 and cryeth not when the Lord binds him, i. e. afflicteth him: but the more God afflicts, the har∣der he growes, and doth revolt more and more. Is. 1.5. 4. This holy tendernesse makes him humble under Gods mercies. The more mercifull that God is to him, the more
tender he is for God, he feareth God and his goodnesse. As Ice contracted with cold dissolves of it selfe under the warme raies and beames of the Sun, so doth his Soule melt and thaw under the sense of Gods favour,Ezra 9.14 like those in Ezra who having received a great deliverance from thier enimies, said one to another, seeing our God hath been so gracious, shall wee againe breake his commandes ments.Luk. 7.47. Thus in Mary Magdaline, we read how she stood behind Christ and wept, that she to wept and mourned for her sins, as that she washt Christs feet with her teares, and wiped them with the haire of her head, yea kissed his feet, and anointed them with oyntment: and why so? how comes this tendernesse upon her? what should cause it? truly, Christ his great mercy unto her, in pardoning her great and many sins; this is the te∣stimony which Christ gives of her, she loved much, because much was forgiven her. So that you see how holy tender∣nesse will yeild unto Gods mercies. 2. This holy tendernesse will shew it selfe to others; it will make a man ve∣ry
carefull not to offend others, it will give no offence to Jew nor Gentile, nor to the Church of God, i. e. no occasion of offence of scandall unto Jew or Pagan or Christian, neither within, nor yet without the Church.1 Cor. 10.32. As it was Pauls precept, so likewise his practice; who is offended (at least through my default) and I bvrne not, i. e.2 Cor. 11.29. burne with sor∣row and holy indignation and ardent zeale for the glory of God, and falvati∣on of those that are scandalized? Paul was a man alwaies for peace, and pres∣seth it upon others: As much as in you lyeth have peace with all men, but espe∣cially with the godly; as for himselfe his conscience was so tender, that he would neither say nor doe any thing, that might give offence to weake Bre∣thren, if eating of flesh would offend,1 Cor. 8.13. he resolves to eat no flesh while the world standeth. So it is with all such as are truly tender, if their meat, drink, ap∣parrell, if their haire, carriage, company, or any other thing, shall give an of∣fence unto their Brethren, they resolve with Paul to cate no more flesh, drinke no
more wine, weare no more long haire, keep no more such company, leave off all rather then give any offence or be a stumbling block unto their bre∣thren. And as this tendernesse appeares to all, soe especially unto such as stand in any neer relation unto them, as wife or child, and how tender was Joseph of his wives reputation and salvation, when she was with Child, and he knew not how it should be soe, and fearing the scandall that might come upon so gracious a woman, and loath she should be made a publick example,Math. 1.19. his resolution was to put her away privily, to leave her to the disposing of her friends and not to consummate the Marriage. The like tendernesse towards Children we find in Job, he fearing least in their feasting they had gone beyond their bounds,Job 1.5. and soe dishonoured God. He of∣ferd a burnt-offering for them unto God every morning. i. e. an offering of recon∣ciliation. which declared his religion toward God and care of his children. So Austin reports of his Mother Moni∣cha,
that she was so tender of the salva∣tion of her children, that if she heard that any one of them had dishonoured God, it wrought such an impression of griefe upon her soule, that it pained her as much as the new bearing of an∣other child. Thus you see how an holy tendernesse will shew it selfe to others. 3. How an holy Tendernesse appears to our selves. he that is tender indeed will not, displease his owne conscience, he resolves with David to sly all sin and sinners: I abhorre (saith he) every evill way, and I will not endure a wicked per∣son: such persons and such practices are very hatefull unto him; he can∣not brook sin, in any degree, great sins, little sins, apparent sins, or sins in appearance, he declines them all, he considers that remarkable speech of our Saviours, Luk. 16.15. That which is highly esteemed amongst men, is an abo∣mination in the sight of God. And there∣fore he dares not alwaies to adventure upon that which hath appearance of good, but brings it to the touch,1 Thes. 5.22. tries all things, and so holds fast (not what
seems good,) but What is good. lastly the render conscience will take heed of what he knowes to be lawfull, he dares not to do all that he may doe, least he should do what he ought not to doe. Con∣sider you that are Gamsters, merry come panions, fashion-mongers. and all flesh-pleasers, which are lovers of pleasure, more then lovers of God. I know you will stand upon your justification, and plead strongly for your dicing, drin∣king, carding, your long haire, your fantasticall fashions, and pot companions, though there be enough recorded in Gods book against them in all of these. Me thinks I heare you say there are ma∣ny great Schollers will maintaine the lawfulnesse and that it is condemned on∣ly by a company of strict lacea Puri∣tans, and men of meane parts and lear∣ning. Give me leave to speak the words of truth and sobernesse: you say cards, dice, drinking, and merry company are things lawfull;1 Cor. 6.12. but answer me, 1. are they expedient. 2. Doe they edify you. 3. Are they not brought under the power of these things, these practices. Alas
who sees not such as thus seek to please the flesh that they do displease God, their merry company makes them to distast the society of Saints; their dicing and drinking makes them to loath the hearing and reading of Gods word; yea Bible and the pack of Cards are like the Arke and Dagon, they will not stand together. Let me therefore advise you not to be too presumptuous upon the lawfulnesse of these, but consider ex∣pediency and edification, that all be done soe that God may have glory, and your selves may be edified more and more in Christ. If you look not to this, that which is lawfull in it selfe will be found unlawfull in you. You will soon be brought under their power & be cap∣tivated by what should be your ser∣vants. Remember therefore what on saith and that most truly, licitis perimus om∣nes, the Whole world is undone by lawfull things. i. e. lawfull things abused or misesteemed. Was it not so with the old world, when our Saviour speaketh of the destruction of the old world by wa∣ter,
what doth our Saviour charge u∣pon them as deserving this great and generall judgement? he mentions only things that were both lawfull and ne∣cessary: They did eate, hey dranke, they bought and sold, they built and plan∣ted, they married and were given in marriage: See you any unlawfulnesse in any of these? notwithstanding the giving themselves up to these things,Luk. 17.27. suffering such practices to call them off from God. God was highly displea∣sed and themselves fearfully perished. Oh therefore doe not presume upon the lawfulnesse of such things, but if you have this holy tendernesse in thee, examine all circumstances least God be offended, and thy conscience so woun∣ded, as that thou canst find no peace within, but in thy apprehension a very reprobate. One word more by way of comfort unto you that are thus tender,Use of Comfort. possible it is that though you desire tendernesse and to hold a firme peace with consci∣ence, yet your conscience may frowne upon you, and so you conclude against
your selfe that God is angry with you, according to that of the Apostle, 1. Joh 3.21. If our heart condemne us, God is greater then our heart, and knoweth all things, i.e. if our conscience condemne us, then God will condemne us much more, but your Conscience you say doth condemne you, and therefore your condition is very sad before God. To give you satisfaction in this, I must confesse it is most true, that when con∣science doth check, accuse, condemne, u∣pon right information, there is no hope of avoiding the sentence of God by any close carriage by which we may thinke to shift and hide our selves and our a∣ctions from his eyes. Yet this hinders not but that sometimes the conscience may condemne, where God doth not. For though it always judge for God, and on his side, yet it doth not alwaies judge with God, and according to his direction: but sometimes it may be that with Jobs friends it makes a lye or God: and yet not purposely, but through misinformation or prejudice, while it lookes on the worst and not on the
best: that is to say on the present and particular indisposition of the heart, and not on the sincere and generall disposi∣tion of it. Such for want of better light in that particular may feare where no feare is, but let me tell such they have a most gracious God, that takes no no∣tice of such failings, but pardoneth and passeth by the transgressions of his people, as if he saw is not.Mic. 7.18 Therefore let such tender ones support their spirits upon that sweet and gracious promise of Christ,Is. 42.3. not to breake the bruised reed, nor quench the smoaking flax, i.e. God will not deale harshly with such weake and feeable ones; but support and comfort them: for though their light be little and burne dimlie, yet the Lord will not extinguish it, but snuffe it and make it burne more cleerly. Consider when your Conscience doth accuse, whether it proceed from suffici∣ent light out of the word of God, or from wrong information. If from light received out of the word of God, her sentence is divine, and we are to regard it: but if otherwise upon wrong infor∣mation,
it is the error of conscience, and our remedy is by sending conscience to seek the warrant of her sentence out of the word of God. Againe if conscience present unto you sins which you committed many years agoe, and whereof you have repented. (For we are to know, that albeit after Repentance the Lord forgives the guil∣tinesse of sin, yet he will have the me∣mory thereof to remaine in that conser∣ving faculty of Conscience, called ; that it may both serve to humble us for the evill we have done, as also to preserve us from sin for the time to come. Againe if conscience accuse us for sin committed and not repented, it is Gods great mercy, who by inward troubles wakens us to judge our selves here, that we may not be condemned of the Lord hereafter. Now if any prophane Belialist shall at last say, what need all this adoe con∣cerning a good conscience: have not all men a good conscience? To such I answer, in some sence they
have a good conscience, namely a consci∣ence which is metaphysically and natu∣rally good: and so they may and yet go to hell. But the conscience that brings with it a continuall feast. and is accompanied with grace in this life, and glory in the life to come. It is more then metaphysi∣cally or naturally good. It is spiritually and supernaturally good. 1. A conscience purged and pacified by the bloud of Christ.Heb. 9.14 2. A conscience habitually exercised to inoffensivenesse both to God and man, Act. 24.16. 3. A conscience that desires to be com∣pleatly good in all things and alwaies, Act. 23.1. 4. A conscience that will approve it selfe good even in the sight of God, Act. 23.1. 1 Pet 3.21. 5. A conscience that will give testimo∣ny of thy hearts simplicity and godly sincerity, and sopport thee under grea∣test troubles and distresses. 2 Cor. 1.8, 9.10, 11, 12. Now if upon a serious search, thou
canst evidence such a conscience, I must tell thee thou hast obteined great fa∣vour from the Lord, and art enriched with so rich a Iewell, that far surpasseth all the wealth of the world, and can never be worne by the men of this world. Rejoice therefore in the Lord al∣waies, and acquaint thy Christian friends with it, that you may rejoice to∣gether, yea eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart for God hath accepted thee, Eccl. 9.7. The conclusion is this,Conclusi∣on. (Christians) Conclusi∣our Consciences are all obscured, corrup∣ted, and depraved through Adams fall. It is the part of every one to labour to reduce conscience to its prime purity a∣gaine. When a Compasse is out of frame we touch the needle of the Compasse with a Loadstone, that the stone may draw it right to the Pole againe: So let our minds be touched with the Load∣stone of the Spirit of grace, that they may come back to the Lord as to the Pole, and quiet themselves in Christ as their true, sole, and perfect Saviour. Let this be your daiely prayer unto
God, and constant endeavour, who only can sanctify us throughout in spirit, soule and body; who can make every part and member of our bodies, with eve∣ry power and faculty of our soules, wea∣pons of Righteousnesse to doe him ser∣vice. Now unto him that is able to make you to stand upright before him, and to keep you from falling,Jud. 24.25. and to present you faultlesse before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, to the only Wise God our Saviour be Glory and Majesty, Do∣minion and Power, now and for ever, Amen. April: 5th. 1656. FINIS.
