W2573 17165827 106109
monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION For a General FAST. Marie R. THeir Majesties taking into most serious Consideration the great War, in which Their Majesties (together with most of the Princes and States of Europe) are engaged, against the French King; And that upon the Success thereof the common Safety of this Realm doth, under God, wholly depend; And putting Their Trust in Almighty God, that he will vouchsafe a special Blessing on Their Majesties Righteous Vndertaking, and thereby consum∣mate the Deliverance of these Kingdoms: Have thought fit to Ap∣point, and do, by and with the Advice of Their Privy Council, hereby Appoint and Command a General and Publick Fast and Humiliation, to be Observed throughout this Realm of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, in most Devout and Solemn manner, for Supplicating Almighty God for Pardon of our Sins, and Imploring his Blessing and Protection in the Preservation of Their Majesties Sacred Persons, and Prosperity of Their Arms both at Land and Sea, to be Religiously Kept and Observed on Wednesday the Nine and twentieth Day of this Instant April, and from thenceforth on the Third Wednesday of every Month during the present War. And for the more orderly Solemnizing of the said several Fast-Days, Their Majesties have gi∣ven Directions to the Right Reverend the Bishops of this Kingdom to Compose a Form of Prayer suitable to this Occasion, to be Used in all Churches and Chappels, and other Places of Publick Worship; And have given Charge for the Dispersing thereof through their several Diocesses in the whole Kingdom. And Their Majesties do most expresly Charge and Com∣mand, That the said Fastings and Prayers be Soberly, Reverently and Decently Performed by all Their Loving Subjects, as they tender the Favour of Almighty God, and upon pain of such Punishments, as Their Majesties can justly Inflict upon all such as shall Contemn or Ne∣glect so Religious a Work. Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Ninth Day of April, 1691. In the Third Year of Our Reign. God save King William and Queen Mary. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesties. M DC XCI.
