W2604 17187311 106123
monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION, For the Apprehending of Sir James Montgomery; Charles Mackallough, and Thomas Smith. WILLIAM R. WHereas Sir James Montgomery being in Custody for High Treason, did upon Tuesday night last make his Escape, by the Help and Assistance of Charles Mackallough and Thomas Smith, and all the said Persons, do Absent and Ab∣scond themselves, flying from Iustice; We have therefore thought fit, by the Advice of Our Privy Council, to Issue this Our Royal Proclamation, and do hereby Require and Command all Our Loving Subjects whatsoever, to Discover, Take and Apprehend the said Sir James Montgomery (being a Little Thin Man about Fourty years of Age, usually wearing a Brown Periwig, and looks very pale and wasted with Sickness) and the said Charles Mackallough (being about Two and thirty years of Age, a Slender Little Man, wearing his own Hair, being of a Dark Brown Colour and Lank, his Eyes Gray, and Eye-brows Brown, he speaks thick, and with a broad Scotch Ac∣cent, thin Visaged and of an indifferent ruddy Complexion, and hath a small rising Ridge on his Nose) and also the said Thomas Smith (who is about Fourty years of Age, a middle sized Man, his Hair Short and Black and a little Curling, his Eye-brows Black, and hath a thin pale Face, with a small Scar on his Right Cheek) and such of them as shall be Apprehended to carry before the next Iustice of Peace, or Chief Magistrate of City or Town Corporate; whom We do hereby Require to Commit them to the next Goal, there to Remain, until they shall be thence Delivered by due Course of Law. And We do hereby Require the said Iustice or Chief Magistrate, immediately to give Notice there∣of to Vs or Our Council. And We do hereby Promise, that whosoever shall Discover and Apprehend the said Sir James Montgomery, Charles Mackallough and Thomas Smith, or any of them, shall Have and Re∣ceive the Rewards following, That is to say, For the said Sir James Montgomery the Sum of Five hundred Pounds, and for each of the said other Two Persons the Sum of One hundred Pounds. And We do here∣by Authorize and Require Our present Commissioners of Our Treasury, and Our High Treasurer and Commissioners of Our Treasury for the time being, to make Payment of the said Sums accordingly. And We do hereby Publish and Declare, That if any Person or Persons, after this Our Royal Proclama∣tion, shall directly or indirectly, Conceal Harbour, Retain, Keep or Maintain any of the said Offenders, or shall Contrive or Connive at any Means, whereby they or any of them may Escape from being Taken or Arrested, such Person or Persons shall be Prosecuted with the utmost Severity of Law. And We do here∣by Declare, that in Case the said Charles Mackallough and Thomas Smith, or either of them, shall Discover and Apprehend the said Sir James Montgomery, so that he shall be brought before Our Chief Iustice of the Kings Bench, or some other of the Iudges of the said Court, or Iustice of Peace, or Chief Magistrate of Ci∣ty or Corporation, such of them so Discovering and Apprehending the said Sir James Montgomery, shall not only Have and Receive Our Gracious Pardon for his or their Offence aforesaid, but shall also Have and Receive the said Reward of Five hundred Pounds before Promised for the Apprehension of the said Sir James Montgomery. Given at Our Court at Whitehall, this Eighteenth Day of January, 1693/4. In the Fifth Year of Our Reign. God save King William and Queen Mary. London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceas'd, Printers to the King and Queens Most Excellent Majesties. 1693/4.
