W2720 12498436 62597
THE Protestant's Answer TO THE Catholick Letter TO THE SEEKER: OR, A VINDICATION OF THE PROTESTANT's ANSWER, To the SEEKER's Request. IMPRIMATUR, Liber cui Titulus, [The Protestant's Answer to the Ca∣tholick Letter to the Seeker, &c.] H. Maurice RR. in Christo P. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. à Sacris. Maii 22. 1688. LONDON, Printed and are to be Sold by Randal Taylor, near Stationers-Hall, M.DCLXXXVIII.
THE CONTENTS. THE matter in debate stated p. 2. The Sum of the Protestant Answer p. 4. Transubstantiation confest by many of the Church of Rome not to be proved by Scripture, pag. 5. Joh. 6. 48. consider'd, p. 6. Not for Transubstantiation, by the confession of several in the Church of Rome, Ibid. It's also proved by several Arguments. As that place had no special reference to the Sacrament, p. 7. Eating the Flesh then spoken of, may be out of the Sacra∣ment as well as in it, Ibid. Proved to concern those present as well as others. p. 8. The sense of eating the Flesh of Christ proved to be Figu∣rative, p. 10. Of Figurative Speeches, p. 12. Particularly here, p. 13, &c. Of Christ's being a Vine, &c. p. 17. The words, This is my Body, considered, p. 18. Of the word This, p. 22. Of Christ's being in the Sacrament after a Spiritual man∣ner, Ibid. The Texts produced by Protestants for it, p. 24. 1. The Letter of Scripture for the Protestant Doctrine, p. 26. (1.) Where it's call'd Bread, and the Fruit of the Vine.
(2.) The Body of Christ had the Natural properties of a Body, p. 29. (3.) The Body of Christ is in Heaven, and circumscri∣bed, p. 32. (4.) That Christ's Body is Glorified, and so not a Sa∣crifice, p. 33. 2. The words which are Figurative, are for us, such are these, This is my Body, Ibid.
THE PROTESTANT's ANSWER TO THE CATHOLICK LETTER TO THE SEEKER, &c. HEre's a Catholick Letter to the Seeker, or a Reply to the Protestant Answer to the Seeker. But what's become of the Seeker himself, for this four Months past? What of the Declaration he was in the Conclusion to make for the Catholick Faith of Rome,Cath. Letter to a Seeker, p. 1. and 34. which we are now told of? That according to the method, it seems agreed on, he may, after Sentence pass'd in this case, proceed to the Infallibility of the Church, or other Points of Faith in difference betwixt them and the Church of England; as our Author intimates there a little too early. The Seeker had indeed given reason enough to judg on which side he was to be satisfied: That tho seemingly he was sent out like the Dove, to try where he might find rest for the Sole of his Foot, yet we may see beforehand, what was the Ark he was to return to; and that they were as sure of him, as they are of a Convert before they offer a Conference. Where's now the Re∣solution he was to come to? Has the Protestant Answer to the Seekers Request, broke these Measures, and forced them to think of another Expedient? Our Author cannot altogether dissemble it. It seems the Seeker was to put certain Ties upon his Answer∣ers, to which his Friend on the side of the Church of Rome
submitted, and it was humbly conceived the Protestant Answerer would have done so too, as our Author signifies, p. 1. But he being a lover of Liberty more than Courtship; and of Truth, and Rea∣son more than both, took upon himself, as its thought, too much Authority, when together with his Answer to the Seekers Request, he wrote a Reply to the Catholick Answer to the Seekers Request. This is a course our Author complains of, and perhaps he has some reason for it. But what has he to accuse the Protestant Answerer of? That he has evaded the Question. As how? Of this he gives a threefold Instance. 1. That he has used the Word Transubstantiation. Of this our Author thus complains, p. 2. and 5. I do not find the word Tran∣substantiation, so much as mentioned in either your Request, or my Answer. Wherefore, how sincere the Gentleman has been in this parti∣cular, let the World judg. A material Point! who would not think now, that the word Transubstantiation was abominated by him, and as little used in their Church, as it is in ours? It's fit therefore to know our Authors mind in it. Of this he saith, It's a word devised by the Church to express the Conversion that's made in the Sacrauent,—and which mysterious change the Holy Catholick [the Roman] Church doth properly call Transubstantiation, p. 2, and 5. Now, where is the fault? Where the insincerity? The insinceri∣ty they may take to themselves; but the fault is, that when they thought by the use of the Phrase, Real Presence, common to both them and us, and by the forbearance of the word Transubstan∣tiation, which is peculiar to themselves, that they might have imposed upon the unwary Reader, the Protestant Answerer used the word Transubstantiation for their Real Presence, and so their de∣sign is discover'd, and in part defeated. 2. He saith, The Protestant Answerer evaded the Question, when instead of speaking to the Real Presence, he betook himself to Tran∣substantiation, p. 2. Now, who would not think upon this charge, that his Real Presence and Transubstantiation, are as incon∣sistent as Truth and Falshood? Here indeed he has put a Questi∣on, which I confess I should have been ready to ask; What's this to the purpose? Is not the Real Presence and Transubstantiation all as one? p. 5. And I should be as ready to ask again, If they are all as one, how was the Question evaded, when instead of speaking to the Real Presence, the Answerer betook himself to Tran∣substantiation?
In this, he thus acutely Answers. No truly, they are not all as one, as you may think. For there is a great deal of difference betwixt a Man, and the Name by which he is distinguished.— 'Tis one thing to prove the Real Presence, and being of Christs Body and Blood in the Sacrament; and another to shew, why this change is by the Church call'd Transubstantiation; tho whoever believes the one, can't in Truth deny the other. That is, the Real Presence and Tran∣substantiation, are not all as one, because they are all as one: And the Answerer has evaded the Question, by using the one for the other, because whoever believes the one, can't in Truth deny the other. 3. But he has not yet concluded the Charge. For saith he, Whereas the Controversy is not about the word, the Answerer has altogether banter'd at the word Transubstantiation, and not spoken to the Substance, p. 5. So before, The Arians with as much reason might have objected against the word Consubstantial (which was devised against them) as the Protestant Answerer has done, where p. 3. he says, That it's enough for them to shew that Transubstantiation is not taught in Scripture, tho the Being of Christs Body and Blood in the Sacrament is,—p. 2. If our Author's skill in reasoning be no better than it appears to be in Ecclesiastical History, his Adversary has no great reason to fear him. That the word Consubstantial was used against the Arians, I acknowledg; but that it was devised against them (as our Author saith) is spoken at adventure. For the contrary is evident that it was in use long before in the Christian Church.Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 8. So saith Eusebius, We have known certain Learned and Famous Bishops and Writers among the Ancients, who reasoning upon the Divinity of the Father and Son, have used the word Consubstantial, or . But to return to the Charge; where is this Controversy managed in the Answer about this unscriptural word Transubstantiation, which the Protestant Answerer altogether banter'd at? He has found it out in somewhat that is not there; I shall here set down the Words of the Answer, with his, and let's see how they agree, Cath. Letter, p. 2. Protestant Answerer, p. 3. He [the Protestant Answer∣er] says, That 'tis enough for them to shew that Transubstan∣tiation is not taught in Scrip∣ture, tho the Being of Christs
Body and Blood in the Sacrament is. 'Tis enough for us to shew, that Transubstantiation is not taught in Scripture, and that those that pretend 'tis there, cannot shew it; nay, that the
literal Sense concludes not for it; and that our notion of the Real Presence, is agreeable to it. Where this Author is guilty of a double Perversion. First, That he translates what is spoken of Transubstantiation in the no∣tion, to the Word (when there is not a Syllable that looks, that way) and then, that he would represent the Real Presence in the Protestant, that is a spiritual, Sense, to be an acknowledg∣ment of the Being of Christs Body and Blood in the Sacrament, in their way. But after our Author has for some Pages entertain'd himself in managing this imaginary dispute against his Adversary, yet in Con∣futation of himself he finds out another sort of matter that he is obliged to consider, and if he can, to confute. The Protestant Answer consists of two Parts. In the first, are considered the Texts produced in the Catho∣lick Answer to the Seeker, to prove their Real Presence, which I hope I may now call Transubstantiation. In the second, There is given a Catalogue of such Texts, as maintain the Protestant Doctrine of Christs Spiritual Presence, and in Confutation of the Corporal Presence held in the Church of Rome. And now let us view our Author's Undertaking, and see how he has quitted himself in both of these. PART I. Sect. 1 WE are to consider in the first place,Part. 1. Sect. 1. how our Author has Vindicated his own Answer to the Seekers Request, and what Reply there is made to the Objections and Arguments di∣rected against his pretended Proofs from Scripture. In the entrance upon this matter, the Protestant Answerer sug∣gested, that the Seeker had put an unreasonable Task upon his Catholick Priests, to prove their Real Presence, or Transubstantiation, by the express Text, and plain Word of God; since Persons of the greatest Note; for Quality and Learning, in their Church, have freely given it up, and granted it to be a vain attempt. Such
as Scotus and Biel, among the Schoolmen, and the Cardinals, Alliaco, Fisher, Cajetan and Bellarmin. What saith our Author to this? First, saith he, Supposing it was so as these Authors say, That there is not one place of Scripture so express, that without the Determination of the Church, it would evidently compel a Man to receive Transubstantiation.—Yet the same might as well be said of the Consubstantiality of the Son, p. 3. Will our Author venture to say, there is no more from Scripture to prove the Consub∣stantiality of the Son, than there is to prove Transubstantiation? Or hath he any heart to say it, after the publishing the Doctrine of the Trinity and Transubstantiation compared, and as long as that Book lies unanswered? But let that be as it will. What, saith he, is this to the Being, or not Being of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament? Had be produced Scotus, Bellarmin, &c. to disprove the Real Presence, it had been something, tho not to your purpose. For the Request was to satisfie you by Scripture only, and not by citing our Modern Divines, &c. but by the express Text, &c. But I think it was to the purpose to shew that some of the most Eminent in their Church declare it is not to be proved in that way, and I think to declare it cannot be proved, is little better than to dis∣prove it. At last our Author is content to yield up Scotus, one of his Modern Divines, and Bellarmin; and he adds, if what they have said in that matter, will do the Gentleman a kindness, he shall have it not only from them, but all the Faithful. If so, I fear our Author then will be left alone; for if all the Faithful are of the same mind with Scotus and Bellarmin; then his Undertaking to prove Transubstantiation by the express Texts of Scripture, will be a fruit∣less Attempt. But we go too far, for that's to be understood with a reserve, viz. Scripture without the Determination of the Church is not so express, &c. This premised, our Author cheerful∣ly proceeds, That altho the Scripture were never so plain, we would yet submit to the Determination of the Church, for the true Sense and Meaning thereof. So that tho he pleads Scripture, and would fain find out somewhat that looks like an express Text; yet he doth it not, nor would be understood, that he thereby renounced the Determination of the Church. For whether the Scripture be plain for it or not, is not the Foot this matter rests upon; and altho it were never so plain, yet the Church is to give it the true
meaning; and whatever meaning the Church gives it, that is the true meaning; and so, if the Church had determined against Tran∣substantiation, as it has determined for it, there would have been still express Texts, and the case had been alike resolved. SECT. II. AT last we are come to the main seat of the Controversie,Sect. 2. p. 6. The Catholick Answerer had produced two places of Scrip∣ture as his plain Texts for Transubstantiation; the first is, Joh. 6. 48. Here the Protestant Answerer interposed, and first directed the Seeker, where he might find about thirty Writers of the Roman Church, who reject that Text as not serving to our Author's purpose, Pag. 4. and then proceeds to shew for what reasons they and we do so reject it. Arg. 1. As it had no special reference to the Sacrament; and that for two Reasons: 1. Because this Discourse of our Saviour was delivered above a year before, ver. 4. To this first our Author replies, That the fourth Verse, [The Passover, a Feast of the Jews, was nigh] is no Rule to shew the Sacrament was not instituted above a year after. For, saith he, that this word Nigh should signifie above a year after, is such a Figure as never was: And so gravely repairs to his Concordance to prove the word Nigh is not by express and plain Scripture to be taken for above a year after. Certainly there was ne∣ver more need of express and plain Scripture, when men cannot look a Chapter or two before them. For would any one that was con∣versant in the Gospels, think that St. John here, and St. Luke 22. 1. must needs speak of the same Passover, because St. Luke hath the same word, Now the Feast of unleavened bread drew nigh, which is call'd the Passover. I see our Author wants here a little informa∣tion. Let him therefore turn to Chap. 7. v. 2, & 14. and he will find a Feast of Tabernacles; and go on to Chap. 13. 1. and he will find another Passover. Now I hope I need not acquaint him that these two Feasts of the Tabernacles and Passover were kept in different Months, and that the same Passover could not be be∣fore and after the Feast of Tabernacles; and consequently, it must be a year betwixt the Passover, Joh. 6. 4. and that Joh. 13. 1. and as much above a year betwixt our Saviour's Discourse, Joh. 6. and the Passover, as that was before the approaching Passover that was said to be Nigh.
2. The Protestant Answerer proceeded to shew that this Dis∣course of our Saviour had no special reference to the Sacrament, because the eating the Flesh, and drinking the Blood here spoken of, might be out of the Sacrament as well as in it, and at that present as well as a year after. This he proved from Vers. 53, 54, 56, 57. In all which the present time is still spoken of, Except ye eat. He that eat∣eth. —My flesh is meat. To this our Author replies: To say, That the flesh of Christ may be eaten out of the Sacra∣ment, and even before it was instituted, &c. is indeed such a Figure, as none but himself can unriddle, p. 8. I answer, But to say (as he doth) that Christ would give us bread to eat in the Sacrament, which should be the very same flesh which he would, and afterwards did give for the life of the world, that is, that he should give it before it was given, is a Figure I doubt our Au∣thor himself cannot unriddle; who saith again, that before he gave it, 'twas impossible for them to eat it; but he gave it not, till he gave it on the Cross. (2) But to say that the Flesh of Christ here spoken of (an Expo∣sition our Author left out) might be eaten out of the Sacrament, as well as in it, is no Riddle, if it be true. And it is true if our Saviour spoke here of his Flesh that might be, and was then to be eaten, at the same time as he spoke it, by all those that were then his present Auditors; as the Answerer proved from verses 53, 54, &c. To this our Author opposes vers. 5. The Bread which I will give is my flesh, &c. Where, saith he, Christ promised, and told them be∣fore that be would (in the Future Tense) give them bread to eat, which should be the very same flesh, which he would, and afterwards did, give for the life of the world. Whence he infers, If the bread which he in the Sacrament gives us to eat, saying, Take, Eat, This is my Body, be not that Bread which he promised he would give us to eat, pray ask your Protestant Answerer, where, when, and how did Christ give us Bread to eat, which should be his flesh, if this be not? Pag. 7. What is a little out of its place, in our Author, I have here laid toge∣ther, that I may give it its full force: To this I answer: 1. I readily own with our Author, that the words, I will give, contain a promise, but then we differ about the time when they were fulfilled. He saith, they refer to his last Supper, when he took
Bread, &c. under the Forms of Bread and Wine. But now if I am examined upon the Where, the When, and the How, I should re∣fer it to the Cross; and that because of the following words, The Bread which I will give is my Flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. For he gave not his Flesh for the life of the world in the Sacrament▪ but after the institution of that, on the Cross; not under the Forms of Bread and Wine, but in his own proper Form, and visible to the Spectators. The reason of his mistake seems to be, that he reads the Future Tense after this manner, our Saviour told them that he would give them Bread to eat, which should be his Flesh. Where he is guilty of two over-sights. First, that he applies that to the Future which is spoken of the Present, for he reads it should be his Flesh, as if it was first Bread, and then was to be Flesh, to put the better colour upon their Doctrine of Transubstantiation; whereas our Saviour saith, the Bread is my Flesh, which is directly against it; and if it signifies any thing of that nature, would rather prove that his Flesh should be Bread. For it's not said, the Bread which I will give shall be my Flesh, but rather that which is my Flesh, I will give to be Bread. 2. He alters the Terms of the Text, for the words are, Which I will give for the life of the world; and he reads them, Which I will give them to Eat: as if the promise refer'd only to the Bread which they should eat; and not to the Flesh which was to be given for the world. So that we see what's like to become of his Question, he prays his Seeker to ask his Protestant Answerer, viz. Where, When and How did Christ give us Bread to eat which should be his Flesh, if this be it not in the Sacrament? For he must frame his Question anew, if he would have it to the purpose; and must read St. John again (notwithstanding what he saith he has done on this occasion, Pag 8.) and whatever he found before, I am apt to think after this little light given to him, he will not find those words in this Chapter, He would give them Bread to eat, which should be his Flesh. And if he reads the Protestant Answer again, he will find no occasion for those words, Where, &c. if this be it not? For the Answerer did not except the Sacrament, and say the eating the Flesh, and drinking the Blood here spo∣ken of, could not be in the Sacrament, but that it might be out of the Sacrament as well as in it; intimating thereby that it was not to be understood in a sense peculiar to the Sacrament, but in a sense common to that and other Offices of Religion; and
that eating and drinking were (as he shew'd) but other words for coming and believing. 3. But our Author has a further reserve, and offers at a pecu∣liar Exposition of those Phrases, I suppose it's (in his phrase. p. 2.) his private meaning  v. 53, &c. Except ye eat,—he that eateth. Not, saith he, that he did then give, or that they did then eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood, which they could not do before he took it, blessed it, brake it, and gave it. For at that time when he spake this, he only told them he would give it, and the Eve before his Passion, he performed it. And from that time I suppose the Obligation bears force, ver. 53. Ex∣cept ye eat, &c. I will suppose that the Present doth not here exclude the Fu∣ture, and that he that eateth my Flesh, and drinketh my Blood hath Eternal life, will always hold true, and what all ages as well as those then present would partake of; but methinks it's very hard to make the present exclude it self, and to tell us that they did not, and could not then eat the Flesh of Christ, when our Savi∣our saith they might and ought, as is evident from what follows. Let us go to the thing to be eaten, and it's represented in the Present Tense, v. 51. This is the Bread. v. 51. I am the Bread. v. 52. Is my Flesh. v. 55. My Flesh is meat. Let us go to the act, and in correspondence to the object, it's also in the present, v. 51. If any man eat. Thus the Jews un∣derstood it, v. 52. How can this man give us his Flesh to eat? And accordingly our Saviour answers, v. 53. Except ye eat, &c. ye have no life in you. He speaks it to those present, ye; and then applies it universally, v. 54. Whoso eateth my Flesh, &c. Let us go to the thing signified by Eating and Drinking, and it's after the same manner, v. 35. He that cometh, and he that believeth, v. 38, 40, 45, 47. I shall conclude this with what was said in the Protestant An∣swer. If Christ's Flesh here spoken of, might be eaten, and his Blood drank out of the Sacrament, then it could not here be understood of that Flesh and Blood which our Author saith the Bread and Wine are converted into in the Sacrament; nor, I may add, of carnal eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood. Our Author resents this ill, for he saith, As to his carnal ea∣ting, we beg his pardon, if he means as we eat Beef, and other Meats. For that we truly and really receive the Body and Blood of Christ (to use his own words) after an Heavenly and Spiritual manner; We should
agree, did we not differ in this, that they receive it in Figure and Fan∣cy only, and we receive it in Substance and Truth, Pag. 8. Here I acknowledg I intended no hurt in the world, but thought I had exprest my self innocently enough. For when I had read in the Catholick Answer, that in the▪ Eucharist is Truly, Really, and Substantially contained under the Forms of Bread and Wine, the True Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus in the very Substance wherein he was born of the Virgin, and wherein he lived and died for us, with this difference only, that he was visible to the eye of Flesh then, and invisible to the same now. I thought the word carnal was expressive of the thing, and indeed I find no great reason to alter it: For, 1. had I said Metaphorically and Figuratively, that by no means would suit what is corporal. And besides, I learn too from our Author, Pag. 17. that that is a deceitful, fictious manner. 2. Had I said corporal, I see little distance betwixt that and carnal; for as Body and Flesh is all one, so is corporal and carnal. 3. Had I chosen the word Spiritual, that's a kind of contradiction, if ap∣plied to a Body; for Spiritual eating of a Body is little better than bodily eating of a spirit. And when a Real Presence by Faith would not content them, if we deny a Real Presence by sense, Seeker, Pag. 6. I had as much reason to believe a Spiritual eating would be no more allowed than a Spiritual Presence. 4. Had I express'd it by Heavenly, when it was somewhat eaten and drank corporally, and that what we took with the mouth was the very Body of Christ, it could not be sufficiently expressive of it. It was further urged, Arg. 2. Upon mature Consideration of the whole, it ap∣pear'd to the Protestant Answerer, that the sense of Eating the Flesh of Christ in this place must be Figurative, and signifies no other than coming to Christ, and Believing in him; which sure is out of the Sacrament, as well as in it. And this indeed he proved from the promiscuous use of the words in that Chapter; but this our Author conceals from his Reader, that he might not too apparently contradict what he had said, Pag. 2. That he says (by no Authority but his own) that the sense of Eating the Flesh, must be Figurative; and right or wrong they are Figurative, upon his own bare word, without Scripture. But as the Protestant Answerer argued from the words and phrases of the Chapter, so from the current of our Saviour's
Discourse, that it could not be properly and literally under∣stood. (1.) Because then all that properly Eat the Flesh of Christ, would according to our Saviour's promise, v. 54. Have Eternal Life; Whoso Eateth, &c. To this our Author answers, Very truel but with a qualification that recalls what he had granted. For it's to be understood, saith he, of Worthy Receivers. But this is by no means consistent with our Saviour's Reasoning, which if the Flesh to be eat, and the Eating of it were to be understood properly, will necessari∣ly infer the Salvation of all such as thus Eat after this manner; as well unworthy as worthy. Since all that Eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood, in the sense there meant, are the persons to whom Eternal Life is promised; but if properly Eating his Flesh be the sense of our Saviour's Expressions there us'd, then we know what follows. 2. The Protestant Answerer urged further, That if the words Eating the Flesh, and Drinking the Blood, be properly to be under∣stood, then the Receiving the Sacrament in both Kinds will be necessary to Salvation; it being affirmed, v. 53. Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of man, and drink his Blood, ye have no life in you; and he shewed that for this reason, amongst others, Cardinal Cajetan would not admit that this Discourse of our Saviour be∣long'd to the Eucharist. What saith our Author to this? Truly nothing. As to this, saith he, of both kinds, it doth not properly relate either to your request, or my Answer. A Reply that may be made in any case. He goes on, And besides, I do not see where the necessity lies of de∣fining the Sacrament in both Kinds to one that believes▪ it in neither. That is, as much as to say, I beg his pardon, I will not vouch∣safe an Answer to such an one as he is; but however, methinks he might have said somewhat, if it had been only for the satis∣faction of the distressed Seeker, to whom he writes his Letter; to let him see that there is no consequence in this Argument. It puzled Cardinal Cajetan, a man of sense and sagacity; and surely the Seeker may then be led away by the error of it, and it may put off his Declaration for the Catholick Faith four Months longer. But there is no danger, it was not necessary to one that doth not believe; but he declares he is ready to satisfie his Seeker, that is, one that doth believe, as we may conceive.
I know not whether this may not have put our Author a little out of humour, for he cannot but abhor, he saith, to see men mould Gods Word into what Form they please, and make every thing a Figure, that doth not square with their Fancy. Is it because our Saviour spake some things by way of Parable, that all he said was such? Or that he never spake otherwise? How comes it that mean Ca∣pacities are (by the Church of St. Martin's) left to themselves, to judg of the true sense of Scripture, according to D. T. who tells you in his True Account of a Conference, That a man after using all Chri∣stian Means, and the help of all Ministerial Guides possible, must at last judg for himself.—A special Assertion indeed! Which if true, what need of Teachers? &c. Pag. 10▪ But how doth he mould the Word of God into what Form he pleases, that understands that Figuratively which was Figura∣tively spoken? And to whom doth our Author speak when he thus Expostulates, Is it because our Saviour spake some things by way of Parable, that all he said was such? Had he no other way to get clear of his Adversary, but to fix this upon him? And had he no other way to meet with those that plead for the perspi∣cuity of Scripture, but to tell the world, that they own our Saviour never spake otherwise than in Parables? How mean and ri∣diculous is this? But however this was a fair occasion as he thought to make a special Remarque upon the Doctrine taught by the Church of St. Martin's. Now here the Protestant Answerer is more immediately concerned as a Parishioner (though one of the Mean Capacities there taught) and would fain see how our Author would manage himself in a debate upon that Argu∣ment; especially when after his Exclamation against it, he him∣self is forced to acknowledg the reasonableness of it. For if a man must not at last judg for himself; or if so, that there will be no need of Teachers; then it's in vain to send Answers and Let∣ters to a Seeker, and to propose Texts to his Examination: And yet in this special way doth our Author proceed from the begin∣ning to the end of his Letter. He leaves it to his Seeker to pass sentence upon what has been said by either party, Pag. 1. Whether, saith he, this hath any reference, be you the Judg. Pag. 7, 13. He de∣sires him to consult the words, and see whether those Texts do imply, &c. Pag. 8. Seriously to distinguish and peruse the Texts, Pag. 33. So that it seems this special Assertion ought to be one of his own, who teaches his Seeker so far, after the same way as mean Capa∣cities are taught by the Church at St. Martin's.
To come to a close of this Argument; the Protestant Answerer the better to represent his Adversaries weakness in decrying Fi∣gures and Parables, shewed him how this Discourse of our Saviour so abounded in them, that there were no less than twenty expressi∣ons of that kind in it; and accordingly drew out several of them for our Author to try his skill upon, and to resolve them with∣out a Figure, Pag. 8. First, saith he, Let the Catholick Answerer tell me without a Figure, what is that meat which endures to Everlast∣ing Life? Here our Author labours hard to prove that the meat in v. 27. is the Bread and Flesh, v. 51. and concludes, which Flesh, without a Figure, I humbly conceive is that meat which endureth unto Everlasting Life. But I as humbly conceive he has not reach'd the point; for granting the Meat, the Bread, and the Flesh to be one and the same, yet how is the Flesh of Christ Bread and Meat without a Metaphor, when it's only spiritually and not Corporally Eaten, as he saith, and when neither capable of digestion, nor we of nourishment by it? Again, if this be Eaten only in the Sacrament, how can it under the Form of Bread endure to Everlasting Life, or how can it be Meat that thus en∣dures, when it is not to be Eaten in Heaven, and all Sacraments and Institutions cease? The other Questions were. How the Son was sealed by the Fa∣ther? How Jesus is Bread, and the Bread that came down from Hea∣ven? How the Bread and the Flesh of Christ could be the same? v. 57. And if the same, how it could come from Heaven, when he was of the Seed of David, according to the Flesh? How one of his Church can talk of a literal Sense of, [except ye drink his Blood], which denies the Cup to the Laity? To all these our Author returns a general Answer, As to his, How the Son was sealed by the Father, and the rest of his How's? they are such Jewish Expressions, as that all Christian pretenders ought to be ashamed of them. So the Jews said, v. 52. How can this man give us his Flesh to eat? So Jewish it is to question God, how he could do it? How this? How that? And so he runs on to the Creation, and Incarnation, &c. I am a little at a loss here, to what cause our Authors mistake is to be assign'd? Surely he could not but understand that the How relates not to the manner, How these things be? But, how these things could be thus applied to our Saviour without a Figure? I am afraid that he saw the difficul∣ty, and so slipt away from it; for else, why should he answer
directly to the first Query, which would more plausibly bear it; and indirectly and fraudulently to the rest? And yet, as if he had to a Demonstration proved what he had undertaken, and effectually confuted his Adversary, he will still have the words express and plain, without a Figure. For thus he concludes, p. 11. If these express and plain words of Christ be a Figure, where he says as plain, as plain can be, that he would give us Bread to eat, which should be his Flesh, [but which I have shewed be∣fore, he did not say.] I say, if these words are Figurative, and must not be properly understood, I see no Reasen, why the whole Bible should not be a Figure too. For if ever Christ was plain in any thing, 'twas in this; especially in a Point, wherein there was never more occasion to expound, if a Figure, than when the Jews (to whom he came) mur∣mured and said, How can this man give us his Flesh to eat? And when some of the Disciples said it was an hard saying, and thereupon walked no more with him. He that, in cases of less moment always explain'd his Parables, should yet be Dark and Figurative in this of that Importance, and which he well foresaw, occasions our differences at this day; it would be contrary to his Wisdom and Goodness. But so far was Christ from this, that he confirms it, v. 53. With a verily, verily, except ye eat the Flesh, &c. I have transcribed this the more at large, because it contains some things very peculiar, and is indeed the utmost force of what he hath for his Defence. I Answer to this. 1. In General, it's manifest, That our Saviour is not literally plain; since it's acknowledg'd that his Discourse is Figu∣rative, from ver. 32. to ver. 51. And is it not strange, that when he had so long discours'd after that manner, that yet in one verse, he should mean literally, and which if literally un∣derstood, would be so manifest a Contradiction to the Sense and Reason of Mankind, that if he had literally said he was Bread, he could not have more astonished them, than when he said, ex∣cept ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, &c. if properly and lite∣rally to be understood. 2. Whereas he saith our Saviour always explain'd his Para∣bles; that is too largely spoken. For even those, which he chuses out of Mark 3. 10, 13, 31, were not expounded to the Multi∣tude; and if his Argument signify any thing, must therefore be
properly understood by them. But why did not he propound the case in Dispute, and give us a like instance in figurative and metaphorical Expressions; Such as our Saviour uses in this Chapter? For, are Sealing, Hungring, &c. to be understood properly, because it's not said, that they are to be understood Figu∣ratively▪ Nay, are eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, to be understood properly? Then certainly, the Capernaits were in the right, that thought our Saviour spoke of carnal Eating, which yet our Author will not allow. 3. He saith, There was never more occasion to expound, if a Figure, than when the Jews murmured, and some of his Disciples went away; and what he saw, occasions our Differences. (1.) As for the murmuring of the Jews, there was no such occasion for our Saviour's expounding it; For thus also they mur∣mured, because that Christ said, I am the Bread that came down from Heaven, v. 41. And yet, tho he took notice of it, ver. 43. he thought not himself concerned to explain his meaning, where there might be more reason for their mistake, than there could be in this. Indeed our Saviour look'd upon them as an obstinate and intractable sort of People, and so did purposely conceal him∣self often, as was observed before, Mark 13. And this we are not without some light in, in the case before us. For this Discourse of his, was in the Synagogue, v. 59. and they were the same People that before were offended and cavilled, ver. 41, 52. And therefore our Saviour left them in the Dark, tho after∣wards, when his Disciples murmured, v. 60, 61, 63. he tells them, it was spiritually to be understood. (2.) As for those Disciples, it doth not appear, that they walked no more with him, because they were offended at his say∣ing, (for that he explain'd it to them) but because he gave an Intimation that he discovered their insincerity, v. 64. There are some of you that believe not; and it follows, From that time many of his Disciples went back, &c. (3.) Neither was there any such occasion for our Saviour's expounding himself from our differences; If he had meant it pro∣perly, I grant there could never be more occasion, because it's a Do∣ctrine so contrary to the Sense and Reason of Mankind; but when it's not so explain'd, the Sense and Reason of Mankind may be thought a sufficient Security against mistake. And there might
be as much reason for our Saviour to expound himself, when he saith, he is Bread, a Door, a Vine, a Rock. But all this while, our Author supposes our Saviour not to have explain'd himself. I grant it, he did not do it on their side; but I think he has done it to all attentive and unprejudiced minds; if they will either consult the foregoing part of this dis∣course, where he speaks of himself, under the Allusions of Bread and Flesh, v. 33, 35, 48, 51. and of believing in him un∣der the the Metaphors of Coming and Eating, v. 35, 36, 47, 51, 60, 61, 62. or if they consult the Conclusion, v. 63. where he tells his offended Disciples, It's the Spirit that quickneth, &c. As if he had said, The eating my Flesh, and drinking my Blood, which I propound to you, is not as those cavilling Jews did misconstrue it; and as you, I perceive, mistake; for in that Flesh, I am to ascend into Heaven; but it's the heeding and obeying my Pre∣cepts, the receiving my Doctrine, and believing in me as your Redeemer, that I require, and you are to regard. And indeed, thus St. Peter understood him, who concludes almost in the same words, Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou hast the words of Eternal Life. And we believe, &c. v. 68, 69. 4. He saith, That Christ was so far from meaning otherwise than plainly, as he spake, that to the murmuring Jews he confirms it, v. 53. with a Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except, &c. Whereas in Para∣bles be explained himself to them. That is, our Saviour meant plain∣ly, because he did not explain himself. But, saith he, he confirmed it. What did he confirm? Did he confirm the Literal sense? That he did not before give, and so could not confirm. Or doth the Repetition of it without Explication shew it to be the Literal sense? That he contends for. But then by parity of reason our Saviour meant properly, when he said, I am the Door. For it's there said in confirmation of what was be∣fore: Verily, verily, I say unto you, I am the Door, Joh. 10. 1, 7. But why did our Saviour repeat it? Without doubt to shew that he spoke it not inconsiderately; and if I add, to explain what he before said, it's not without somewhat in the Text to countenance it. For before he spoke of himself under the notion of Flesh, v. 51, 52. but then of Flesh and Blood, to intimate both the violence and manner of his Death; which he did usually speak with more caution and reserve about.
If we reflect upon what has been said, we see how unwarily (I am loth to add more) our Author delivers himself, when he saith, If these words are Figurative, I see no reason why the whole Bible should not be a Figure too. And if ever Christ was plain in any thing, it was in this. And, which I cannot recite without some in∣dignation; Should he explain himself in matters of less weight, and yet be dark in this great concern, is what would be contrary to his wis∣dom and goodness, p. 10, 11. So that there shall be no sense or perspicuity in Scripture, nor wisdom and goodness in our Savi∣our, if their Doctrine be not his, and he be not of the same mind with them. Indeed after all our Author's confidence in this matter, and his questioning all things, if this be questioned: he determines that which the greatest Authority in his Church, the Council of Trent, would not determine. For when it had been sharply debated for and against these words being understood of the Eucharist, it was at last agreed for the satisfaction of both sides, neither to affirm nor deny it, and to yield to those that deni'd it, that they had Fathers and Doctors on their side. And thus the Council concludes; However that Discourse (of our Saviour's, Joh. 6.) be understood according to the divers Interpretations of the Holy Fathers and Doctors, Sess 21. c. 1. Here our Author takes a great leap from Pag. 9. of the An∣swer, to Pag. 22. but because it's not amiss, I shall follow him: The Protestant Answerer put it to them to give as plain Letter of Scripture to prove Christ was neither a Door, Rock, nor Vine, as he could that he was all Three: Or that all Christians are not turn'd into Christ's Natural Body, when it's said Ephes. 5. 20. We are members of his Body. This he did to shew that the Phrases, Eating the Flesh, and, This is my Body, were not of themselves sufficient to enforce us to take them in a proper sense; since it's no more plainly said, Except ye eat the Flesh, &c. and, This is my Body; than it's said, I am the Door, The Vine, &c. Now what course doth our Author take to assoil this? Let's see, saith he, whether the parity 'twixt I am the Door, The Vine, &c. be the same with, The Bread is my Flesh, and, This is my Body, with∣out ever explaining a Syllable to the contrary. Here he is a little too forward. For he is to remember that the thing requir'd is to give as plain Scripture to prove that Christ was neither a Door, nor Vine, &c. as there is for it. He knows who said it, I will prove the
Catholick Doctrine of the Real Presence, and I defie the world to prove the contrary. Cath. Answ. to the Seeker, Pag. 1. and that declares again, It's impossible to bring one Text out of the whole Bible to prove that the Body and Blood of Christ is not in the Sacrament, Cath. Letter, Pag. 24. If now he so expects, then it may be so expected from him, that he should prove the Negative, and that by as plain a Text he should shew Christ is not a Door or Vine, as we can shew that he is. I must confess I put him upon a Ridiculous Task, but who can help it, it's in his own way. But to leave this trifling, let us return to see his parity; though I doubt we shan't much bet∣ter our selves. As for the Door, he saith, The Text tells us it was a Parable, Joh. 10. 6. This Parable spake Jesus. Wherefore if the Protestant Answerer would be so kind, as to produce plain Scripture for this of the Sacrament's being a Figure, as I have done for the Door's being a Parable, he'l certainly gain a Proselyte of me. As for gaining him a Proselyte by plain Scripture, I have reason to despair, who declares beforehand that though the Scripture were never so plain, he would yet submit to thi Determination of the Church, Pag. 4. But where is this plain Scripture for the Door's being a Parable? He points to the verse. But what was the Parable he spoke? It's in the Verses foregoing about a Door, I grant; But not of Christ's being the Door; for that follows after, Ver. 7. Then said Jesus unto them again, Verily, verily, I am the Door. So that if he keeps to his own way without explaining a Syllable, he is where he was, and Christ may be as properly a door, as we may properly Eat the Flesh of Christ. He goes on: In like manner of the Vine, Christ saith, Joh. 15. 1. I am the true Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman, as Mat. 20. 1. when he likened the Kingdom of Heaven to an Housholder; and so goes on explaining the same, ver. 4. As the Branch cannot, &c. Which if you read the Chapter, you'l find to be more plain. I perceive he is very serious, and I am of his mind, if the Seeker read on, he would find it plain, that Christ is not properly a Vine, and so say I, if he reads Joh. 6. he would find it as plain, that Eating the Flesh of Christ is not properly to be understood. But if words will oblige us without attending the sense, and we must take them as we find them without explaining a Syllable, then I say still it's as plainly said, I am the true Vine, as my Flesh is meat indeed; and according to our Author's way of Exposition, this can be no Parable. For, saith he, you'l find in all cases Christ spake not by Para∣bles
without telling them it was so, Pag. 12. But here it's not so said; for as before, so after the words, v. 4. As the Branch, &c. he saith, v. 5. I am the Vine. He goes on: In like manner of the Rcck, That he was the Corner-stone, upon which the Foundation was laid, &c. But how doth he prove Christ was not properly a Rock according to his own way? Because, saith he, he is a Corner-stone, and a Foundati∣on, which is just as if he had been asked, how he would prove, without explaining a Syllable, Christ is not properly a Corner-stone, or a Foundation; and he should say, because he is a Rock. But what saith he to the last Instance, to prove as plainly, Christi∣ans are not turned into Christ's Natural Body, when it's said we are members of his Body, Ephes. 5. 20? To this an Answer is to be expected. Well, after all his windings and turnings, his Parities, and without explainings, and his reading, and his in like manners, and his Rules for understanding Parables, the words are as plain and express that Christ is a Door, a Vine, a Rock, and we are mem∣bers of Christ's Body, as they are that we Eat the Flesh of Christ; and if one be properly to be understood, there is as much reason from the meer words for the like understanding the other. After this Digression, our Author undertakes the last Argu∣ment of the Protestant Answerer, viz. Arg. 3. Here is nothing of the Conversion of the Bread in∣to the Body of Christ; but rather the contrary; for if the words are Literally to be understood, then they would rather infer the conversion of Christ's Flesh and Blood into Bread and Wine, when he saith, I am the Bread of Life, v. 5. My Flesh is meat (or Bread) indeed. As to the first, which is the conversion of the Bread into the Body of Christ, and the chief thing proposed to him, he hath silently past it over; perhaps he saw here also no necessity of defining or proving it to one that believes it not. But to make up this defect he gives his Adversary a grave Reprimend, that when he had just before said, that these words had no special Reference to the Sacrament, he should now so apply them, by an odd way of shufflng. And why did he not as sharply admonish him for offer∣ing to shew that the words might infer the conversion of Christ's
Flesh into Bread? For both alike belonged to him. Our Author it seems apprehended not all this was Argumentum ad hominem. But how doth he clear the Point, and shew they infer no such conversion? First he saith, for proof whereof, [That Christ's Flesh is not turn'd into Bread] let us go to the words of Conversion, This is my Body. But, methinks, it would have better became him to have first proved the Conversion of the Bread into Flesh from these words. As for St. John, he grants that had the words been, My Flesh is Bread indeed, as his Adversary would fain have them, then he would have something on his side. But if that be the sense of it, and the words Bread and Meat are used by our Sa¦viour promiscuously; then it's so far acknowledged. And for that I shall refer our Author to v. 26, 27. but he will not allow v. 48. to look that way, nor indeed will I. But yet they will as soon prove Christ turned into Bread, as the words the Bread that I will give is my Flesh, will prove the Bread turn'd into his Flesh; which they so little do, that they rather would imply the con∣trary, if understood literally, as I have shewed pag. 8 But he concludes, rather than differ, I'le joyn in opinion with the Protestant Answerer, and these other Divines, and with him and them submit to the Determination of the Church. But where is this the opi∣nion of the Protestant Answerer? Surely our Author is like him in Aristotle, that where ever he went, fancied he saw himself. But what need is there to go to the Church in this case? For I hope he will think sense and reason sufficient to instruct men whether those words will prove that Christ was turned into Bread: And we think sense and reason as sufficient to inform them whether the words of our Saviour will prove that Bread was turn'd into Christ's Flesh. I now thought this matter had been at an end, when the Protestant Answerer past from this Argument to the second Text. But our Author has not yet done with him. For he tells us, There is one Argument yet, on which the Gentleman seems much to depend (pag. 9.)When he says, Since if Christ be not, but where he intirely is, then (says he) he must be eaten intirely, &c. From whence he concludes the not being of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, because (as he conceives) he is not there intire, for reasons (not Scripture) of his own, p. 14. Bless me! thought I, where am I now? in the land of Oberon? What shall I say? he quotes pag. 9. I hastily turn'd thither, and there I was satisfied my memory had not yet for∣saken
me. The case is thus, the Answerer, as is before observed, to shew the absurdity of our Author's appealing to the mere Let∣ter, put several Queries to him out of this Chapter, which he desired him to resolve in his own way, without going to Figures. The last of which was this, how he can literally interpret, ver. 57. [He that eateth me] that holds in the Eucharist is contained the true Body and Blood, together with the Soul and Divinity of our Lord Je∣sus Christ.—Since if Christ be not but where he intirely is, then he must be eaten intirely. This question amongst others was there drop'd by our Author; and the reason is apparent, for he must either have acknowledged that the words He that eateth me, must be under∣stood Figuratively and Spiritually, and not Corporally: Or else that the Soul and Divinity of Christ must be Eaten with his Body: Or that the Soul and Divinity of Christ are not in the Eucharist with his Body. The case, I confess, is hard to one that has somewhat else to respect than truth; and therefore it be∣came him to be silent. But why he should now bring it on the Stage under another guise, I can't imagin, when thus to resume it, and pervert it, must as much expose his insincerity as the omis∣sion of it before, did his inability to answer it. The Reader will see that the Argument and the conclusion are none of the Answer∣er's; for that Proposition, where ever Christ is, there he intirely is, is a principle of our Author's, and which is there made use of against him that profess'd to believe with the same Faith he believes a God, that in the Eucharist is truly and substantially contained the true Body and Blood, together with the Soul and Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, Cath. Answ. to Seeker, p. 4. And where our Author found the Conclusion. I know not, for there is nothing in the Protestant Answer like to this, that from thence concludes the not Being of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, because he is not there intire. However it may not be amiss to see how our Author relieves himself: Saith he; To which, I answer and grant, that Christ is not, but where he is intire. And whether Christ who is perfect God, may not be intire in the Sacrament, and in many places at one and the same time, is the Query? which if fully resolved, will overthrw all his reasoning Ware besides? Well, how will he prove Christ intirely in the Sacrament? That is, the true Body of Christ with the Soul and Di∣vinity. That was forgot before, and so is not to be remembred; but if it may be accepted for a full and intire Answer, he will prove his Body may be intire in many places at one and the same
time. What he saith of that, belongs to another place, and shall there be considered, p. 29. But what is this to his Soul and Divinity; and to the literal sense of he that eateth me, and the Argument the Answerer prest upon him? He will be able to an∣swer it, when he can prove his Proposition, that Christ is not, but where he is intire; for then his Body must be Omnipresent as well as his Divinity, which after all the may be's, and his at∣tempts to prove it possible for Christ's Body to be in many pla∣ces at one and the same time, I suppose he will have no allow∣ance to publish, if he should have the imprudence to maintain. SECT. III. WE are at length come to his second Text to prove his Real Presence,Sect. 3. viz. This is my Body. Here the Protestant Answerer shew'd how absurd the direction of the Seeker was, that his Answerers should produce their Texts, without troubling themselves to tell the meaning on't, because he was certain that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation could never be the literal meaning of those words. As for example, saith he, Where is there one word, that the [This] whatever it means, is the true Body and Blood, together with the Soul and Divinity of Christ, in the self-same Sub∣stance wherein he was born of the Virgin? Where that this true Body and Blood is truly, really and substantially contained under the Forms of Bread and Wine? Where that the Bread and Wine are upon Consecra∣tion turned into the true Body and Blood of Christ? Let us see how our Author replies to this, p. 17. Let us note his Where's. Where, says he, is there one word? Where that this true Body and Blood? Where that the Bread and Wine are upon Consecration, turn'd into the True Body and Blood of Christ, &c. Which truly, are Where's indeed? But what's become of the Soul and Divinity of Christ? What of the self-same Substance wherein he was born of the Virgin? What of the true Body, truly, really, and substantially contain'd under the Forms of Bread and Wine? Which are what he profess'd firmly and truly to believe by the same Faith he believes a God? And where (to add another Where) will he find these literally in the words, This is my Body? He tells us one would think that so many Where's were not without a Wherefore. And because the Gentleman desires to know the Where, he shall also know the When. Certainly now to the Confu∣tation of Scotus and Biel, &c. and the confusion of all Hereticks,
We shall have a plain discovery, and that in so many words we shall find the true Body and Blood, together with the Soul and Di∣vinity of Christ, &c. For this go we to his when Jesus took Bread, &c. and said, This is my Body, Mat. 26. 26. Then it was, saith he, and, Here it is by power of these words of God, This is my Body, that the Bread is turned into the Body of Christ. This is indeed a submissi∣on to the Seeker's direction to produce the words without a mean∣ing, and it is so because it is so; This is my Body, doth turn the Bread into the Body, because there are the words, This is my Body. I hope the Reader is satisfied, for in truth I am. The next thing proposed by the Prot. Answerer was, what the meaning is of This, in, This is my Body? If, saith he, it be Bread, then the Bread is in the literal sense, the substance of Christ's Body, and so overthrows the change to be made in Transub∣stantiation. If by This, is not meant the Bread, then the Bread could never be turned into the Body of Christ by vertue of the words, This is my Body. Our Author readily answers, Ask the Question, What? and our Saviour will resolve you, Mat. 26. 26. This is (what?) my Body, he did not say, after he had blessed it, Say, Take, Eat, This is Bread, but my Body; than which, nothing can be more plain, than that it was his Body. And to make all sure, he se∣riously proves it, because it's not hic, but hoc est panis. It's well in the Greek is of the same Gender with panis. But let us admit of this Learned Criticism (though by the way let me ob∣serve for our Author's instruction, when the Article relates to the sentence, it's to be put in the Neuter Gender) the diffi∣culty put, yet remains; for if the This relates to Body, then the sense is, This Body is my Body. But saith he, let us suppose This to refer to Bread, It yet follows that it is his Body. But it fol∣lows also, as the Answerer argued, that then the Bread is the Substance of Christ's Body, according to the Letter; and so could not be turned into it. So that our Author has left the difficulty as he found it. But because the Answerer here said, We have not Faith to believe that reason the Scripture hath not taught, he very subtilly argues af∣ter this manner: From whence, saith he, I gather, that notwithstan∣ding all his Arguments to disprove the Real Presence, yet he hath not Faith (though face) to deny it. For that pag. 3. he tells you that be∣sides their positive Articles, they have a great many Negative ones, [and the Answerer tells you, for which we are beholden to the
Corruptions and Innovations of the Church of Rome] &c. For that he hath not faith to believe, what the Scripture hath not taught, that in the Eucharist is not contain'd the Body of Christ. The Gentleman therefore can have no Faith to deny it. A very quaint Argument; which I shall dismiss with a parallel Instance. He that hath not Faith to believe that which the Scripture hath not taught, hath not Faith to deny that to be of Faith which the Scripture doth not teach: And therefore because Mahometism is not taught in Scripture, he hath not Faith to deny it. But this spirit of acute∣ness doth not last long, for having labour'd to find inconsisten∣cies in the Doctrine of the Church of England as set down in the Answer, he blunders without end. He allows what our Church saith, That the Body of Christ is eaten in the Sacrament after an Hea∣venly and Spiritual manner; but he adds, but this we believe to be a true and real manner, not a Deceitful, Figurative, or Fictitious man∣ner. —If you grant it after a Spiritual manner, you must grant it there after a true manner. If Christ be there in Spirit, he is also there in Truth; and if there in Spirit and Truth, all my Arguments are granted. I think not; for the Church of England saith, it's only after an Heavenly and Spiritual manner. So that though they do agree, where Christ is in Spirit, he is there in Truth; yet I doubt me the word only alters the case, for he may be there in Spirit and in Truth, and yet not be Corporally there. And I question whether any thing less will satisfie our Author; and so it appears; For, saith he, Christ is there after such an Intire, Real and Substantial manner, as we believe, or he is in no manner there at all, p. 19, 20. PART II. Sect. 1. HAving thus considered the Texts produced by the Catholick Answer to the Seeker,Part 2. Sect. 1. and shew'd how little they serve their Cause; I shall proceed to the Second Part, and that is to vindi∣cate the Texts produced in the Protestant Answer, from the Ex∣ceptions of our Author. Here our Author sets his Texts against those of the Protestant; but it would have done well if he had first set down what it is he should prove on his own side, viz. That in the Eucharist is truly, really and substantially contained, under
the Forms of Bread and Wine, the true Body and Blood, together with the Soul and Divinity of Christ in the same substance wherein he was born of the Virgin, and wherein he lived and died for us; and this by the Conversion of the whole Bread into the Body, and the Wine into the Blood of Christ. If this had been done, how meanly would it have look'd▪ though he brought his 24 Texts to prove it? and surely he could not then have had the confidence to have said, as he now doth, I doubt not but it appears that the Texts brought on the Catholick [Roman] side are abundantly plain and suf∣ficient for the Being of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, as thus set down. And it would doubtless have been some gratification to his Reader, if he had given us a Paraphrase as his Adversary had done, according to these his Sentiments. But here he saith that the Answerer pretends not to prove by these Texts that the Body and Blood of Christ are not in the Sacrament, p. 24 Why so? Because it's one of their Negative Articles, and to require plain and express words of Scripture to prove such a thing is not there taught, is, says he, to demand a proof, the thing is not capable of.—As if suppose there was not express words of Scripture to confute Arianism, therefore that could not be confuted by Scripture. It's enough that what is not in Scrip∣ture is no Article of Faith; it's enough that there are such Pro∣positions in Scripture as are sufficient to refute it, though there should not be express words. But however if he will take it in the words of our Article, and if it may be to his content, we shall find it positively said that Transubstantiation is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture. And we have our Author acknowledging that his Adversary undertakes to shew that the Protestants have the Letter of Scripture for them, meaning (as he saith) that in the Sa∣crament is Not contained the Body of Christ, p. 30. And now let us try whether the Answerer did not give them more than his bare word for it; in the use he made of his own Quotations. As he observed from thence. SECT. II. 1. THat it's no contradiction to our Saviour's manner of speaking,Sect. 2. to interpret these words Figuratively, since our Author after all his Exclamations of giving Christ the Lie, is forced
(tho here he slips over it) elsewhere to acknowledg that the Cup, yea and the word Bread, is so used, p. 28. 2. That in many Instances the Letter of Scripture is for us: As, Arg. 1. That there is no Substantial change in the Elements, but they remain the same Bread and Wine after Consecration as before. So it's five times call'd Bread, 1 Cor. 10. 26, &c. and the whole Solemnity is call'd Breaking of Bread, Act. 2. 42. To this our Author replies several ways, as, By the word Bread, saith he, is meant the Communion of the Body of Christ, as by the word Cup is signified the Communion of the Blood of Christ, p. 24. But to this I answer, 1. That if the words Bread and Cup are not to be under∣stood Literally, but with a thereby is meant, and thereby is signi∣fied, then there is no more reason from the bare words to un∣derstand, This is my Body Literally: And that it may be as well interpreted, This is the Representation, and Sign of my Body, as this Bread is the Communion of my Body. 2. From hence it follows, That if the Bread be the Commu∣nion of the Body of Christ, as the Cup is the Communion of the Blood of Christ, then the Bread is no more changed than the Cup; but as the Cup remains the Cup, so the Bread re∣mains the Bread in the Communion. 3. If the Bread be the Communion of the Body of Christ, then the Communion of the Body of Christ is in the Commu∣nion of the Bread; and so the Bread is still Bread. 4. Our Author has not touched the Point, which was to shew the Letter of Scripture is for us, when it calls it Bread after Consecration. But he saith, Saint Paul mentions not the words, Cup and Bread, but he explains them to be the Body and Blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 26. As often as ye eat this Bread, ye do shew the Lords death, which was not shewn, but by offering up his True and Real Body and Blood. I answer, so we may better say he mentions not the Body of Christ, but he explains it, when he five times afterwards calls it Bread: But how doth the shewing of the Death of Christ prove the Bread to be his Body, when it rather proves it not to be his Body, be∣cause his Body is not, according to them, visible, and to be shewn? He saith further, How could they be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord, v. 27. if the Body and Blood be not there?
I answer, As persons may be guilty of it out of the Sacra∣ment: Thus we read Heb. 6. 6. Who crucifie to themselves the Son of God afresh. And Chap. 10. 29. Who trod under foot the Blood of the Covenant. And so by unworthy receiving of the Lords Sup∣per, in which his Death was Commemorated and Represented, they after the same manner were by Interpretation guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord. And this the next ver. 29. shews, not discerning the Lords Body; which can be understood only of a Spiritual discerning by Faith. Or rather as the word signifies, discriminating. Lastly, he adds, 'Twould be hard a sinner should be damn'd meer∣ly for moderate eating and drinking Wine; for according to the Prote∣stant Answerer, the Sacrament is no more, who tells you, p. 11. There is no other Substance distributed among the Communicants, than that of Bread and Wine. 1. But if our Author had gone three or four Lines further, he would have found those words, pag. 11. The Body of Christ is not otherwise present than it is eaten, that is, after an Heavenly and Spiritual Manner, in the Spiritual Blessings and effects of his Merits and Sufferings in his Body, to those that believe. So that he preva∣ricates, when he saith, Sinners are damn'd meerly for moderate eat∣ing and drinking, and that we esteem the Sacrament no more. 2. We look upon it as a Divine Institution, and by virtue of that Institution a means of Grace; and that by a worthy participation of it, we partake of that Grace which is thereto promised, therein exhibited, and thereby conveighed, as it's there declared, p. 17. and conse∣quently the damnation threatned is to the contempt of God's Ordinance, and of the Sufferings of Christ therein represented, and of the Grace of God purchased by those Sufferings, and therein to be obtained. The Answerer shew'd, also as the Bread, so the Wine was with∣out alteration, from Mat. 26. 28. who after he had said, This is my Blood, calls it the Fruit of the Vine. And from the order in St. Mark 14. 23, 24. where the Apostles are said to have drank of it, before our Saviour said, This is my Blood. This Branch of the Argument our Author divides from the other, and casts it forward three or four Pages, Pag. 28. for it gave too much light to the other, whilst they were toge∣ther. As to the former Text, I will not drink of the fruit of the Vine,
he saith, St. Luke gives the plainest order of it, Chap. 22. 14. and that there it has relation to the Paschal Cup. I grant, that in St. Luke it more immediately is joyn'd to the Paschal Feast, but yet in St. Matthew and Mark, Christ is said to have spoke these words after the delivery of the Cup in the Lords-Supper. And the least that can be observed from hence is, that it was indifferently to be applied to either; and so it more strongly argues that it was alike to be understood [that the Wine in the Eucharistical Cup was the natural fruit of the Vine, as that in the Paschal] as that the substance of both was one and the same, and no more change in the one than the other. But, suppose this, yet, saith he, the meaning of these words could in no wise be applied to the Substance of Wine proceeding from an Earthly Vine; but to the Substance of his Blood, the fruit of the Heavenly Vine, for that it was to be drank new with them in his Father's Kingdom, which is Heaven, where they neither keep Taverns, nor drink Wine, &c. Some persons while they charge others with irreverence, themselves seem to have lost all due reverence for holy things. We will suppose, in favour of our Author, that by the Kingdom of God our Saviour means Heaven, and by the Fruit of the Vine, he means the Substance of Christ's Blood; yet how will it follow that it's the same Fruit of the Vine they drink of in Heaven as they drank of in the Sacrament; since the Blood of Christ is no more drank in Heaven, than Wine; nor is the Sacrament any more administred there, than the Passover? So that if by the Kingdom of God, Heaven is to be understood, then the phrase, Till I drink it new, signifies Mystically and Figuratively according to the manner of Scripture, which sets forth the happiness of that state by eating, Mat. 8. 11. Luk. 14. 15. and the excellency and perfection of it by the word New, Revel. 14. 13, &c. And so the meaning is, I shall not henceforth thus eat with you; the next Festival I shall observe, will be in Heaven; there we that have now thus eat and drank together, shall partake of the feli∣city of that state; and this fruit of the Earthly Vine shall be exchanged for Rivers of Heavenly Pleasures, which we shall there be entertained with. The next thing observed by the Answerer in proof of the Sub∣stance of the Wine continuing so after Consecration, was from the order observed in St. Mark 14. 23. where it's said the Dis∣ciples
drank of the Wine, before our Saviour said, This is my Blood. Here our Author thinks himself excus'd from an Answer, be∣cause of an Error in the Press, Body being put for Blood. But if he turned to the Text, he might see that place was quoted right, and common sense would serve to rectifie it. However he cour∣teously offers somewhat in the mean time, by way of Answer, viz. Whether St. Mark expresseth the words in the same order as they were spoken or no, it matters not; seeing he has the Substance of what was said, and wherein they all agree; to wit, that it was his Blood. And it's also apparent that Christ first gave thanks, and blessed it, be∣fore he gave it, &c. pag. 29. But doth it not matter whether St. Mark expresseth the words in order? Certainly if the order he recites it in, were the order observed by our Saviour, and that the Apostles received the Cup, and drank of the Wine before the words of Conversion (as they call them) were used, then it fol∣lows (as the Answerer argued) that they only drank of the Sub∣stance of the Wine, and that the words, This is my Blood, could not signifie, and much less produce a Conversion of the Wine into the Blood of Christ. This our-Author was sensible of, and therefore in his Answer left out the main part of it. For what tho all the Evangelists agree that the words, This is my Blood; were then used by our Saviour? What though Christ first gave thanks, and blessed it, before he gave it, if he did not also use the words of Conversion, before he gave it? For all the rest he might do, and yet the Wine be Wine still (as they own.) But thus it was, if St. Mark is right in the order, and it seems to be the proper order, because he only speaks of the particular, that they all drank of it. But we are not to have any thing to the purpose till (as he saith) the Bill be amended, and that I take for his best An∣swer. Arg. 2. The Protestant Answerer shewed the Letter of Scripture is for us, that our Saviour's Body had the natural and insepara∣ble Properties of a Body, such as Extension, Circumscription, &c. p. 15. Here our Author calls in the Faith of a Christian, and the Almighty Power of God to his Succour; and looks upon the Answerer as a second Didymus, because he will, like him, not believe except he sees; and worse than him, who saw but the Humanity, yet believed the Divinity of Christ, p. 30. But why all this, when he believes all the Scripture teaches, and reason it self justifies?
May not a man believe, unless he believes contrary to what he himself sees, and the Scripture teaches? Or why is he worse than Thomas, when Thomas would not believe unless he saw? But the Answerer is one of those (Thanks be to God) whom our Saviour pronounced Blessed, That have not seen, and yet have believed. What is there he would have him believe? It is what was never put to Thomas, for our Saviour convinced him by an ocular De∣monstration, Joh. 20. 27. Reach hither thy finger, and behold, &c. As much as if he had said, The Resurrection is real, for it's a real Body that is before thee; and it's my Body, for reach hither thy finger, &c. It's plain our Saviour here thought he gave an unquestionable Proof of the Truth of his Resurrection by shew∣ing his Body to Thomas, which could not have been, had not his Body had the properties of an human body, without which it could not have been a Body; or which if it had been without, Thomas could not have been convinced in that way, that it was his Body. But our Author here undertakes to prove, that this was not the Condition of our Saviour's Body; or, that he could by his power separate these essential Properties of a Body from his Body. Here I must confess my self indebted to him for an answer to what he offered to this purpose before, but not to the purpose of the Ar∣gument there, and here repeats. Pray, saith he, how was his Bo∣dy to be seen, Extended, Finite, and Circumscribed, when he pass'd through Walls and Doors that were close? John 20. 17. He entred the room, the Doors being shut.—How came he through? Was his Body In∣tire, Extended, Finite, and Circumscribed with Limbs, Bones, and Si∣news? —Such is the Infinite Power of God, that though they were inclosed in walls every where a Mile thick, 'twould yet be possible for Christ to enter intire through all, p. 15. Here is one thing omitted, and that is to prove, that as the Doors were shut, when they assembled, for fear of the Jews (as the Evangelist saith) so they were not opened by Christ, when he came and stood in the midst of them; till which be proved, we shall say the letter of Scripture is for us, and that Christ's Body had Flesh and Bones, might be beheld and felt, and did neither come through the Walls, nor indeed could do, so long as it remains true that the Penetration of Dimensions is impossible. But I had need to recal this; for I am for ever silenced if what he saith be true, that the Answerer argues perfidiously of Christ, as if he were not God, not distinguishing betweeen his Glorious Body and ours;
for as God, all things are possible to him. But where is that perfidious∣ness, since no more is denied to Christ, than is to God? For because all things are possible to God, doth he think that it's perfidious to say, that it's not possible for God to be ignorant or unfaithful, or circumscrib'd, and so to exist after the manner of a Body? Or doth he think it's perfidious to say, it's impossible to make the Body of Christ to have been existent in different times, and real∣ly to have been existent before it was existent, and yet not to be existent till it was? Or is it perfidious to say, it's impossible to make the circumscribed Body of Christ to be Omnipresent? The last he seems to affirm by his often repeated Maxim, That Christ is not but where he is intire, and placing therein the Difference between Christ's Glorious Body and ours. But of that more anon. Our Author, as he would prove the Body of Christ might lose all the Properties of a Body, so also that it might be contained under the Forms of Bread and Wine, that is, to all appearance it might have all the Properties of those Elements, and yet be none of them, but the Body of Christ alone. And this he reasons upon, after this manner, Where is the difficulty to believe but this may be, as the Holy Ghost under the Form of a Dove, with Feather, Beak, Wing, and all the properties of a Fowl? Or in the Form of Tongues of Fire? Both which to our eyes were but as a perfect Dove, and as perfect Tongues; yet those different objects to the eye of Flesh, were but one Holy Ghost to the Eye of Faith. Therefore nothing can be more plain than that Objects may be one thing to the Eye of Flesh, and another thing to the Eye of Faith. So in the Sacrament, to our sight and tast is plain Bread and Wine, but to our Faith (in Gods word) it is the Real and Intire Body and Blood of Christ. An instance and inference not at all to the purpose. For the Question is not, Whether a Spiritual Being may not be under the appearance of a Body? for so it was with the Angels when they appeared as men, and the Holy Ghost when it appeared like a Dove. Neither is the Question, whether an Object may be one thing to the eye of Flesh, and another to the eye of Faith? for so our Saviour appear'd to be man, and yet was God as well as man. All which yet is besides the matter, for in these cases there is an invi∣sible Being under a visible representation, or an Invisible Being in union to a visible. But here are two objects visible in their own na∣ture, viz. the Body of Christ, and Bread; and the one of these so turn'd into the other, that there are all the Properties of a visible Being,
which is not there, viz. Bread; and none of the properties of that visible Being which is there, viz. the Body of Christ. So that the que∣stion should be thus propos'd, Whether what is an object of sense, may have all the properties of another sensible object, with∣out being that thing which they are the properties of; and none of the properties belonging to its own nature and being? Arg. 3. The Protestant Answerer shew'd, that the Letter of Scripture is for us, that the Body of Christ as it ascended, so is to continue in Heaven till the conclusion of the world; and so cannot be in Heaven and Earth at the same time. This our Au∣thor calls a barren conceit; but as barren as it is, it is true, and has Scripture and Reason on its side, notwithstanding what he has objected to the contrary. The first Argument he offers in Answer to this is, that he is a perfect and omnipotent-God. And that he may be, and yet not reconcile contradictions (as has been just before shewed.) He confirms it by Scripture, Mat. 18. 20. c. 28. 20. Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. And if there, he is there intire, or not at all, p. 15. & 32. But when Christ promised to be in the midst of them, did he promise to be there Corporally? If bodily, I would fain know under what Form he is there? And if he be intire where ever he is, and yet he is every where as God, then the Body of Christ must be as Omnipresent as his Divinity; and so there would be no need, nor indeed possibility of his Descending. He adds, Our Saviour is not so confined in Heaven, as that he can∣not also be upon Earth; for we read that he Descended and overthrew Saul in the way to Damascus, and spoke to him, Act. 9. 4. And he may be actually present without being seen, for the men with Saul saw no man, v. 7. By all which it's plain, that Christ may be in Earth, and in many places at the same time, as well as in Heaven. But to this I answer, (1.) It's not certain that the Apostle saw, or that Christ appeared to his Fleshly eye. For elsewhere he is said to see him in a trance, Act. 22. 17. and here v. 4. to fall on the Earth; and so God is said to be seen, when yet there was no similitude, Exod. 24. 10. Deut. 4. 12. (2.) If he was seen bodily, yet it's not said, as our Author would have it, that he Descended, and was bodily present. But it might be as with St. Stephen, who looked up to Heaven, and saw Jesus standing on the right hand of God, Act. 7. 55. And so here
v. 3. it's said, that there shined round about (St. Paul) a light from Heaven. (3.) Much less is there so much as any intimation of what our Author saith, that Christ was Bodily in Heaven and the Earth at the same time. For if he was in in the one, it's certain he was not Bodily in the other. And this our Author unwittingly ac∣knowledges, when he saith Christ descended and overthrew Saul. So Vigilius Tapsitanus, When the Body of Christ was in the Earth, it was not in Heaven; and now because it is in Heaven, 'tis not in the Earth. Arg. 4. The Answerer argued on, That the Letter is for us, that Christ was but once offered as a Propitiatory Sacrifice, &c. that his Body is Glorified and so not to be offer'd, Heb. 9. 28, &c. But to this our Author has made no Reply. SECT. III. FRom hence the Prot. Answerer proceeded to shew, that as the Letter of Scripture is for us, so are the words which are Fi∣gurative, as in those, This is my Body, p. 16. The method was here orderly and distinct, but our Author runs one into another. I shall gather up what he saith as well as I can. The Arguments by which the Answerer proved those words to be Figurative, are as followeth. Arg. 1. From the word This, which if to be understood of the Bread, Bellarmine grants, then the word Body must be Figu∣ratively understood. And that it was the Bread, at least in con∣junction with the other acts relating to it, the Answerer shew'd, which our Author lets pass. Arg. 2. The Answerer argues, if the words are to be understood literally and properly, when these words were said by our Savi∣our, then the Body would be broken, before it was broken. To this our Author answers, (1.) P. 26. Though his Natural Body be there, yet the manner of it's Being is Spiritual and Sacramen∣tal, and the manner of its Breaking follows the manner of its Being; his Body is there Broken in the Sign, not the Substance. I answer, That to speak of a Body's being after the manner of
a Spirit, is as much as to say on the contrary, A Spirit exists af∣ter the manner of a Body: that is, That Body may be a Spirit, and a Spirit a Body. 2. If the Body be in the manner of its Being only Spiritual and Sacramental, and the breaking in the manner of its break∣ing be only Spiritually, then why not the Body be only Spiritual and Sacramental? Or why should we any more profess our selves Jews or Infidels (as he would have it) to doubt, whether, nay to af∣firm, what Christ said was improper and Metaphorical, when we say, This is my Body is to be understood Figuratively and Spi∣ritually, than it's to say (as he doth) it's broken spiritually; since, as the Answerer observ'd it's as well said, This is broken, as This is my Body: And our Author saith, the manner of its being and breaking, are Spiritual and Sacramental, Mystical and Representative? 3. But this is besides the case; for the Question is not about the manner of Breaking, but how Christ could say, This is Broken (if not Figuratively understood) before it was broken. But to this we are to expect an Answer. But he adds▪ (2.) Moreover these words [which is broken] do prove (as the Holy Catholick Church always did, and ever will hold) it to be a true, proper Sacrifice; for the being broken, explains the Nature of a Sacrifice, which imports the destruction of the thing offered, if corrup∣tible and liable to destruction: But the Body of Christ being Incorrupti∣ble and Immortal, can't be really hurt, therefore the manner of breaking, is only Mystical and Representative. Setting aside that what he saith concerning the Catholick Church, is spoken Gratis, I answer, If the nature of a Sacri∣fice imports the destruction of the thing offered, if corruptible and liable to destruction, then the Body of Christ must have been destroy'd (if a proper Sacrifice) before it was destroy'd; for the Body of Christ (when Christ spoke these words, This is my Body) was certainly liable to destruction. And so he has fastned the Objection, instead of an∣swering it. (3.) He concludes, If this manner of Breaking, pleases not the Gen∣tleman (as in truth it doth not, and he has now given his Rea∣sons for it) let us see whether the Body of Christ were not otherwise Broke before he instituted the Sacrament. Now his Body was pierced, and Blood spilt at his Circumcision, followed by unspeakable Pains, rest∣less Labours, &c. What his Agony in the Garden? What his being crowned with Thorns and Bloody Whipping at the Pillar?—Where∣fore
with Truth our Saviour might have said of his Body [which is broke] without supposing any thing improper or untrue. 1. What doth our Author mean when he saith he would see, Whether the Body of Christ were not otherwise broken before he instituted the Sacrament: And instances in his Agony in the Garden, his crown∣ing with Thorns, and whipping? Doth he think these were before the Sacrament? 2. If this was the meaning of our Saviour, when he said, This is my Body which is broken, that he was Circumcised, and in an Agony, &c. then where is the Sacrifice, which he saith, im∣parts the destruction of the thing? Which these things were neither literally nor mystically. Arg. 3. The Answerer urged, that Jesus himself then took the Bread, &c. when he said, This is my Body, and yet Jesus had at that time a Body which was not broken, &c. no not so much as mystically. So that the same Body was whole and broken. Here our Author is silent. Arg. 4. He argued from the words, Do this in Remembrance of me, which supposes absence; and therefore an Institution set up in remembrance, and yet in which the Body was to be actually present, is to suppose the Body to be absent and present at the same time. To this he answers. 1. That those words no way relate to the Laity, who only receive the Sacrament, but to the Priests, who consecrate and administer, for it's no where said, This Eat, This Take, This Receive, but, This Do. A. 1. If this be so, then there is no command to the People to receive. 2. To whom did the Apostle write his Epistle, but to Laity as well as Priests. 3. Surely he did not read 1 Cor. 11. 24. where the Apostle saith, Take, Eat, This is my Body. This do; What? but, Take, Eat; so v. 25. This do ye, as oft as ye drink it in remembrance of me. This do: What? but, Drink this. But after all, what is this to the Argument? For whether these Words were spoke to the Laity or Priests, relates not to the Case; but the Question is, Whether Remembrance of Persons, is in its true Notion consistent with Presence?
To this he answers, The Seeker unanswerably observed, that the Remembrance of its Being, doth no way make it cease to be. A wise Observation! But what then? Doth it not suppose the Absence of the thing? This he saith is a weak piece of Sophistry, as if, saith he, my Re∣membrance of your being with me, when Present, did any wise suppose your Absence from me. But I thought, with the rest of Mankind, that Remembrance and Sight are as distinct in their notion, as Absence and Presence; and that I may as well see what is Absent, as remember what is Present: What is Present we see and know, but what is Unseen and Absent, we remember. After all, we see that the Author has left no Rule to direct a true Seeker to, no Guide to direct him, no Arguments to settle his wavering mind; and if there be not a better Rule, Guide, or Arguments than he has offered toward his Conviction, there is no help for it, but the Seeker must live and dye a Seeker. It's impossible to convince a man that has Sense and Reason, that he must not use them, and that whatever use they may be of in Temporal Matters, they ought to be of none in Religion: and he that will undertake this difficult task, must either prove he doth not contradict himself when he will shew and refer him to the Letter of Scripture, and wish him to use his Eyes to see it, And his reason to judg of it; or else he must prove that both parts of a Contradiction may be true. And having brought our Author hither, I may safely leave him, and conclude his Argu∣ment, together. FINIS. ERRATA. PAg. 10. lin. 21. for Seeker pag. 6. [Seeker pag. 6.] with Braces. P. 27. l. 32. for whe r. where. ADVERTISEMENT. Transubstantiation contrary to Scripture; or the Protestant's Answer to the Seeker's Request. An Apology for the Pulpits; being in Answer to a late Book, Intituled, Good Advice to the Pulpits. Together with an Appendix, containing a Defence of Dr. Tenison's Sermon about Alms; in a Letter to the Author of this Apology.
