W2758 11877982 50277
THE BLOVDY TENENT, of PERSECUTION, for cause of CONSCIENCE, discussed, in A Conference betweene TRVTH and PEACE. VVHO, In all tender Affection, present to the High Court of Parliament, (as the Result of their Discourse) these, (amongst other Passages) of highest consideration. Printed in the Year 1644.
FIrst, That the blood of so many hun∣dred thousand souls of Protestants and Papists, spilt in the War of present and for∣mer Ages, for their respective Consciences, is not required nor accepted by Iesus Christ the Prince of Peace. Secondly, Pregnant Scriptures and Ar∣guments are throughout the Worke propo∣sed against the Doctrine of Persecution for for cause of Conscience. Thirdly, Satisfactorie Answers are given to Scriptures, and objections produced by Mr. Calvin, Beza, Mr. Cotton, and the Mi∣nisters of the New English Churches, and others former and later, tending to prove the Doctrine of Persecution for cause of Con∣science. Fourthly, The Doctrine of Persecution for cause of Conscience, is proved guilty of all the blood of the Soules crying for venge∣ance under the Altar.
Fifthly, All Civill States, with their Offi∣cers of justice in their respective constitutions and administrations are proved essentially Civill, and therefore not Iudges, Governours or Defendours of the Spirituall or Christian state and Worship. Sixtly, It is the will and command of God, that since the comming of his Sonne the Lord Iesus) a permission of the most Pa∣ganish, Iewish, Turkish or Antichristian consciences and worships, bee granted to all men in all Nations and Countries: and they are onely to bee fought against with that Sword which is only (in Soule matters) able to conquer, to wit, the Sword of Gods Spirit, the Word of God. Seventhly, The state of the Land of Is∣rael, the Kings and people thereof in Peace & War, is proved figurative and ceremoniall, and no patterne nor president for any King∣dom or civill state in the world to follow. Eightly, God requireth not an uniformity
of Religion to be inacted and inforced in any civill state; which inforced uniformity (soo∣ner or later) is the greatest occasion of civill Warre, ravishing of conscience, persecution of Christ Iesus in his servants, and of the hypocrisie and destruction of millions of souls. Ninthly, In holding an inforced unifor∣mity of Religion in a civill state, we must necessarily disclaime our desires and hopes of the Iewes conversion to Christ. Tenthly, An inforced uniformity of Re∣ligion throughout a Nation or civill state, confounds the Civill and Religious, denies the principles of Chrstianity and civility, and that Iesus Christ is come in the Flesh. Eleventhly, The permission of other consciences and worships then a state profes∣seth, only can (according to God) procure a firme and lasting peace, (good assurance being taken according to the wisdome of the civill state for uniformity of civill obedience from all sorts.)
Twelfthly, lastly, true civility and Chri∣stianity may both flourish in a State or King∣dome, notwithstanding the permission of divers and contrary consciences, either of Iew or Gentile.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, both Houses of the High Court of PARLIAMENT. Right Honourable and Renowned Patriots: NExt to the saving of your own soules (in the lamentable shipwrack of Mankind) your taske (as Christians) is to save the Soules, but as Magistrates, the Bodies and Goods of others. Many excellent Discourses have been presented to your Fathers hands and Yours in former and present Parliaments: I shall be humbly bold to say, that (in what concernes your duties as Magistrates, towards others) a more necessary and seasonable debate was never yet presented. Two things your Honours here may please to view (in this Controversie of Persecution for cause of Conscience) beyond what's extant. First the whole Body of this Controversie form'd & pitch'd in true Battalia. Secondly (although in respect of my selfe it be impar con∣gressus, yet in the power of that God who is Maximus in Mini∣is, Your Honours shall see the Controversie is discussed with men as able as most, eminent for abilitie and pietie, Mr. Coton, and the New English Ministers. When the Prophets in Scripture have given their Coats of Armes and Escutchons to Great Men, Your Honours know the Babylonian Monarch hath the Lyon, the Persian the Beare, the Grecian the Leopard, the Romane a compound of the former 3. most strange and dreadfull, Dan. 7.
Their oppressing, plundring ravishing, murthering, not only of the bodies, but the soules of Men are large explaining com∣mentaries of such similitudes. Your Honours have been famous to the end of the World, for your unparallel'd wisdome, courage, justice, mercie, in the vindicating your Civill Lawes, Liberties, &c. Yet let it not be grievous to your Honours thoughts to ponder a little, why all the Prayers and Teares and Fastings in this Nation have not pierc'd the Heavens, and quench'd these Flames, which yet who knowes how far they'll spread, and when they'll out! Your Honours have broke the jawes of the Oppressour, and taken the prey out of their Teeth (Iob. 29.) For which Act I believe it hath pleased the most High God to set a Guard (not only of Trained men, but) of mighty Angels, to secure your sitting, and the Citie. I feare we are not pardoned, though reprieved: O that there may be a lengthning of Londons tranquilitie, of the Parliaments safetie, by mercy to the poore! Dan. 4. Right Honourable, Soule yokes, Soule oppressions plundrings, ravishings, &c. are of a crimson and deepest dye, and I believe the chiefe of Englands sins, unstopping the Viols of Englands present sorrowes. This glasse presents your Honours with Arguments from Re∣ligion, Reason, Experience, all proving that the greatest yoakes yet lying upon English necks, (the peoples and Your own) are of a spirituall and soule nature. All former Parliaments have changed these yoakes accor∣ding to their consciences (Popish or Protestant) 'Tis now your Honours turne at helme, and (as your task, so I hope your res∣lution, not to change (for that is but to turne the wheele, which another Parliament, and the very next may turne againe:) but to ase the Subjects and Your selves from a yoake (as was once spoke in a case not unlike Act 15.) which neither You nor your Fathers were ever able to beare.
Most Noble Senatours, Your Fathers (whose seats You fill) are mouldred, and mouldring their braines, their tongus, &c. to ashes in the pit of rottenesse: They and You must shortly (together with two worlds of men) appeare at the great Barre: It shall then be no griefe of heart that you have now attended to the cries of Soules, thousands oppressed, millions ravished by the Acts and Statutes concerning Soules, not yet repealed. Of Bodies impoverished, imprisoned, &c. for their soules be∣liefe, yea slaughtered on heapes for Religions controversies in the Warres of present and former Ages. Notwithstanding the successe of later times,The famous saying of a late King of Bohe∣mia. (wherein sundry opinions have been hatched about the subject of Re∣ligion) a man may clearly discerne with his eye, and as it were touch with his finger that according to the verity of holy Scriptures, &c. mens consciences ought in no sort to be violated, urged or constrained. And whensover men have attempted any thing by this violent course, whether openly or by secret meanes, the issue hath beene pernicious, and the cause of great and wonderfull innovations in the principallest and mightiest Kingdomes and Countries, &c. It cannot be denied to be a pious and prudentiall act for Your Honours (according to your conscience) to call for the advice of faithfull Councellours in the high debates concerning Your owne, and the soules of others. Yet let it not be imputed as a crime for any suppliant to the God of Heaven for You, if in the humble sense of what their soules beleeve, they powre forth (amongst others) these three requests at the Throne of Grace. First, That neither Your Honours, nor those excellent and worthy persons, whose advice you seek, limit the holy One of Israel to their apprehensions, debates, conclusions, rejecting or neglecting the humble and faithfull suggestions of any, though as base as spittle and clay, with which sometimes Christ Iesus opens the eyes of them that are borne blinde.
Secondly, That the present and future generations of the Sons of Men may never have cause to say that such a Parlia∣ment (as England never enjoyed the like) should modell the worship of the living,Essay of Reli∣gion. eternall and invisible God after the Bi of any earthly interest, though of the highest concernment under the Sunne: And yet, saith that learned Sir Francis Bacon (how ever otherwise perswaded, yet thus he confesseth:) Such as hold pressure of Conscience, are guided therein by some pri∣vate interests of their owne. Thirdly, What ever way of worshipping God Your owne Consciences are perswaded to walke in, yet (from any bloody act of violence to the consciences of others) it may bee never told at Rome nor Oxford, that the Parliament of England hath committed a greater rape,It is rarely seen that ever persons were persed for their  then if they had forced or ravished the bodies of all the women in the World. And that Englands Parliament (so famous throughout all Europe and the World) should at last turne Papists, Prelatists, Presbyterians, Independents, Socinians, Familists, Antinomians, &c. by confirming all these sorts of Consciences, by Civill force and violence to their Consciences.
To every Courteous Reader. VVHile I plead the Cause of Truth and Innocencie against the bloody Doctrine of Persecution for cause of conscience, I judge it not unfit to give alarme to my selfe, and all men to prepare to be persecuted or nted for cause of conscience. Whether thou standest charged with 10 or but 2 Talents, if thou huntest any for cause of conscience, how canst thou say thou follow∣est the Lambe of God who so abhorr'd that practice? If Paul, if Iesus Christ were present here at London, and the que∣stion were proposed what Religion would they approve of: The Papists, Prelatists, Presbyterians, Independents, &c. would each say, Of mine, of mine. But put the second question, if one of the severall sorts should by major vote attaine the Sword of steele: what weapons doth Christ Jesus authorize them to sight with in His cause? Doe not all men hate the persecutor, and every conscience true or false complaine of cruelty, tyranny? &c. Two mountaines of crying guilt lye heavie upon the backes of All that name the name of Christ in the eyes of Iewes, Turkes and Pagans. First, The blasphemies of their Idolatrous inventions, superstitions, and most unchristian conversations. Secondly, The bloody irreligious and inhumane oppressions and destructions under the maske or vaile of the Name of Christ, &c. O how like is the jealous Iehovah, the consuming fire to end these present slaughters in a greater slaughter of the holy Witnesses? Rev. 11. Six yeares preaching of so much Truth of Christ (as that time afforded in K. Edwards dayes) kindles the flames of Q. Maries bloody persecutions. Who can now but expect that after so many scores of yeares preaching and professing of more Truth, and amongst so many great contentions amongst the very best of Protestants, a fierie furnace should be heat, and who sees not now the ires kindling?
I confesse I have little hopes till those flames are over, that this Discourse against the doctrine of persecution for cause of conscience should passe currant (I say not amongst the Wolves and Lions, but even amongst the Sheep of Christ themselves) yet liberavl animam meam, I have not hid within my breast my souls belief: And although sleeping on the bed either of the pleasures or profits of sine thou thinkest thy conscience bound to smite at him that dares to waken thee? Yet in the middest of all these civill and spirituall Wars (I hope we shall agree in these particulars.) First, how ever the proud (upon the advantage of an higher earth or ground) or' clooke the poore and cry out Schismatickes. Hereticks, &c. shall blasphemers and seducers scape unpunished? &c. Yet there is a sorer punishment in the Gospel for despising of Christ then Moses, even when the despiser of Mses was put to death without mercie, Heb. 10. 28, 29. He that beleeveth not shall bee damned, Marke 16. 16. Secondly, what ever Worship, Ministry, Ministration, the best and purest are practised without faith and true perswasion that they are the true institutions of God, they are sin, sinfull worships, Ministries, &c. And however in Civill things we may be servants unto men, yet in Divine and Spirituall things the poorest pesant must disdaine the service of the highest Prince: Be ye not the ser∣vants of men, 1 Cor. 14. Thirdly, without search and triall no man attaines this faith and right perswasion, 1 Thes. 5. Try all things. In vaine have English Parliaments permitted English Bibles in the poorest English houses, and the simplest man or woman to search the Scriptures, if yet against their soules perswasion from the Scripture, they should be forced (as if they lived in Spaine or Rome it selfe without the sight of a Bible) to beleeve as the Church beleeves. Fourthly, having tried, we must hold fast, 1 Thessal. 5. upon the losse of a Crowne, Revel. 13. we must not let goe for all the lea bitings of the present afflictions, &c. having bought Truth deare, we must not ell it cheape, not the least graine of it for the whole World, no not for the saving of Soules, though our owne most precious; least of all for the bitter sweetning of a little vani∣shing pleasure.
For a little puffe of credit and reputation from the changeable breath of uncertaine sons of men. For the broken bagges of Riches on Eagles wings: For a dreame of these, any or all of these which on our death-bed vanish and leave tormenting stings behinde them: Oh how much better is it from the love of Truth, from the love of the Father of lights, from whence it comes, from the love of the Sonne of God, who is the way and the Truth, to say as he, Iohn 18. 37. For this end was I borne, and for this end came I into the World that I might be are witnesse to the Truth.
A Table of the principall Contents of the Booke. TRuth and Peace their rare and seldome meeting. Page 15 2 Great complaints of Peace. 16 Persecutors seldome plead Christ but Moses for their Authour. 17 Strife Christian and unchristian. ibid A threefold dolefull cry. ibid. The wonderfull providence of God in the writing of the arguments against persecution. 18 A definition of persecution discussed. 19 Conscience will not be restrained from its owne worship, nor constrained to another. 20 A chaste soule in Gods worship, compared to a chaste wife. ibid. Gods people have erred stom the very fundamentalls of visible worship. ibid 4 Sorts of spirituall foundations in the New Testament. 21 The 6 fundamentalls of the Christian Religion. ibid. The comming out of Babel not Iocall, but mysticall. ibid. The great ignorance of Gods people concerning the nature of a true Church. ibid. Common-Prayer written against by the New English Ministers. 23 Gods people have worshipped God with false worships. ibid. God is pleased sometimes to convey good unto his people beyond a pro∣mise. ibid. A notable speech of King James to a great Nonconformist turned per∣secutor. 24 Civill peace discussed. ibid. The difference between Spirituall and civill state. 25 Six cases wherein Gods people have been usually accounted arrogant, and peace breakers, but most unjustly 26 The true causes of breach and disturbance of civill peace. 29 A preposterous way of suppressing errours. 30 Persecutors must needs oppresse both erroneous and true consciences. ibid. All persecutors of Christ professe not to persecute him. ibid.
What is meant by the Hereticke. Tit. 3. Pag. 33 The word Heretick generally mistaken. 34 Corporall killing in the Law, typing out Spirituall killing in the Go∣spell. 36 The cariage of a Soule sensible of mercy, towards others in their blind∣ness, &c. 38 The difference between the Church, and the World wherein it is, in all places. 38 The Church and civill State confusedly made all one. 39 The most peaceable accused for peace-breaking. 40 A large Examination of what is meant by the Tares, and letting of them alone. ibid. Sathans subtletic about the opening of Scripture. 41 Two sorts of Hypocrites, 44 The Lord Iesus the great Teacher by Parables, and the only Expounder of them. 44 Preaching for conversion is properly out of the Church. 45 The tares proved properly to signifie Antichristians. ibid. Gods Kingdome on Earth the visible Church. 46 The difference between the Wheat and the Tares, as also betweene these Tares and all others. 46 A civill Magistracie from the beginning of the world. 47 The Tares are to be tolerated the longest of all sinners. 48 The danger of infection by permitting of the Tares, assoyled. ibid. The civill Magistrate not so particularly spoken to in the New Testament as Fathers, Masters, &c. and why. 50 A two-fold state of Christianitie; Persecuted under the Romane Empe∣rours, and Apostated under the Romane Popes. ibid. 3 Particulars contained in that prohibition of Christ Iesus concerning the Tares, Let them alone, Mat. 13. 51 Accompanying with Idolaters, 1 Cor. 5. discussed. 52 Civill Magistrates never invested by Christ Iesus with the power and title of Defenders of the Faith. 54 Gods people ever earnest with God for an Arme of Flesh. 55 The  punishment of the blind Pharises in 4 respects. ibid. The point of seducing, infecting, or Soule killing, examined. 57 Strange consusions in punishments. 59 The blood of Soules, Acts 20. lies upon such as professe the Ministrie: the blood of Bodies only upon the State. ibid.
surpers and true Heires of Christ Iesus. Page 60 The Civill Magistrate bound to preserve the bos of their subjects, and not to destroy them for conscience sake. 61 The fire from heaven, Rev. 13. 13. 2 Tim. 2. 25, 26. examined. 62 The originall of the Christian name, Acts 11. 63 A Civill sword in Religion makes a Nation of hypocrites, Isa. 10 64 A difference of the true and false Christ and Christians. 65 The nature of the worship of unbeleeving and naturall persons. ibid. Antoninus Pius his famous act concerning Religion. 66 Isa. 24. Mic. 4. 3. concerning Christs visible Kingdome discussed. ibid. Acts 20 29. The suppressing of Spirituall wolves discussed. 67 It is in vaine to decline the name of the head of the Church, and yet to pra∣ctise the headship. 68 Titus 1. 9. 10 discussed. 69 Vnmercifull and bloody doctrine. 70 The Spirituall weapons, 2 Cor. 10. 4. discussed. ibid. Civill weapons most improper in Spirituall causes. 71 The Spirituall artillerie, Eph. 6. applied. 72 Rom. 13. concerning Civill Rulers power in Spirituall causes, largely examined. 73 Pauls appeale to Caesar examined. 77 And cleared by 5 arguments. ibid. 4 Sorts of swords. 79 What is to be understood by evill, Rom. 13. 4. 81 Though evill be alwayes evill, yet the permission of it may sometimes be good. 83 2 Sorts of commands both from Moses and Christ. 84 The permission of diverce in Israel, Mat. 19. 17, 18. ibid. Usury in the Civill state lawfully permitted. 85 Seducing teachers, either Pagan, Iewish, Turkish or Antichristian, way yet be obedient subjects to the Civill Laws. 86 Scandalous livers against the Civill state. 87 Toleration of Jesabel and Balaam, Rev. 2 14. 20. examined. 88 The Christian world hath swallowed up Christianity. 89 Christ Iesus the deepest polititian that ever was, yet commands be a tole∣ration of Antichristians. 91 The Princes of the world seldome take part with Christ Iesus. 93 Buchanans items to King James. ibid. King James his sayings against persecution. ibid.
King Steven of Poland his sayings against persecution. Page 93 Forcing of conscience a soule rape. 94 Persecution for conscience hath been the launcet which hath let blood the Nations. All Spirituall whores are bloody ibid. Poligamie or the many wives of the Fathers. ibid. David advancing of Gods worship against order. 95 Constantine and the good Emperours confest to have done more hurt to the Name and Crowne of Christ then the bloody Noroes did. ibid. The language of persecuters. 96 Christs Liies may flourish in the Church, notwithstanding the weeds in the world permitted. 97 Queen Elizabeth and King James their persecuting for cause of Religion examined. ibid. Queen Elizabeth confessed by Mr. Cotton to have almost fired the world in civill combustions. 98 The Wars between the Papists and the Protestants. ibid. The Wars and successe of the Waldensians against three Popes. 99 Gods people victorious ver commers, and with what weapons. ibid. The Christian Church doth not persecute, but is persecuted. ibid. The nature of excommunication. 100 The opinion of ancient Writers examined concerning the doctrine of perse∣cution. 101 Constraint upon conscience in Old and New England. ibid. The Indians of New England permitted in their worshipping of devils, 102 In 2 cases a false Religion will not hurt. 103 The absolute sufficiencie of the Sword of the Spirit. 104 A Nationall Church not instituted by Christ. ibid. Man hath no power to make Lawes, to binde conscience. 105 Hearing of the word in a Church estate a part of Gods worship. 107 Papists plea for toleration of conscience. ibid. Protestant partiality in the cause of persecution. 108 Pills to purge out the bitter humour of persecution. ibid. Superstition and persecution have had many votes and suffrages from Gods owne people. 109 Soul-killing discussed. ibid. Phineas his act discussed. 111 Eliah his slaughters examined. ibid Dangerous consequences flowing from the civill Magistrates power in Spirituall cases. 114
The world turned upside downe. Page 114 The wonderfull answer of the Ministers of New England to the Ministers of Old. ibid. Lamentable differences even amongst them that feare God. 115 The doctrine of persecution ever drives the most godly out of the world 116 A Modell of Church and Civill power composed by Mr. Cotton, and the Ministers of New England, and sent to Salem, (as a further con∣firmation of the bloody doctrine of persecution for cause of conscience) examined and answered. 118 Christs power in the Church confest to be above all Magistrates in Spi∣rituall things. 119 Isa. 49. 23. lamentably wrested. ibid. The civill Commonweale, and the Spirituall Commonweale the Church not inconsistent, though independent the one on the other. 120 Christ ordinances put upon a whole city or Nation may civilize them, and moralize, but not Christianize before repentance first wrought. 121 Mr. Cottons and the New English Ministers confession that the Ma∣gistrate hath neither Civill nor Spirituall power in Soul matters. 122 The Magistrates and the Church (by Mr. Cottons grounds) in one and the same cause made the Iudges onthe Bench, and delinquents at the Bar. 123 A demonstrative illustration that the Magistrate cannot have power o∣ver the Church in Spirituall or Church causes. 124 The true way of the God of Peace in differences between the Church and the Magistrate. 125. The tearms Godlinesse and Honesty explained, 1 Tim. 2. x. and honesty pro∣ved not to signifie in that place the righteousnes of the second Table. 127 The forcing of men to Gods worship, the greatest breach of civill peace. 129 The Roman Caesars of Christs time described. ibid. It pleased not the Lord Iesus in the institution of the Christian Church to appoint and raise up any Civill Governours to take care of his wor∣ship. 130 The true custodes utriusque Tabulae, and keepers of the Ordinances and worship of Iesus Christ. ibid. The Kings of Aegypt, Moah, Philistia, Assyria, Nivch, were not charged with the worship of God, as the Kings of Iudah were. 131 Masters of families not charged under the Gospel to force all the consci∣uces of their families to worship. 132 Gods people have then shined brightest in Godlines, when they have enjoyed
least quietnesse. pag. 134. Few Magistrates, few Men, spiritually good; yet divers sorts of com∣mendable Goodnes beside spirituall. ibid. Civill power originally and fundamentally in the People. Mr. Cotton and the New English give the power of Christ into the hands of th Commonweale. 137 Lawes concerning Religion, of two sorts. 138 The very Indians abhor to disturbe any Conscience at Worship. 139 Canons and constitutions pretended Civill, but indeed Ecclesiasticall. ibid. A threesold guilt lying upon Civill powers, commanding the Subjects Soule in Worship. 143 Persons may with lesse sinne be forced to marry whom they cannot love, then to worship where they cannot beleeve. ibid. As the cause, so the weapons of the Beast and the La be are infinitely different. 146 Ataxerxes his Dicree examined. 147 The summe of the Examples of the Gentile Kings decrees concerning Gods worship in Scripture. 149 The Doctrine of putting to death Blasphemers of Christ, cuts off the hopes of the Iewes partaking in his blood. 18 The direfull effects of fighting for Conscience. 151 Errour is confident as well as Truth. 152 Spirituall prisons. 153 Some Consciences not so easily healed and cured as men imagine. 154 Persecuters dispute with Hereticks, as a tyrann call Cat with the poore Mouse: And with a true Witnes, as a roaring Lyon with an innocent Lambe in his paw. 155 Persecuters endure not tho name of Persecuters. 156 Psal 101 concerning cutting off the wicked, examined. 158 No difference of Lands and Countries, since Christ Iesus his comming. ib. The New English seperate in America, but not in Europe. 159 Christ Iesus forbidding his followers to permit Leaven in the Church, doth not forbid to permit Leaven in the World. 160 The Wall (Cant. 8. 9.) discussed. 161 Every Religion commands its professors to heare only its own Priests or Ministers. 162 Ionah his preaching to the Ninevites discussed. 162 aring of the Word discussed. ibid. Eglon his rising up to Ehuds message, discussed. ibid.
A two-fold Ministrie of Christ: First, Apostolicall, properly conver∣ting, Secondly, Feeding or Pastorall. pag. 162 The New English forcing the people to Church, and yet not to Religion (as they say) forcing them to be of no Religion all their dayes 163 The Civill State can no more lawfully compell the Consciences of men to Church to heare the Word, then to receive the Sacraments. 164 No president in the word, of any people converting and baptizing them∣selves. 166 True conversion to visible Christianitie, is not only from sins against the second Table, but from false Worships also. ibid. The Commission, Mat. 28 discussed. 167 The Civill Magistrate not be trusted with that Commission. ibid. Iehosaphat, 2 Chron. 1. a figure of Christ Iesus in his Church, not of the Civill Magistrate in the State. 168 The maintenance of the Ministrie, Gal. 6. 6. examined. ibid. Christ Iesus never appointed a maintenance of the Ministrie from the i∣penitent and unbelieving. 169 They that compell men to heare, compell them also to pay for their hearing and conversion. ibid. Luc. 14. Compell them to come in, examined. ibid. Naturall men can neither truly worship nor mainteine it. 170 The Nationall Church of the Iewes might well be forced to a setled maintenance: but not so the Christian Church. 171 The maintenance which Christ hath appointed his Ministrie in the Church. 172 The Vniversities of Europe causes of universall sins and plagues: yet Schooles are honourable for tongues and Arts. 173 The true Church is Christs Schoole, and Believers his Scholars. ibid. Mr. Ainsworth excellent in the Tongues yet no Vniversitie man. 174 K. Henry the 8. set down in the Popes chaire in England. 175 Apocrypha, Homilies, and Common Prayer precious to our forefathers. ib. Reformation proved fallible. 176 The president of the Kings of Israel & Iudah largely examined. 178 The Persian Kings example make strongly against the doctrine of Perse∣cution. 179 1. The difference of the hand of Canaan from all lands and countries, in 7 particulars. ibid. 2. The difference of the people of Israel from all other peoples, in 7 parti∣culars. 183
Wonderfull turnings of Religion in England in twelve yeares revolu∣tion. Page 185 The Pope not unlike to recover his Monarchy over Europe, before his dowfall. ibid. Israel Gods only Church might well renew that Nationall Covenant and ceremoniall worship, which other Nations cannot doe. 187 The difference of the Kings and Governours of Israel from all Kings and Governours of the world, in 4 particulars. 188 5 Demonstrative arguments proving the unsoundnesse of the maxime, viz. The Church and Commonweale are lie Hypocrates twins. 189 Asacrilegious prostitution of the name Christian. 192 David immediately inspired by God in his ordering of Church affairs. 193 Solomons deposing of Abahar, 1 Kings 2. 26, 27. discussed. 194 The liberties of Christs Churches in the choice of her officers. 195 A civill influence dangerous to the State liberties. ibid. Jehosaphats fast examined. ibid. God will not wrong Caesar, and Caesar should not wrong God. 196 The famous acts of Josiah examined. ibid. Magistracie in generall from God, the particular formes from the peo∣ple. ibid. Israel confirmed in a Nationall Covenant by revelations, signes and mi∣racles, but not so any other Land. ibid. Kings and Nations often plant and often plucke up Religions. 197 A Nationall Church ever subject to turne and returne. ibid. A woman, Papissa, or head of the Church. ibid. The Rapists neerer to the truth, concerning the governour of the Church, then most Protestants. 198 The Kingly power of the Lord Iesus troubles all the Kings and Rulers of the world. ibid. A twofold exaltation of Christ. ibid. A monarchicall and Ministeriall power of Christ. 199 3 Great competitours for the Ministeriall power of Christ. ibid. The Pope pretendeth to the Ministeriall power of Christ, yet upon the point chalengeth the Monarchicall also. ibid. 3 Great factions in England striving for the Arme of Flesh. 200 The Churches of the separation ought in humanity, and subjects liberty, not to be oppressed, but at least permitted. 201 7 Reasons proving that the Kings of Israel and Iudah can have no other but a Spirituall Antitype. 202
Christianitie des not to the nature of a Civill Commonweale; nor doth want of Christianitie diminish it. pag. 203 Most strange, yet most true consequences from the Civill Magistrates being the Antitype of the Kings of Israel and Iudah. ibid. If no Religion but what the Commonweale approve; then no Christ, no God, but at the pleasure of the World. 204 The true Antitype of the Kings of Israel and Iudah. ibid. 4. The difference of Israels Statutes and Lawes from all others in 3 par∣ticulars. ibid. 5. The difference of Israels Punishments & Rewards from all others. 205 Temporall prosperitie most proper to the Nationall state of the Iewe. ibid. The Excommunication in Israel. 206 The corporall stoning in the Law typed out spirituall stoning in the Go∣spel. ibid. The wars of Israel typicall and unparalleld, but by the Spirituall wars of Spirituall Israel. ibid. The famous typicall captivitie of the Iewes. 207 Their wonderfull victories. 208 The mysticall Army of white troopers. 209 Whether the Civill state of Israel was presidentiall. ibid. Great unfaithfulnesse in Magistrates to cast the burthen of judging and establishing Christianitie upon the Commonweale. 210 Thousands of lawfull Civill Magistrates, who never heare of Iesus Christ. 211 Nero and the persecuting Emperours not so injurious to Christianity, as Constantine and others, who assumed a power in Spirituall things ibid. They who force the conscience of others, cry out of persecution, when their owne are forced. 212 Constantine and others wanted not so much affection, as information of judgement. ibid. Civill Authoritie giving and lending their Hornes to Bishops dangerous to Christs truth. ibid. The Spirituall power of Christ Iesus, compared in Scripture to the in∣comparable horne of the Rhinocerot. 213 The nursing Fathers and Mothers, Isa. 49. ibid. The civill Magistrate owes 3 things to the true Church of Christ. 214 The civill Magistrate owes  things to false Worshippers. 214 The rise of High Commissions. 215 Pious Magistrates & Ministers consciences are perswaded for that, which
other as plous Magistrates & Ministers consciences condemn. Page 215 An apt similitude discussed concerning the Civill Magistrate. 216 A grievous charge against the Christian Church and the King of it. 222 A strange Law in New England formerly against excommunicate per∣sons. ibid. A dangerous doctrine against all Civill Magistrates. 223 Originall sin charged to hurt the Civill state. ibid. They who give the Magistrate more then his duo, are apt to disreabe him of what is his. 224 A strange double picture. 226 The great priviledges of the true Church of Christ. 227 2 Similitudes illustrating the true power of the Magistrate. ibid. A marvelous chalenge of more power under the Christian, then under the Heathen Magistrate. 229 Civill Magistrates, derivatives from the fountains or bodies of people. 230 A beleeving Magistrate no more a Magistrate then an unbeleeving. ibid. The excellencie of Christianity in all callings. ibid. The Magistrate like a Pilot in the Ship of the Commonweale. 231 The tearmes Heathen and Christian Magistrates. ibid. The unjust and partiall liberty to some consciences and bondage unto all others. 232 The commission Matth. 28. 19, 20. not proper to Pastors and teachers least of all to the Civill Magistrate. 233 Vnto whom now belongs the care of all the Churches, &c. ibid. Acts 15. commonly misapplied 234 The promise of Christs presence Mat. 18. distinct from that Mat. 28. 235 Church administrations firstly charged upon the Ministers thereof. 236 Queen Elizabeths Bishops truer to their principles then many of a better spirit and profession. 237. Mr. Barrowes profession concerning Queen Elizabeth. ibid The inventions of men swarving from the true essentialls of civill and Spi∣rituall Commonweales. 239 A great question viz. whether only Church members, that is godly persons in a particular Church estate, be only eligible into the Magistracie. ib. The world being divided into 30 parts, 25 never heard of Christ. 240 Lawfull civill states where Churches of Christ are not. ibid. Few Christians Wise and noble and qualified for affaires of State. ibid.
SCRIPTURES AND REASONS written long since by a Witnesse of lesus Christ, close Prisoner in Newgate, against Per∣secution in cause of Conscience; and sent some while since to Mr. Cotton, by a Friend who thus wrote: In the multitude of Councellours there is safety: It is therefore humbly desired to be instru∣cted in this point: viz. Whether Persecution for cause of Conscience, be not against the Doctrine of Iesus Christ the King of Kings. The Scriptures and Reasons are these. BEcause Christ commandeth that the Tares and Wheat (which some understand are those that walke in the Truth, and those that walke in Lies) should be let alone in the World, and not pluc∣ked up untill the Harvest, which is the end of the World, Matth. 13. 30. 38. &c. The same commandeth Matth. 15. 14. that they that are Blinde (as some interpret, led on in false Religion, and are offended with him for teaching true Religion) should be let alone, referring their punishment unto their falling into the Ditch. Againe, Luke 9. 54, 55. hee reproved his Disciples who would have had Fire come downe from Heaven and devoure those Samaritanes who would not receive Him, in these words: Ye know not of what Spirit ye are, the son of Man is not come to destroy Mens lives, but to save them. Paul the Apostle of our Lord teacheth, 2 Tim. 24. 2. That the ser∣vant of the Lord must not strive, but must be gentle toward all Men, suf∣fering the Evill Men, instructing them with meeknesse that are contrary minded, proving if God at any time will give them repentanco, that they may acknowledge the Truth, and come to amendment out of that snare of the devill, &c. According to these blessed Commandements, the holy Prophets fore∣told,
that when the Law of Moses (concerning Worship) should cease, and Christs Kingdome be established, Esa. 2. 4. Mic. 4. 3, 4 They shall breake their Swords into Mathookes, and their Speares into Sithes. And Esa. 11. 9. Then shall none hurt or destroy in all the Mountaine of my Holinesse, &c. And when he came, the same he taught and practised, as before: so did his Disciples after him, for the Weapons of his Warfare are not carnall (saith the Apostle) 2 Cor. 10 4. But he chargeth straitly that his Disciples should be so far from per∣secuting those that would not bee of their Religion, that when they were persecuted they should pray (Matth. 5.) when they were cursed they should blesse, &c. And the Reason seemes to bee, because they who now are Tares, may hereafter become Wheat; they who are now blinde, may hereafter see; they that now resist him, may hereafter receive him; they that are now in the devils snare, in adversenesse to the Truth, may hereafter come to repentance; they that are now blasphemers and persecutors (as Paul was) may in time become faithfull as he; they that are now idolators as the Corinths once were (1 Cor. 6. 9.) may hereafter become true worshippers as they; they that are now no people of God, nor under mercy (as the Saints sometimes were, 1 Pet. 2. 20.) may hereafter become the people of God, and obtaine mercy, as they. Some come not till the 11. houre, Matth. 20. 6. if those that come not till the last houre should be destroyed, because they come not at the first, then should they never come but be prevented. All which premises are in all humility referred to your godly wise consideration. Because this persecution for cause of conscience is against the profession and practice of famous Princes. First, you may please to consider the speech of King Iames, in his Majesties Speech at Parliament, 1609. He saith, it is a sure Rule in divi∣nity, that God never loves to plant his Church by violence and bloodshed. And in his Highnesse Apologie, pag. 4. speaking of such Papists that tooke the Oath, thus: I gave good proofe that I intended no persecution against them for conscience cause, but onely desired to bee secured for civill obedience, which for conscience cause they are bound to performe. And pag. 60. speaking of Blackwell (the Arch-priest) his Majesty saith, It was never my intention to lay any thing to the said Arch-Priests charge (as I have never done to any) for cause of conscience. And in his Highnesse Exposition on Revel. 20. printed 1568. and after 1603. his Majesty writeth thus: Sixthly, the compassing of the Saints
and the besieging of the beloved City, declareth unto us a certaine note of a false Church, to be Persecution, for they come to seeke the faithfull, the faithfull are them that are sought: the wicked are the besiegers, the faithfull are the besieged. Secondly, the saying of Stephen King of Poland: I am King of Men, not of Consciences, a Commander of Bodies, not of Soules. Thirdly, the King of Bohemia hath thus written: And notwithstanding the successe of the later times (where∣in sundry opinions have beene hatched about the subject of Religion) may make one clearly discerne with his eye, and as it were to touch with his Finger, that according to the veritie of Holy Scrip∣tures, and a Maxime heretofore told and maintained, by the ancient Doctors of the Church; That mens consciences ought in no sort to bee violated, urged, or constrained; and whensoever men have attempted any thing by this violent course, whether openly or by secret meanes, the issue hath beene pernicious, and the cause of great and wonderfull Innovations in the principallest and mightiest Kingdomes and Countries of all Christendome. And further his Majesty saith: So that once more we doe professe before God and the whole World, that from this time forward wee are firmly resolved not to persecute or molest, or suffer to be persecuted or molested, any person whosoever for matter of Religion, no not they that professe themselves to be of the Romish Church, neither to trouble or disturbe them in the exercise of their Religion, so they live confor∣mable to the Lawes of the States, &c. And for the practice of this, where is persecution for cause of conscience except in England and where Popery reignes, and there neither in all places, as appeareth by France, Poland, and other places. Nay, it is not practised amongst the Heathen that acknowledge not the true God, as the Turke, Persian, and others. Thirdly,3. Reas. because persecution for cause of conscience is condemned by the ancient and later Writers, yea and Papists themselves. Hilarie against Auxentius saith thus: The Christian Church doth not persecute, but is persecuted. And lamentable it is to see the great folly of these times, and to sigh at the foolish opinion of this world, in that men thinke by humane aide to helpe God, and with worldly pompe and power to undertake to defend the Christian Church. I aske you Bi∣shops, what helpe used the Apostles in the publishing of the Gospel? with the aid of what power did they preach Christ, and converted the Hea∣then from their idolatry to God? When they were in prisons, and lay in chaines, did they praise and give thankes to God for any dignities, graces,
and favours received from the Court? Or do you thinke that Paul went about with Regall Mandates, or Kingly authority, to gather and esta∣blish the Church of Christ? sought he protection from Nero, Vespasian? The Apostles wrought with their hands for their owne maintenance, travailing by land and water from Towne to Citie, to preach Christ: yea the more they were forbidden, the more they taught and preached Christ. But now alas, humane helpe must assist and protect the Faith, and give the same countenance to and by vaine and worldly honours. Doe men seek to defend the Church of Christ? as if hee by his power were unable to performe it. The same against the Arrians. The Church now, which formerly by induring misery and imprison∣ment was knowne to be a true Church, doth now terrifie others by im∣prisonment, banishment, and misery, and boasteth that she is highly estee∣med of the world, when as the true Church cannot but be hated of the same. Tertull. ad Scapulam: It agreeth both with humane reason, and naturall equity, that every man worship God uncompelled, and beleeve what he will; for it neither hurteth nor profiteth any one another mans Reli∣gion and Beleefe: Neither beseemeth it any Religion to compell another to be of their Religion, which willingly and freely should be imbraced, and not by constraint: for as much as the offerings were required of those that freely and with good will offered, and not from the contrary. Ierom. in proaem. lib. 4. in Ieremiam. Heresie must be cut off with the Sword of the Spirit: let us strike through with the Arrowes of the Spi∣rit all Sonnes and Disciples of mis-led Heretickes, that is, with Testimonies of holy Scriptures. The slaughter of Heretickes is by the word of God. Brentius upon 1 Cor. 3. No man hath power to make or give Lawes to Christians, whereby to binde their consciences; for willingly, freely, and uncompelled, with a ready desire and cheerfull minde, must those that come, run unto Christ. Luther in his Booke of the Civill Magistrate saith; The Lawes of the Civill Magistrates government extends no further then over the body or goods, and to that which is externall: for over the soule God will not suffer any man to rule: onely he himselfe will rule there. Where∣fore whosoever doth undertake to give Lawes unto the Soules and Consciences of Men, he usurpeth that government himselfe which apper∣taineth unto God, &c. Therefore upon 1 Kings 5. In the building of the Temple there was no sound of Iron heard, to signifie that Christ will have in his Church a free and a willing People, not compelled and constrained by Lawes and Statutes.
Againe he saith upon Luk. 22. It is not the true Catholike Church, which is defended by the Secular Arme or humane Power, but the false and feigned Church, which although it carries the Name of a Church yet it denes the power thereof. And upon Psal. 17. he saith: For the true Church of Christ know∣eth not Brachium saeculare, which the Bishops now adayes, chiefly use. Againe, in Postil. Dom. 1. post Epiphan. he saith: Let not Christians be commanded, but exhorted: for, He that willingly will not doe that, where∣unto he is friendly exhorted, he is no Christian: wherefore they that doe compell those that are not willing, shew thereby that they are not Christian Preachers, but Worldly Beadles. Againe, upon 1 Pet. 3. he saith: If the Civill Magistrate shall com∣mand me to believe thus and thus: I should answer him after this man∣ner: Lord, or Sir, Looke you to your Civill or Worldly Government. Your Power extends not so farre as to command any thing in Gods Kingdome: Therefore herein I may not heare you. For if you cannot beare it, that any should usurpe Authoritie where you have to Command, how doe you thinke that God should suffer you to thrust him from his Seat, and to seat your selfe therein? Lastly, the Papists, the Inventors of Persecution, in a wicked Booke of theirs set forth in K. Iames his Reigne, thus: Moreover, the Meanes which Almighty God appointed his Officers to use in the Conversion of Kingdomes and Nations, and People, was Humilitie, Patience, Charitie; saying, Behold I send you as Sheepe in the midst of Wolves, Mat. 10. 16. He did not say, Behold I send you as Wolves among Sheepe, to kill, imprison, spoile and devoure those unto whom they were sent. Againe vers. 7. he saith: They to whom I send you, will deliver you up into Councells, and in their Synagogues they will scourge you; and to Presidents and to Kings shall you be led for my sake. He doth not say: You whom I send, shall deliver the people (whom you ought to convert) unto Councells, and put them in Prisons, and lead them to Presidents, and Tribunall Seates, and make their Religion Felony and Treason. Againe he saith, vers 32 When ye enter into an House, salute it, saying, Peace be unto this House: he doth not say, You shall send Pursevants to ransack or spoile his House. Againe he said, Iohn 10. The good Pastour giveth his life for his Sheep, the Thiefe commeth not but to steale, kill and destroy. He doth not say, The Theefe giveth his life for his Sheep, and the Good Pastour
commeth not but to steale, kill and destroy. So that we holding our peace, our Adversaries themselves speake for us, or rather for the Truth. To answer some maine Objections. And first, that it is no praejudice to the Common wealth, if Libertie of Conscience were suffred to such as doe feare God indeed, as is or will be manifest in such mens lives and conversations. Abraham abode among the Canaanites a long time, yet contrary to them in Religion, Gen. 13. 7. & 16. 13. Againe he so journed in Gerar, and K. Abimelech gave him leave to abide in his Land, Gen. 20. 21. 23. 24. Isaack also dwelt in the same Land, yet contrary in Religion, Gen. 26. Iacob lived 20 yeares in one House with his Unkle Laban, yet dif∣fered in Religion, Gen, 31. The people of Israel were about 430 yeares in that infamous land of Egypt, and afterwards 70 yeares in Babylon, all which time they differed in Religion from the States, Exod. 12. & 2 Chron. 36. Come to the time of Christ, where Israel was under the Romanes, where lived divers Sects of Religion, as Herdians, Scribes and Pharises, Saduces and Libertines, Thudans and Samaritanes, beside the Common Religion of the Iewes, Christ and his Apostles. All which differed from the Common Religion of the State, which was like the Worship of Di∣ana, which almost the whole world then worshipped, Acts 19. 20. All these lived under the Government of Caesar, being nothing hurt∣full unto the Common-wealth, giving unto Caesar that which was his. And for their Religion and Consciences towards God, he left them to themselves, as having no Dominion over their Soules and Consciences. And when the Enemies of the Truth raised up any Tumults the wise∣dome of the Magistrate most wisely appeased them, Acts 18. 14. & 19. 35.
THE ANSWER OF Mr. IOHN COTTON of Boston in New-England, To the aforesaid ARGUMENTS against Persecution for Cause of Consciene. Professedly mainteining Persecution for Cause of Conscience. THe Question which you put, is, Whether Persecution for cause of Conscience, be not against the Doctrine of Iesus Christ the King of Kings. Now by Persecution for Cause of Conscience, I conceive you meane, either for professing some point of Doctrine which you believe in Conscience to be the Truth, or for practising some Worke which in Conscience you believe to be a Religious 'Duty. Now in Points of Doctrine some are fundamentall, without right be∣liefe whereof a Man cannot be saved: Others are circumstantiall or lesse principall, wherein Men may differ in judgement, without prejudice of salvation on either part. In like sort, in Points of Practice, some concerne the waightier Du∣ties of the Law, as, What God we worship, and with what kinde of Worship; whether such, as if it be Right, fellowship with God is held; if Corrupt, fellowship with Him is lost. Againe, in Points of Doctrine and Worship lesse Principall: either they are held forth in a meeke and peaceable way, though the Things be Erroneous or unlawfull  Or they are held forth with such Arrogance and Impetuousnesse, as tendeth and reacheth (even of it selfe) to the di∣sturbance of Civill Peace. Finally, let me adde this one distinction more: When we are perse∣cuted for Conscience sake, It is either for Conscience rightly informed, or for erronious and blind Conscience. These things premised, I would lay down mine Answer to the Que∣stion in certaine Conclusions. First, it is not lawfull to persecute any for Conscience sake Rightly in∣formed; for in persecuting such, Christ himselfe is persecuted in them, Acts 9. 4. Secondly, for an Erronious and blind Conscience, (even in fundamen∣tall
and weighty Points) It is not lawfull to persecute any, till after Admonition once or twice  and so the Apostle directeth, 7 it. 3. 10. and giveth the Reason, that in fundamentall and principall points of Do∣ctrine or Worship, the Word of God in such things is so cleare, that hee cannot but bee convinced in Conscience of the dangerous Errour of his way, after once or twice Admonition, wisely and faithfully dispensed. And then if any one persist, it is not out of Con∣science, but against his Conscience, at the Apostle saith vers. 11. He is sub∣verted and sinneth, being condemned of Himselfe, that is, of his owne Conscience. So that if such a Man after such Admonition shall still per∣sist in the Errour of his way, and be therefore punished; He is not per∣secuted for Cause of Conscience, but for sinning against his Owne Con∣science. Thirdly, In things of lesser moment, whether Points of Doctrine or Worship, If a man hold them forth in a Spirit of Christian Meeknesse and Love (though with Zeale and Constancie) he is not to be persecuted, but tolerated, till God may be pleased to manifest his Truth to him, Phil. 3. 17. Rom. 14. 1, 2, 3, 4. But if a Man hold forth or professe any Errour or false way, with a boysterous and arrogant spirit, to the disturbance of Civill peace, he may justly be punished according to the qualitie and measure of the disturbance caused by him. Now let us consider of your Reasons or Objections to the contrary. Your first head of Objections is taken from the Scripture. Object. 1. Because Christ commandeth to let alone the Tares and Wheat to grow together unto the Harvest, Mat. 13. 30. 38. Answ. Tares are not Briars and Thornes, but partly Hypocrites, like unto the Godly, but indeed Carnall, as the Tares are like to Wheat, but are not Wheat. Or partly such Corrupt Doctrines or Practices as are indeed unsound, but yet such as come very neere the Truth, (as Tares doe to the Wheat) and so neere, that Good men may be taken with them, and so the Persons in whom they grow, cannot be rooted out, but good will be rooted up with them. And in such a case Christ cal∣leth for Toleration, not for penall prosecution, according to the 3. Con∣clusion. Object. 2. In Math. 15. 14. Christ commandeth his Disciples to let the Blind alone till they fall into the ditch; therefore he would have their punishment deferred till their all destruction. Answ. He there speaketh not to publie officers, whether in Church or Common-weale, but to his private Disciples, concerning the Pharises, over whom they had no power. And the Command he giveth to let
them alone, is spoken in regard of troubling themselves or regarding the offence, which they tooke at the wholesome Doctrine of the Gospell: As who should say, Though they be offended at this Saying of mine, yet doe not you feare their Feare, nor bee troubled at their offence, which they take at my Doctrine, not out of sound Judgement, but out of their Blindnesse. But this maketh nothing to the Cause in hand. Ob. In Luk. 9. 54. 55. Christ reproveth his Disciples, who would have had fire come downe from Heaven to consume the Samaritanes, who refused to receive Him. Obj. And Paul teacheth Timothy, not to strive, but to be gentle to∣wards All men, suffering evill patiently. Answ. Both these are Directions to Ministers of the Gospell how to deale (not with obstinate offenders in the Church, that sinne against Con∣science, but) either with Men without, as the Samaritanes were, and many unconverted Christians in Crete, whom Titus (as an Evangelish) was to seeke to convert: Or at best with some Iewes or Gentiles in the Church, who though carnall, yet were not convinced of the errour of their Way: And 'tis true, it became not the Spirit of the Gospell to convert Aliens to the Faith of Christ (such as the Samaritanes were) by Fire and Brimstone; nor to deale harshly in publique Ministerie or pri∣vate Conference with all such contrary minded men, as either had not yet entred into Church-Fellowship, or if they had, yet did hitherto sinne of Ignorance, not against Conscience. But neither of both these Texts doe hinder the Ministers of the Go∣spell to proceed in a Church-way against Chruch-members, when they become Scandalous offenders, either in Life or Doctrine: much lesse doe they speake at all to Civill Magistrates. Ob. 5. From the prediction of the Prophets, who foretold that Carnall Weapons should cease in the dayes of the Gospell, Isa. 2. 4. & 11. 9. Mic. 4. 3. 4. And the Apostie professeth, The weapons of our Warfare are not carnall, 2 Cor, 10. 4. And Christ is so farre from persecuting those that would not be of his Religion, that he chargeth them, when they are persecuted themselves, they should pray, and when they are cursed they should blesse The reason whereof seemeth to be, that they who are now Persecuters and wicked persons, may become true Disciples and Converts. Answ. Those predictions in the Prophets doe onely shew, First, with what kind of Weapons he will subdue the Nations to the Obedience of the Faith of the Gospell, not by Fire and Sword, and Weapons of Warre,
but by the Power of his Word and Spirit, which no man doubteth of. Secondly, those predictions of the Prophets shew what the meeke and peaceable temper will be of all the true Converts to Christianity, not Lions or Leopards, &c. not cruell oppressors, nor malignant opposers, or biters of one another. But doth not forbid them to drive ravenous Wolves from the sheepfold, and to restraine them from devouring the Sheepe of Christ. And when Paul saith, The weapons of our warfare are not carnall but spirituall, he denyeth not civill weapons of Iustice to the Civill Magi∣strate, Rom. 13. but onely to Church officers. And yet the weapons of such officers he acknowledgeth to be such, as though they be spirituall, yet are ready to take vengeance of all disobedience, 2 Cor. 10. 6. which hath reference (amongst other Ordinances) to the censure of the Church against scandalous offenders. When Christ commandeth his Disciples to blesse them that curse them and persecute them, he giveth not therein a rule to publick officers, whe∣ther in Church or Commonweale, to suffer notorious sinners, either in life or doctrine, to passe away with a blessing: But to private Christians to suffer persecution patiently, yea and to pray for their persecutors. Againe, it is true, Christ would have his Disciples to bee farre from persecuting (for that is a sinfull oppression of Men for righteousnesse sake) but that hindreth not but that he would have them execute upon all dis∣obedience the judgement and vengeance required in the Word, 2 Cor. 10. 6. Rom. 13. 4. Though it be true that wicked persons now may by the grace of God become true Disciples and Converts, yet we may not doe evill that good may come thereof: And evill it would bee to tolerate notorious evill doers, whether seducing teachers, or scandalous livers. Christ had something against the Angel of the Church of Pergamus for tolerating them that held the doctrine of Balaam, and against the Church of Thiati∣ra for tolerating Iesabel to teach and seduce, Rev. 2. 14. 20. Your second Head of Reasons is taken from the profession and practice of famous Princes, King Iames, Stephen of Poland, King of Bohemia. Whereunto a treble answer may briefly be returned. First, we willingly acknowledge, that none is to be persecuted at all, no more then they may be oppressed for righteousnesse sake. Againe, we acknowledge that none is to be punished for his consci∣ence, though mis-informed, as hath been said, unlesse his errour be funda∣mentall,
or seditiously and turbulently promoted, and that after due con∣viction of his conscience, that it may appeare he is not punished for his conscience, but for sinning against his conscience. Furthermore, we acknowledge none is to be constrained to beleeve or professe the true Religion till he be convinced in judgement of the truth of it: but yet restrained he may from blaspheming the truth, and from seducing any unto pernicious errours. 2. Wee answer, what Princes professe or practise, is not a rule of conscience: they many times tolerate that in point of State policy, which cannot justly be tolerated in point of true Christianity. Againe, Princes many times tolerate offendours out of very necessity, when the offenders are either too many, or too mighty for them to pu∣nish, in which respect David tolerated Ioab and his murthers, but against his will. 3. We answer further, that for those three Princes named by you, who tolerated Religion, we can name you more and greater who have not tolerated Heretickes and Schismatickes, notwithstanding their pre∣tence of conscience, and arrogating the Crowne of Martyrdome to their sufferings. Constantine the Great at the request of the Generall Councell of Nice, banished Arrius with some of his fellowes. Sozom. lib. 1. Eccles. Hist. cap. 19. 20. The same Constantine made a severe Law against the Dona∣tists. And the like proceedings against them were used by Valentinian, Gratian, and Theodosius, as Augustine reporteth in Epist. 166. Only Iu∣lian the Apostata granted liberty to Heretickes as well as to Pagans, that he might by tolerating all weeds to grow, choake the vitals of Christia∣nity, which was also the practice and sin of Valens the Arrian. Queene Elizabeth, as famous for her government as any of the former, it is well knowne what Lawes she made and executed against Papists. Yea and King Iames (one of your own witnesses) though he was slow in proceeding against Papists (as you say) for conscience sake, yet you are not ignorant how sharply and severely he punished those whom the malignant world calleth Puritanes, men of more conscience and bet∣ter faith then he tolerated. I come now to your third and last argument, taken from the judge∣ment of ancient and later Writers, yea even of Papists themselves, who have condemned persecution for conscience sake. You begin with Hilary, whose testimony we might admit without any prejudice to the truth: for it is true, the Christian Church doth not
persecute, but is persecuted. But to excommunicate an Hereticke, is not to persecute; that is, it is not to punish an innocent, but a culpable and damnable person, and that not for conscience, but for persisting in errour against light of conscience, whereof it hath beene convinced. It is true also what he saith, that neither the Apostles did, not may we propagate Christian Religion by the Sword: but if Pagans cannot be won by the Word, they are not to be compelled by the Sword. Ne∣verthelesse this hindreth not, but if they or any others should blaspheme the true God, and his true Religion, they ought to be severely punished; and no lesse doe they deserve, if they seduce from the truth to damnable Heresie or Idolatry. Your next Writer (which is Tertullian) speaketh to the same pur∣pose in the place alledged by you. His intent is onely to restraine Sca∣pula the Romane Governour of Africa from the persecution of Christians, for not offering sacrifice to their gods: And for that end fetcheth an ar∣gument from the Law of Naturall Equity, not to compell any to any Religion, but to permit them either to beleeve willingly, or not to be∣leeve at all. Which wee acknowledge, and accordingly permit the In∣dians to continue in their unbeleefe. Neverthelesse it will not therefore be lawfull openly to tolerate the worship of devils or Idols, or the seducti∣on of any from the truth. When Tertullian saith, Another mans Religion neither hurteth nor profiteth any; it must be understood of private worship and Religion pro∣fessed in private: otherwise a false Religion professed by the Members of a Church, or by such as have given their Names to Christ, will be the ruine and desolation of the Church, as appeareth by the threats of Christ to the Churches of Asia, Revel. 2. Your next Authour Hierom crosseth not the truth, nor advantageth not your cause: for we grant what he saith, that Heresie must bee cut off with the Sword of the Spirit. But this hindreth not, but that being so cut downe, if the Hereticke still persist in his Heresie, to the seduction of others, he may be cut off by the civill sword, to prevent the perdition of others. And that to bee Hieromes meaning appeareth by his note upon that of the Apostle, [A little Leaven leaveneth the whole lumpe] therefore (saith he) a sparke as soone as it appeareth, is to be extinguish∣ed, and the Leaven to be removed from the rest of the dough, rotten pee∣ces of flesh are to be cut off, and a scabbed beast is to be driven from the let the whole house, masse of dough, body and flocke, be set on fire with the sparke, bee sowred with the Leaven, be putrified with the
rotten flesh, perish by the scabbed beast. Brentius (whom you next quote) speaketh not to your Cause. We willingly grant him and you, that Man hath no power to make Lawes, to bind Conscience. But this hindreth not, but that Men may see the Lawes of God observed, which doe bind Conscience. The like Answer may be returned to Luther, whom you next al∣leadge. First, that the Government of the Civill Magistrate extendeth no further then over the Bodies and Goods of their Subjects, not over their Soules: And therefore they may not undertake to give Lawes to the Soules and Consciences of Men. Secondly, that the Church of Christ doth not use the Arme of Secu∣lar Power to compell men to the Faith, or profession of the Truth; for this is to be done by Spirituall weapons, whereby Christians are to be exhorted, not compelled. But this hundreth not that Christians sinning against light of Faith and Conscience, may justly be censured by the Church with Excommu∣nication, and by the Civill Sword also, in case they shall corrupt others to the perdition of their Soules. As for the Testimony of the Popish Book, we weigh it not, as knowing (whatsoever they speake for Toleration of Religion, where themselves are under Hatches) when they come to sit at Sterne, they judge and practise quite contrary, as both their Writings and Iudiciall procee∣dings have testified to the World these many yeares. To shut up this Argument from Testimonie of Writers. It is well known, Augustine retracted this Opinion of yours, which in his younger times he had held, but in after riper age reversed and refuted, as appeareth in the second Book of his Retractations, chap. 5. and in his Epistles 48. 50. And in his 1. Book against Parmenianus, cap. 7. he shew∣eth, that if the Donatists were punished with death, they were justly punished. And in his 11 Tractate upon Iohn, They murther, saith he, Soules, and themselves are afflicted in Body: They put men to everlasting death, and yet they complaine when themselves are put to suffer tempo∣rall death. Optatus in his 3. book, justifieth Macharius, who had put some He∣reticks to death; that he had done no more herein then what Moses, Phincas, and Elias had done before him. Bernard in his 66 Sermon in Cantica: Out of doubt (saith he) it is better that they should be restrained by the Sword of Him, who beareth not the Sword in vaine, then that they should be suffred to draw many
others into their Errour. For he is the Minister of God for Wrath to every evill doer. Calvins judgement is well knowne, who procured the death of Michael Servetus for pertinacie in Heresie, and defended his fact by a Book written of that Argument. Beza also wrote a Booke de Haereticis Morte plectendis, that Here∣ticks are to be punished with Death. Aretius likewise tooke the like course about the Death of Valentinus Gentilis, and justified the Magi∣strates proceeding against him, in an History written of that Argu∣ment. Finally, you come to answer some maine Objections, as you call them, which yet are but one, and that one objecteth nothing against what we hold. It is (say you) no prejudice to the Common-wealth, if Libertie of Conscience were suffred to such as feare God indeed, which you prove by the examples of the Patriarchs and others. But we readily grant you, Libertie of Conscience is to be granted to men that feare God indeed, as knowing they will not persist in He∣resie, or turbulent Schisme, when they are convinced in Conscience of the sinfulnesse thereof. But the Question is, Whether an Heretick after once or twice Ad∣monition (and so after conviction) or any other scandalous and hey∣nous offender, may be tolerated, either in the Church without Excom∣munication, or in the Common-wealth without such punishment as may preserve others from dangerous and damnable infection. Thus much I thought needfull to be spoken, for avoyding the Grounds of your Errour. I forbeare adding Reasons to justifie the Truth, because you may finde that done to your hand, in a Treatise sent to some of the Brethren late of Salem, who doubted as you doe. The Lord Jesus lead you by a Spirit of Truth into all Truth, through Jesus Christ.
A REPLY to the aforesaid ANSWER of Mr. Cotton. In a CONFERENCE betweene TRVTH and PEACE. CHAP. I. Truth. IN what darke corner of the World (sweet Peace) are we two met? How hath this present evill World banished Me from all the Coasts & Quarters of it? and how hath the Righte∣ous God in judgement taken Thee from the Earth, Rev. 6. 4. Peace. 'Tis lamentably true (blessed Truth) the foundations of the World have long been out of course:Truth and Peace rare∣ly and sel∣dom meet. the Gates of Earth and Hell have conspired together to intercept our joyfull meeting and our holy kisses: With what a wearied, tyred Wing have I flowne over Nations, King∣domes, Cities, Townes, to finde out precious Truth? Truth. The like enquiries in my flights and travells have I made for Peace, and still am told, she hath left the Earth, and fled to Heaven. Peace. Deare Truth, What is the Earth but a dungeon of darknesse, where Truth is not? Truth. And what's the Peace thereof but a fleeting dreame, thine Ape and Counterfeit? Peace. O where's the Promise of the God of Heaven, that Righteous∣nes and Peace shall kisse each other? Truth. Patience (sweet Peace) these Heavens and Earth are grow∣ing Old, and shall be changed like a Garment, Psal. 102. They shall melt away, and be burnt up with all the Works that are therein; and the most high Eternall Creatour, shall gloriously create New Heavens and New Earth, wherein dwells Righteousnesse, 2 Pet. 3. Our kisses then shall have their endlesse date of pure and sweetest ioyes? till then both Thou and I must hope, and wait, and beare the furie of the Dragons wrath, whose monstrous Lies and Furies shall with himselfe be cast into the lake of Fire, the second death, Revel. 20. Peace. Most precious Truth, thou knowest we are both pursued and
laid for: Mine heart is full of sighes, mine eyes with teares: Where can I better vent my full oppressed bosome, then into thine, whose faithfull lips may for these few houres revive my drooping wandring spirits, and here begin to wipe Teares from mine eyes, and the eyes of my dearest Children? Truth. Sweet daughter of the God of Peace, begin; powre out thy sorrowes, vent thy complaints: how joyfull am I to improve these pre∣cious Minutes to revive our Hearts, both thine and mine, and the hearts of all that love the Truth and Peace, Zach. 8. Peace. Deare Truth, I know thy birth, thy nature, thy delight. They that know thee, will prize thee farre above themselves and lives, and sell themselves to buy thee. Well spake that famous Elizabeth to her fa∣mous Attorney Sir Edward Coke: Mr. Attourney, goe on as thou hast begun, and still plead, not pro Domina Regina, but pro Domina Veritate. Truth. 'Tis true, my Crowne is high, my Scepter's strong to breake down strongest holds, to throw down highest Crownes of all that plead (though but in thought) against me. Some few there are, but oh how few are valiant for the Truth, and dare to plead my Cause, as my Wit∣nesses in sack-cloth, Revel. 11. While all mens Tongues are bent like Bowes to shoot out lying words against Me! Peace. O how could I spend eternall dayes and endlesse dates at thy holy feet, in listning to the precious Oracles of thy mouth! All the Words of thy mouth are Truth, and there is no iniquity in them; Thy lips drop as the hony-combe. But oh! since we must part anon, let us (as thou saidst) improve our Minutes, and (according as thou promi∣sedst) revive me with thy words, which are sweeter then the honey, and the honey-combe. CHAP. II. DEare Truth, I have two sad Complaints: First,a great complaints of Peace. The most sober of thy Witnesses, that dare to plead thy Cause, how are they charged to be mine Enemies, contentious, tarbulent, seditious? Secondly, Thine Enemies, though they speake and raile against thee, though they outragiously pursue, imprison, banish, kill thy faith∣full Witnesses, yet how is all veillion'd o're for Iustice 'gainst the Hereticks? Yea, if they  and blow the  of devouring Warres, that leave neither Spirituall nor Civill State, but burns up Branch
and Root, yet how doe all pretend an holy War? He that kills, and hee that's killed, they both cry out, It is for God, and for their conscience. Tis true, nor one nor other seldome dare to plead the mighty Prince Christ Iesus for their Authour,Persecu∣tors sel∣dom plead Christ, but Moses for their Author. yet both (both Protestant and Papist) pretend they have spoke with Moses and the Prophets, who all, say they (before Christ came) allowed such holy persecutions, holy Warres against the enemies of holy Church. Truth. Deare Peace (to ease thy first complaint) tis true, thy dearest Sons, most like their mother, Peace-keeping, Peace-making Sons of God, have borne and still must beare the blurs of troublers of Israel, and tur∣ners of the World upside downe. And tis true againe, what Salomon once spake: The beginning of strife is as when one letteth out Water, therefore (saith he) leave off contention before it be medled with. This Caveat should keepe the bankes and sluces firme and strong, that strife, like a breach of waters, breake not in upon the sons of men. Yet strife must be distinguished:Strife di∣stinguish∣ed. It is necessary or unnecessary, godly or ungodly, Christian or unchristian, &c. It is unnecessary,1. Ungod∣ly strife. unlawfull, dishonourable, ungodly, unchristian, in most cases in the world, for there is a possibility of keeping sweet Peace in most cases, and if it be possible, it is the expresse command of God that Peace be kept, Rom. 13. Againe,2. Godly strife. it is necessary, honourable, godly, &c. with civill and earthly weapons to defend the innocent, and to rescue the oppressed from the vio∣lent pawes and jaws of oppressing persecuting Nimrods, Psal. 73. Iob 29. It is as necessary, yea more honourable, godly, and Christian, to ight the ight of faith, with religious and spirituall Artillery, and to contend earnestly for the faith of Iesus, once delivered to the Saints against all op∣posers, and the gates of earth and hell, men or devils, yea against Paul himselfe, or an Angell from heaven, if he bring any other faith or do∣ctrine, Iude vers. 4. Gal. 1. 8. Peace. With the clashing of such Armes am I never wakened.A three∣fold dole∣full cry. Christs worship is his bed, Cant. 1. 16. False wor∣ship there∣fore is a false bed. Speake once againe (deare Truth) to my second complaint of bloody persecu∣tion, and devouring wars, marching under the colours of upright Iu∣stice, and holy Zeale, &c. Truth. Mine eares have long beene filled with a threefold dolefull Outcry. First, of one hundred forty foure thousand Virgins (Rev. 14) forc'd and ravisht by Emperours, Kings, and Governours to their beds of wor∣ship and Religion, set up (like Absalems) on high in their severall States and Countries.
Secondly,The cry of the soules un∣der the Altar. the cry of those precious soules under the Altar (Rev. 6.) the soules of such as have beene persecuted and slaine for the testimony and witnesse of Iesus, whose bloud hath beene spilt like water upon the earth, and that because they have held fast the truth and witnesse of Iesus, against the worship of the States and Times, compelling to an uniformity of State Religion. These cries of murthered Virgins who can sit still and heare? Who can but run with zeale inflamed to prevent the destowring of chaste soules, and spilling of the bloud of the innocent? Humanity stirs up and prompts the Sonnes of men to draw materiall swords for a Virgins chastity and life, a∣gainst a ravishing murtherer? And Piety and Christianity must needs a∣waken the Sons of God to draw the spirituall sword (the Word of God) to preserve the chastity and life of spirituall Virgins, who abhorre the spirituall defilements of false worship, Rev. 14. Thirdly,A cry of the whole earth. the cry of the whole earth, made drunke with the bloud of its inhabitants, slaughtering each other in their blinded zeale, for Conscience, for Religion, against the Catholickes, against the Lutherans, &c. What fearfull cries within these twenty years of hundred thousands men, women, children, fathers, mothers, husbands, wives, brethren, si∣sters, old and young, high and low, plundred, ravished, slaughtered, murthe∣red, famished? And hence these cries, that men ling away the spirituall sword and spirituall artillery (in spirituall and religious causes) and rather trust for the suppressing of each others God, Conscience, and Religion (as they suppose) to an arme of flesh, and sword of steele? Truth. Sweet Peace, what hast thou there? Peace. Arguments against persecution for cause of Conscience. Truth. And what there? Peace. An Answer to such Arguments, contrarily maintaining such persecution for cause of Conscience. Truth. These Arguments against such persecution,The won∣derfull providēce of God in the wri∣ting of the Argu∣ments a∣gainst per∣secution in Milke. and the Answer pleading for it, written (as Love hopes) from godly intentions, hearts, and hands, yet in a marvellous different stile and manner. The Arguments a∣gainst persecution in milke, the Answer for it (as I may say) in bloud. The Authour of these Arguments (against persecution) (as I have beene informed) being committed by som then in power, close prisoner to Newgate, for the witnesse of some truths of Iesus, and having not the use of Pen and Inke, wrote these Arguments in Milke, in sheets of Pa∣per, brought to him by the Woman his Keeper, from a friend in London, as the stopples of his Milk bottle.
In such Paper written with Milk nothing will appeare, but the way of reading it by fire being knowne to this friend who received the Pa∣pers, he transcribed and kept together the Papers, although the Au∣thor himselfe could not correct, nor view what himselfe had written. It was in milke, tending to soule nourishment, even for Babes and Suck∣lings in Christ. It was in milke, spiritually white, pure and innocent, like those white horses of the Word of truth and meeknesse, and the white Linnen or Armour of righteousnesse, in the Army of Iesus. Rev. 6. & 19. It was in milke, soft, meeke, peaceable and gentle, tending both to the peace of soules, and the peace of States and Kingdomes. Peace. The Answer (though I hope out of milkie pure intentions) is re∣turned in bloud: bloudy & slaughterous conclusions; bloudy to the souls of all men,The An∣swer writ in Bloud. forc'd to the Religion and Worship which every civil State or Com∣mon-weale agrees on, and compells all subjects to in a dissembled uniformitie. Bloudy to the bodies, first of the holy witnesses of Christ Iesus, who testifie against such invented worships. Secondly, of the Nations and Peoples slaughtering each other for their severall respective Religions and Consciences. CHAP. III. Truth. IN the Answer Mr. Cotton first layes downe severall distin∣ctions and conclusions of his owne, tending to prove persecu∣tion. Secondly, Answers to the Scriptures, and Arguments proposed a∣gainst persecution. Peace. The first distinction is this:The first distinctiō discussed. By persecution for cause of Con∣science, I conceive you meane either for professing some point of doctrine which you beleeve in conscience to be the truth, or for practi∣sing some worke which you beleeve in conscience to be a religious dutie. Truth. I acknowledge that to molest any person,Desiniti∣on of per∣secution discussed. Iew or Gentile, for either professing doctrine, or practising worship meerly religious or spiri∣tuall, it is to persecute him, and such a person (what ever his doctrine or practice be true or false) suffereth persecution for conscience. But withall I desire it may bee well observed, that this distinction is not full and complete: For beside this that a man may be persecuted
because he holdeth or practiseth what he beleeves in conscience to be a Truth, (as Daniel did, for which he was cast into the Lyons den. Dan. 6.) and many thousands of Christians, because they durst not cease to preach and practise what they beleeved was by Go commanded,Consci∣ence will not be re∣strained from its own wor¦ship, nor constrai∣ned to an∣other. as the Apostles answered (Acts 4 & 5.) I say besides this a man may also be persecuted, because hee dares not be constrained to yeeld obedience to such doctrines and worships as are by men invented and appointed. So the three famous Iewes were cast into the fiery furnace for refusing to fall downe (in a non-conformity to the whole conforming world) be∣fore the golden Image, Dan. 3. 21. So thousands of Christs witnesses (and of late in those bloudy Marian dayes) have rather chose to yeeld their bodies to all sorts of torments, then to subscribe to doctrines, or practise worships, unto which the States and Times (as Nabuchadnezzar to his golden Image) have compelled and urged them. A chaste wife will not onely abhorre to be restrained from her hus∣bands bed,A chaste soule in Gods worship like a chast wife. as adulterous and polluted, but also abhor (if not much more) to bee constrained to the bed of a stranger. And what is abominable in corporall, is much more loathsome in spirituall whoredome and defilement. The Spouse of Christ Iesus who could not finde her soules beloved in the wayes of his worship and Ministery, (Cant. 1. 3. and 5. Chapters) abhorred to turne aside to other Flockes, Worships, &c. and to imbrace the bosome of a false Christ, Cant. 1. 8. CHAP. IV. Peace. THe second distinction is this. In points of Doctrine some are fundamentall,The se∣cond di∣stinction discussed without right beleefe whereof a man cannot be saved: others are circumstan∣tiall and lesse principall, wherein a man may differ in judgement with∣out prejudice of salvation on either part. Truth. To this distinction I dare not subscribe,Gods peo∣ple may erre from the very funda∣mentals of visible worship. for then I should ever∣lastingly condemne thousands, and ten thousands, yea the whole gene∣ration of the righteous, who since the falling away (from the first primi∣tive Christian state or worship) have and doe erre fundamentally con∣cerning the true matter, constitution, gathering and governing of the Church: and yet farre be it from any pious breast to imagine that they are not saved, and that their soules are not bound up in the bundle of eternall life. We reade of foure sorts of spirituall or Christian foundations in the New Testaments.
First, the Foundation of all foundations,4 sorts of spirituall Foundati∣ons the Corner-stone it selfe, the Lord Iesus, on whom all depend, Persons, Doctrines, Practices, 1. Cor. 3. 2. Ministriall foundations. The Church is built upon the founda∣tion of the Apostles and Prophets, Ephel. 2. 20. 3. The foundation of future rejoycing in the fruits of Obedience, 1 Tim. 6. 4. The foundation of Doctrines, The sixe Foundati∣ons of the Christian Religion or Wor∣ship. without the knowledge of which, there can be no true profession of Christ, according to the first instituti∣on, Heb. 6. The foundation or principles of Repentance from dead works, Faith towards God, the Doctrine of Baptisme, Laying on of Hands, the Resurrection, and Eternall Iudgement. In some of these, to wit, those concerning Baptismes, & Laying on of Hands, Gods people will be found to be ignorant for many hundred yeares: and I yet cannot see it proved that light is risen, I mean the light of the first institution, in practice. Gods people in their persons, Heart-waking (Cant. 5. 2.) in the life of personall grace, will yet be found fast asleep in respect of publike Christian Worship. Gods people (in their persons) are His, most deare and precious:Comming out of Ba∣bell, not locall but mysticall. yet in respect of the Christian Worship they are mingled amongst the Baby∣lonians, from whence they are called to come out, not locally (as some have said) for that belonged to a materiall and locall Babell, (and, lite∣rall Babell and Ierusalem have now no difference, Iohn 4. 21.) but spi∣ritually and mystically to come out from her sins and Abominations. If Mr. Cotton maintaine the true Church of Christ to consist of the true matter of holy persons call'd out from the World; and the true forme of Vnion in a Church Covenant; And that also, neither Nationall, Pro∣vinciall, nor Diocesan Churches are of Christs institution: how many Thousands of Gods people of all sorts, (Clergie and Laitie, as they call them) will they finde both in former and later times, captivated in such Nationall, Provinciall, and Diocesan Churches? yea and so far from li∣ving in, yea or knowing of any such Churches (for matter and forme) as they conceive now only to be true,The great Ignorance of Gods people concerning the Nature of the true Church. that untill of late yeares, how few of Gods people knew any other Church then the Parish Church of dead stones or timber? It being a late marvailous light revealed by Christ Iesus the Sun of Righteousnesse, that his people are a Company or Church of living stones, 1 Pet. 2 9. And however his own Soule, and the soules of many others (precious to God) are perswaded to separate from Nationall, Provinciall, and Di∣ocesan Churches, and to assemble into particular Churches: yet since
there are no Parish Churches in England,Mr. Cotton & all the Halfe Se∣perates, halting between true & fals Churches, and conse∣quently, not yet clear in the funda∣mentall matter of a Christiā Church. but what are made up of the Parish bounds within such and such a compasse of houses; and that such Churches have beene and are in constant dependance on, and subordi∣nation to the Nationall Church: how can the New-English particular Churches joyne with the Old English Parish Churches in so many Ordi∣nances of Word, Prayer, Singing, Contribution, &c. but they must needs confesse, that as yet their Soules are farre from the knowledge of the foun∣dation of a true Christian Church, whose matter must not only be living stones, but also separated from the rubbish of Antichristian confusions and desolations. CHAP. V. Peace. WIth lamentation I may adde: How can their Soules be cleare in this foundation of the true Christian matter, who persecute and oppresse their own (acknowledged) Brethren pre∣senting Light unto them about this Point? But I shall now present you with Mr. Cottons third distinction. In point of Practice (saith he) some concerne the weightier duties of the Law, as, What God we wor∣ship, and with what kind of Worship: whether such, as if it be Right, fellowship with God is held; if false, fellowship with God is lost. Truth. It is worth the inquirie, what kind of Worship he intendeth; for Worship is of various signification: whether in generall acceptation he meane the rightnesse or corruptnesse of the Church,The true Ministrie a Funda∣mentall. or the Ministry of the Church, or the Ministrations of the Word, Prayer, Seales, &c. And because it pleaseth the Spirit of God to make the Ministry one of the foundations of the Christian Religion, (Heb. 6. 12.) and also to make the Ministrie of the Word and Prayer in the Church, to be two speciall works (even of the Apostles themselves) Acts 6. 2. I shall desire it may be well considered in the feare of God. First, concerning the Ministery of the Word; The New-English Mini∣sters, when they were new elected & ordained Ministers in New Englād, must undeniably grant,The New English Ministers examined. that at that time they were no Ministers, not∣withstanding their profession of standing so long in a true Ministry in Old England, whether received from the Bishops (which some have maintained true) or from the People, which Mr. Cotton & others better liked, and which Ministrie was alwayes accounted perpetuall and in∣delible: I apply, and aske, Will it not follow, that if their new Mini∣stry and Ordination be true, the former was false? and if false, that in the
exercise of it (notwithstanding abilities, graces, intentions, labours, and (by Gods gracious, unpromised, & extraordinary blessing) some successe) I say, will it not according to this distinction follow, that according to visible rule, Fellowship with God was lost? Secondly, concerning Prayer;Common Prayer cast off, & written a∣gainst by the New-English. The New English Ministers have dis∣claimed and written against that worshipping of God by the Common or set formes of Prayer, which yet themselves practised in England, not∣withstanding they knew that many servants of God in great sufferings witnessed against such a Ministrie of the Word, and such a Ministrie of Prayer. Peace. I could name the persons, time and place, when some of them were faithfully admonished for using of the Common prayer, and the Arguments presented to them, then seeming weake, but now ac∣knowledged sound: yet at that time they satisfied their hearts with the practice of the Author of the Councell of Trent, who used to read only some of the choicest selected Prayers in the Masse-booke, (which I con∣fesse was also their own practice in their using of the Common-Prayer.) But now according to this distinction, I ask whether or no fellowship with God in such prayers was lost. Truth. I could particularize other exercises of Worship, which can∣not be denied (according to this distinction) to be of the waightier points of the Law, to wit, [What God we Worship, and with what kind of wor∣ship:] wherein fellowship with God (in many of our unclean and abo∣minable Worships) hath been lost. Only upon these premises I shall ob∣serve. First, that Gods people, even the standard-bearers and leaders of them (according to this distinction) have worshipped God (in their sleepy ignorance) by such a kind of Worship,Gods people have worship∣ped God with false worships. as wherein fellowship with God is lost; yea also this it is possible for them to do, after much light is risen against such Worship, and in particular, brought to the eyes of such holy and worthy persons. Secondly, there may be inward and secret fellowship with God in false Ministeries of Word and Prayer,It pleaseth God some∣times, be∣yond his promise, to convey blessings & comfort to His, in false wor∣ships. (for that to the eternall prayse of Infi∣nite Mercy beyond a word or promise of God I acknowledge) when yet (as the distinction saith) in such worship (not being right) fellowship with God is lost, and such a service or ministration must be lamented and forsaken. Thirdly, I observe that Gods people may live and die in such kindes of worship, notwithstanding that light from God publikely and privately, hath beene presented to them, able to convince: yet not reaching to
their conviction and forsaking of such wayes, contrary to a conclusion af∣terward exprest,Funda∣mentals of Chri∣stian wor∣ship not so easie and cleare. to wit, [That fundamentals are so cleere, that a man cannot but be convinced in Conscience, and therefore that such a person not being convinced, he is condemned of himselfe, and may be persecuted for sinning against his conscience.] Fourthly, I observe that in such a maintaining a clearnesse of funda∣mentals or waightier points, and upon that ground a persecuting of men, because they sinne against their consciences, Mr. Cotton measures that to others, which himselfe when he lived in such practices, would not have had measured to himselfe. As first, that it might have beene affirmed of him, that in such practices he did sinne against his conscience, having sufficient light shining about him. Secondly, that hee should or might lawfully have beene cut off by death or banishment, as an Hereticke, sinning against his owne conscience. And in this respect the Speech of King Iames was notable to a great Non-conformitant converted (as is said by King Iames) to conformity,A notable speech of K. Iames to a great non-con∣formist, turned persecuter. and counselling the King afterward to persecute the Non-conformists evn unto death: Thou Beast (quoth the King) if I had dealt so with thee in thy non-conformity, where hadst thou beene? CHAP. VI. Peace. THe next distinction concerning the manner of persons holding forth the aforesaid practices (not onely the waightier duties of the Law,The 4. distinctiō discussed. but points of doctrine and worship lesse principall.) Some (saith he) hold them forth in a meeke and peaceable way: some with such arrogance and impetuousnesse, as of it selfe tendeth to the disturbance of civill peace. Truth. In the examination of this distinction we shall discusse, First, what is civill Peace, (wherein we shall vindicate thy name the better.) Secondly, what it is to hold forth a Doctrine or Practice in this im∣petuousnesse or arrogancy. First,What ci∣vill peace is. for civill peace, what is it but pax civitatis, the peace of the Ci∣tie, whether an English City, Scotch, or Irish Citie, or further abroad, French, Spanish, Turkish City, &c. Thus it pleased the Father of Lights to define it, Iorem. 29. 7. Pray for the peace of the City; which peace of the City, or Citizens, so com∣pacted in a civill way of union, may be intire, unbroken, safe, &c. not∣withstanding
so many thousands of Gods people the Iewes, were there in bondage, and would neither be constrained to the worship of the Citie Ba∣bell, nor restrained from so much of the worship of the true God, as they then could practice, as in plaine in the practice of the 3 Worthies, Sha∣drach, Misach, and Abednego, as also of Daniel, Dan. 3. & Dan. 6. (the peace of the City or Kingdome, being a far different Peace from the Peace of the Religion or Spirituall Worship, maintained & professed of the Citizens. This Peace of their Worship (which worship also in some Cities being various) being a false Peace,Gods peo∣ple must be Non∣conformi∣tants to Evill. Gods people were and ought to be Nonconformitants, not daring either to be restrained from the true, or constrained to false Worship, and yet without breach of the Civill or Citie-peace, properly so called. Peace. Hence it is that so many glorious and flourishing Cities of the World maintaine their Civill peace, yea the very Americans & wildest Pagans keep the peace of their Towns or Cities;The diffe∣rence be∣tween Spi∣rituall and Civill Peace. though neither in one nor the other can any man prove a true Church of God in those places, and consequently no spirituall and heavenly peace: The Peace spiri∣tuall (whether true or false) being of a higher and farre different na∣ture from the Peace of the place or people, being meerly and essenti∣ally civill and humane. Truth. O how lost are the sonnes of men in this point? To illu∣strate this: The Church or company of worshippers (whether true or false) is like unto a Body or Colledge of Physitians in a Citie; like unto a Corporation, Society, or Company of East-Indie or Turkie-Merchants, or any other Societie or Company in London: which Companies may hold their Courts, keep their Records, hold, disputations; and in matters con∣cerning their Societie, may dissent, divide, breake into Schismes and Fa∣ctions, sue and implead each other at the Law, yea wholly breake up and dissolve into pieces and nothing, and yet the peace of the Citie not be in the least measure impaired or disturbed; because the essence or be∣ing of the Citie, and so the well-being and peace thereof is essentially distinct from those particular Societies;The diffe∣rence be∣tween the Spirituall and Civill State. the Citie-Courts, Citie-Lawes, Citie-punishments distinct from theirs. The Citie was before them, and stands absolute and intire, when such a Corporation or Societie is taken down. For instance further, The City or Civill state of Ephesus was essen∣tially distinct from the worship of Diana in the Citie, or of the whole city. Againe, the Church of Christ in Ephesus (which were Gods people, converted and call'd out from the worship of that City unto Christianitie or worship of God in Christ) was distinct from both.
Now suppose that God remove the Candlestick from Ephesus, yea though the whole Worship of the Citie of Ephesus should be altered:The Civil State, the Spirituall estate, and the Church of Christ distinct in Ephesus. yet (if men be true and honestly ingenuous to Citie-covenants, Combinations and Principles) all this might be without the least impeachment or in∣fringement of the Peace of the City of Ephesus. Thus in the Citie of Smirna was the Citie it selfe or Civill estate one thing, The Spirituall or Religious state of Smirna, another; The Church of Christ in Smirna, distinct from them both; and the Synagogue of the Iewes, whether literally Iewes (as some thinke) or mystically, false Chri∣stians, (as others) called the Synagogue of Sathan, Revel. 2. distinct from all these. And notwithstanding these spirituall oppositions in point of Worship and Religion, yet heare we not the least noyse (nor need we, if Men keep but the Bond of Civility) of any Civill breach, or breach of Civill peace amongst them: and to persecute Gods people there for Re∣ligion, that only was a breach of Civilitie it selfe. CHAP. VII. Peace. NOw to the second Quaerie, What it is to hold forth Do∣ctrine or Practice in an arrogant or impetuous way? Truth. Although it hath not pleased Mr. Cotton to declare what is this arrogant or impetuous holding forth of Doctrine or Practice tending to disturbance of Civill peace,The An∣swerer too obscure in generalls. I cannot but expresse my sad and sorrow∣full observation, how it pleaseth God to leave him, as to take up the common reproachfull accusation of the Accuser of Gods children;Gods mee∣kest ser∣vants use to be counted arrogant and impe∣tuous. 6 cases wherein Gods peo∣ple have been bold & zealous, yet not ar∣rogant. to wit, that they are arrogant and impetuous: which charge (together with that of obstinacie, pertinacie, pride, Troublers of the Citie, &c.) Sa∣than commonly loads the meekest of the Saints and Witnesses of Iesus with. To wipe off therefore these fowle blurs and aspersions from the faire and beautifull face of the Spouse of Iesus, I shall select and propose 5 or 6 cases, for which Gods witnesses in all Ages and Generations of Men, have been charged with arrogance, impetuousnes, &c. and yet the God of Heaven, and Iudge of all men, hath graciously discharged them from such crimes, and maintained and avowed them for his faithfull and peaceable servants. First, Gods people have proclaimed, taught, disputed for divers months together, a new Religion and Worship, contrary to the Worship projected
in the Towne,Christ Je∣sus and his Disciples teach pub∣likely a new Do∣ctrine, fun∣damental∣ly diffe∣rent from the Religi∣on profes∣sed. City, or State, where they have lived, or where they have travelled, as did the Lord Iesus Himselfe over all Galile, and the Apo∣stles after Him in all places, both in the Synagogues and Market-places, as appeares Acts 17. 2. 17. Acts 18. 48. Yet this no Arrogance nor Impetuousnesse. Secondly, Gods servants have been zealous for their Lord and Master, even to the very faces of the Highest, and concerning the persons of the Highest, so far as they have opposed the Truth of God: So Eliah to the face of Ahab, It is not I, but thou, and thy Fathers house that troublest Israel: So the Lord Iesus concerning Herod, Goe tell that Fox: So Paul, God delivered me from the mouth of the Lion; and to Ananias,Gods ser∣vants zea∣lous and bold to the faces of the High∣est. Thou whited wall, and yet in all this no Arrogance, nor Impe∣tuousnesse. Thirdly, Gods people have been immoveable, constant and resolved to the death, in refusing to submit to false Worships, and in preaching and pro∣fessing the true worship, contrary to expresse command of publicke Au∣thority: So the three famous Worthies against the command of Nobil∣chadnezzar,Gods peo∣ple con∣stantly im∣moveable to death. and the uniforme conformity of all Nations agreeing upon a false worship, Dan. 3. So the Apostles (Acts 4 and 5 chap.) and so the witnesses of Iesus in all ages, who loved not their lives to the death (Rev. 12.) not regarding sweet life nor bitter death, and yet not Arro∣gant, nor Impetuous. Fourthly, Gods people since the comming of the King of Israel,Gods peo∣ple ever maintai∣ned Christ Jesus the only Lord and King to the con∣science. the Lord Iesus, have openly and constantly profest, that no Civill Magi∣strate, no King nor Caesar have any power over the Soules or Conscien∣ces of their Subjects, in the matters of God and the Crowne of Iesus, but the Civill Magistrates themselves; yea Kings and Keisars are bound to subject their owne soules to the Ministery and Church, the Power and Government of this Lord Iesus, the King of Kings. Hence was the charge against the Apostles (false in Civill, but true in spiritualls) that they affirmed that there was another King, one Iesus, Acts 17. 7. And indeed, this was the great charge against the Lord Iesus Himself, which the Iews laid against Him, and for which he suffered Death, as appears by the Accusation written over His Head upon the Gallows, Iohn 9. 19. Iesus of Nazareth King of the Iewes. This was and is the summe of all true preaching of the Gospell or glad newes,That Christ is King a∣lone over conscience is the sum of all true preaching. viz. That God anointed Jesus to be the sole King and Governour of all the Israel of God in spirituall and soule causes, Psal. 2. 6. Acts 2. 36. Yet this Kingly power of His he resolved not to man∣age
in His owne Person, but Ministerially in the hands of such Messen∣gers which he sent forth to preach and baptise, and to such as belee∣ved that word they preached, Iohn 17. And yet here no Arrogance nor Impetuousnesse. 5. Gods people in delivering the Minde and Will of God concerning the Kingdomes and Civill States where they have lived, have seemed in all shew of common sense and rationall policie (if men looke not higher with the eye of saith) to endanger and overthrow the very Ci∣vill State,Gods people have see men the disturbers of Civill State. as appeareth by all Ieremses preaching and counsell to King Zedechia, his Princes and people, insomuch that the charge of the Prin∣ces against Ieremiah was, that he discouraged the Army from fighting against the Babylonians, and weakned the Land from its own defence, and this charge in the eye of reason, seemed not to be unreasonable or unrighteous, Ier. 37. 38. chapters, and yet in Ieremy no Arrogance nor Impetuousnesse. 6. Lastly, Gods people by their preaching, disputing, &c. have beene (though not the cause) yet accidentally the occasion of great conten∣tions and divisions,Gods word and people the occa∣sion of tumults. yea tumults and uproares in Townes and Cities where they have lived and come, and yet neither their Doctrine nor themselves Arrogant nor Impetuous, however so charged: For thus the Lord Jesus discovereth mens false and secure suppositions, Luke 1. 51. Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on the earth? I tell you nay, but rather division, for from hence forth shall there be five in one house divided, three against two, and two against three, the father shall be divided against the sonne, and the sonne against the father, &c. And thus upon the occa∣sion of the Apostles preaching, the Kingdome and Worship of God in Christ, were most commonly uproares and tumults, where ever they came: For instance, those strange and nonstrous uproares at Iconium, at Ephesus, at Ierusalem, Acts 14. 4. Acts 19. 29. 40. Acts 21. vers. 30, 31. CHAP. VIII. Peace. IT will be said (deare Truth) what the Lord Jesus and his Messengers taught was Truth, but the question is about Errour. Truth. I answer, this distinction now in discussion, concernes not Truth, or Errour, but the manner of holding forth or divulging.
I acknowledge that such may bee the way and manner of holding forth,The in∣stances proposed carry a great shew of impe∣ousnesse, yet all are pure and peaceable. (either with railing or reviling, daring or chalenging speeches, or with force of Armes, Swords, Guns, Prisons, &c.) that it may not on∣ly tend to breake, but may actually breake the civill peace, or peace of the Citie. Yet these instances propounded are cases of great opposition and spirituall hostility, and occasions of breach of civill peace: and yet as the borders (or matter) were of gold: so the speckes (or manner, Cau∣tic. 1.) were of silver: both matter and manner, pure, holy, peaceable, and inoffensive. Moreover, I answer, that it is possible and common for persons of soft and gentle nature and spirits to hold out falshood with more seem∣ing meeknesse and peaceablenesse, then the Lord Jesus or his servants did or doe hold forth the true and everlasting Gospell. So that the an∣swerer would be requested to explain what he means by this arrogant and impetuous holding forth of any doctrine, which very manner of holding forth tends to breake civill peace, and comes under the cogni∣sance and correction of the Civill Magistrate: Lest hee build the Se∣pulchre of the Prophets, and say, If we had been in the Pharises daies, the Romane Emperours dayes, or the bloody Marian dayes, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets, Mat. 23. 30. who were charged with arrogance and impetuousnesse. CHAP. IX. 2. Ob. Peace. IT will here be said, Whence then ariseth civill dissentions and uproares about matters of Religion? Truth. I answer:The true cause of tumults at the prea∣ching of the Word. When a Kingdome or State, Towne or Family, lyes and lives in the guilt of a false God, false Christ, false worship: no wonder if sore eyes be troubled at the appearance of the light, be it ne∣ver so sweet: No wonder if a body full of corrupt humours be trou∣bled at strong (though wholsome) Physick? If persons sleepy and lo∣ving to sleepe be troubled at the noise of shrill (though silver) alarums: No wonder if Adonijah and all his company be amazed and troubled at the sound of the right Heyre King Salomon,  King. 1. If the Husband∣men were troubled when the Lord of the Vineyard sent servant after servant, and at last his onely Sonne, and they beat, and wounded, and kill'd even the Sonne himselfe, because they meant themselves to seize upon the inheritance, unto which they had no right, Matth. 21. 38.
Hence all those tumults about the Apostles in the Acts, &c. whereas good eyes are not so troubled at light; vigilant and watchfull persons loyall and faithfull, are not so troubled at the true, no nor at a false Re∣ligion of Jew or Gentile. Secondly,A prepo∣sterous way of suppressing errours. breach of civil peace may arise, when false and idolatrous practices are held forth, & yet no breach of civil peace from the doctrine or practice, or the manner of holding forth, but from that wrong and preposterous way of suppressing, preventing, and extinguishing such doctrines or practices by weapons of wrath and blood, whips, stockes, imprisonment, banishment, death, &c. by which men commonly are perswaded to convert Heretickes, and to cast out uncleane spirits, which onely the finger of God can doe, that is the mighty power of the Spirit in the Word. Hence the Towne is in an uproare,Light on∣ly can ex∣pell fogs and dark∣nesse. and the Country takes the Ala∣rum to expell that fog or mist of Errour, Heresie, Blasphemy, (as is sup∣posed) with Swords and Guns; whereas tis Light alone, even Light from the bright shining Sunne of Righteousnesse, which is able, in the soules and consciences of men to dispell and scatter such fogges and darknesse. Hence the Sons of men, (as David speakes in another case, Psal. 39.) disquiet themselves in vaine, and unmercifully disquiet others, as (by the helpe of the Lord) in the sequell of this discourse shall more ap∣peare. CHAP. X. Peace. NOw the last distinction is this: Persecution for Consci∣ence, is either for a rightly informed conscience, or a blinde and erroneous conscience. Answ. Truth. Indeed both these consciences are persecuted: but lamentably blinde and erronious will these consciences shortly appear to be,Persecu∣tors op∣presse both true and erroneous conscien∣ces. which out of zeale for God (as is pretended) have persecuted ei∣ther. And heavie is the doome of those blinde Guides and Idoll Shep∣herds (whose right eye Gods finger of jealousie hath put out) who flat∣tering the ten Homes or worldly Powers, perswade them what excel∣lent and faithfull service they performe to God, in persecuting both these consciences: either hanging up a rightly informed conscience, and therein the Lord Jesus himselfe, betweene two malefactors, or else killing the erroneous and the blinde, like Saul (out of zeale to the Is∣rael
of God) the poore Gibeonites, whom it pleased God to permit to live: and yet that hostility and cruelty used against them (as the repea∣ted judgement yeare after yeare upon the whole Land after told them) could not be pardoned, untill the death of the persecutor Saul his sons had appeased the Lords displeasure, 2 Sam. 21. CHAP. XI. Peace. AFter explication in these Distinctions, it pleaseth the An∣swerer to give his resolution to the question in foure parti∣culars. First, that he holds it not lawfull to persecute any for conscience sake rightly informed, for in persecuting such (saith he) Christ himself is persecuted: for which reason, truly rendred, he quotes Act. 9. 4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Truth. He that shall reade this Conclusion over a thousand times, shall as soone finde darknesse in the bright beames of the Sunne, as in this so cleare and shining a beame of Truth, viz. That Christ Jesus in his Truth must not be persecuted. Yet this I must aske (for it will be admired by all sober men) what should be the cause or inducement to the Answerers mind to lay down such a Position or Thesis as this is, It is not lawfull to persecute the Lord Iesus. Search all Scriptures, Histories, Records, Monuments, consult with all experiences, did ever Pharaoh, Saul, Ahab, Iezabel, Scribes and Pharises, the Jewes, Herod, the bloudy Neroes, Gardiners, Boners, Pope or Devill himselfe, professe to persecute the Son of God, Jesus as Jesus, Christ as Christ, without a mask or covering? No, saith Pharaoh, the Isrealites are idle, and therefore speake they of sacrificing: David is risen up in a conspiracy against Saul, there∣fore persecute him: Naboth hath blasphemed God and the King, there∣fore stone him: Christ is a seducer of the people, a blasphemer against God, and traytor against Caesar, therefore hang him: Christians are schismaticall, factious, hereticall, therefore persecute them: The De∣vill hath deluded Iohn Hus, therefore crowne him with a paper of De∣vils, and burne him, &c. Peace. One thing I see apparantly in the Lords over-ruling the pen of this worthy Answerer,All perse∣cutors of Christ professe not to per∣secute him. viz. a secret whispering from heaven to him, that (although his soules ayme at Christ, and hath wrought much for
Christ in many sincere intentions,All perse∣cutors of Christ, professe not to per∣secute him and Gods mercifull and patient ac∣ceptance) yet he hath never left the Tents of such who think they doe God good service in killing the Lord Jesus in his servants, and yet they say, if we had beene in the dayes of our Fathers in Queene Maries dayes, &c. we would never have consented to such persecution: And therefore when they persecute Christ Jesus in his truths or servants, they say, Doe not say you are persecuted for the Word for Christ his sake, for we hold it not lawfull to persecute Iesus Christ. Let me also adde a second; So farre as he hath beene a Guide (by preaching for persecution) I say, wherein he hath beene a Guide and Leader, by mis-interpreting and applying the Writings of Truth, so far I say his owne mouthes and hands shall judge (I hope not his persons, but) his actions, for the Lord Jesus hath suffered by him, Act. 9. 3. and if the Lord Jesus himselfe were present, himselfe should suffer that in his owne person, which his servants witnessing his Truth doe suffer for his sake. CHAP. XII. Peace. THeir second Conclusion is this: It is not lawfull to perse∣cute erroneous and blinde conscience, even in funda∣mentall and weighty points, till after admonition once or twice, Tit. 3. 11. and then such consciences may be persecuted, because the Word of God is so cleare in fundamentall and weighty points, that such a person cannot but sin against his conscience, and so being con∣demned of himselfe, that is, of his conscience, hee may be persecuted for sinning against his owne conscience. Truth. I answer, in that great battell betweene the Lord Jesus and the Devill, it is observable that Sathan takes up the weapons of Scrip∣ture, and such Scripture which in shew and colour was excellent for his purpose: but in this 3. of Titus, as Salomon speakes of the Birds of heaven, Prov. 1. a man may evidently see the snare; and I know the time is comming wherein it shall bee said, Surely in vaine the Net is laid in the sight of the Saints (heavenly Birds.) So palpably grosse and thicke is the mist and fog which Sathan hath raised about this Scripture, that he that can but see men as trees in mat∣ters of Gods worship, may easily discerne what a wonderfull deepe sleepe Gods people are fallen into concerning the visible Kingdome of Christ, in so much that this third of Titus which through fearfull pro∣phanations,
hath so many hundred years been the pretended Bulwark and defence of all the bloudy Wolves, dens of Lions, and mountains of Leopards, hunting and devouring the Witnesses of Jesus, should now be the refuge and defence of (as I hope) the Lambes and little ones of Jesus, yet (in this point) so preaching and practising so unlike to them∣selves, to the Lord Jesus, and lamentably too like to His and their Persecutors. CHAP. XIII. Peace. BRight Truth, since this place of Titus is such a pretended Bulwark for persecuting of Hereticks, & under that pretence of persecuting all thy followers, I beseech you by the bright beames of the Sun of Righteousnesse, scatter these mists, and unfold these par∣ticulars out of the Text: First, What this Man is that is an Hereticke. Secondly, How this Hereticke is condemned of himselfe. Thirdly, What is this first and second Admonition, and by whom it is supposed to be given. Fourthly, What is this rejecting of Him, and by whom it is supposed this Rejection was to be made. Truth. First,What is meant by Hereticke in Titus. What is this Heretick? I find him commonly defined to be such an one as is obstinate in Fundamentalls, and so also I conceive the Answerer seems to recent him, saying, That the Apostle renders this reason, why after once and twice Admonition, he ought to be persecu∣ted, because in fundamentall and principall points of Doctrine and Worship, the Word of God is so cleare, that the Hereticke cannot but be convinced in his owne Conscience. But of this reason, I finde not one tittle mentioned in this Scripture: for although he saith such an one is condemned of himselfe, yet he saith not, nor will it follow that fundamentalls are so cleare, that after first and second Admonition, a person that submits not to them is condem∣ned of himself, any more then in lesser points. This 11 verse hath refe∣rence to the former verses. Titus an Evangelist, a Preacher of glad Newes, abiding here with the Church of Christ at Creet, is required by Paul to avoid, to reject, and to teach the Church to reject Genea∣logies, disputes, and unprofitable questions about the Law: Such a like charge it is as he gave to Timothy, left also an Evangelist at Ephe∣sus, 1 Tim. 1. 4.
If it should be objected what is to be done to such contentious vain strivers about Genealogies and questions unprofitable? The Apostle seems plainly to answer, Let him be once and twice admonished. Ob. Yea, but what if once and twice admonition prevaile not? The Apostle seems to answer, , and that is, the man that is wilfully obstinate after such once and twice admonition, Re∣ject him. With this Scripture agrees that of 1 Tim. 6. 4, 5. where Timothy is commanded to withdraw himselfe from such who dote about questions and strife of words. All which are points of a lower and inferiour nature, not properly falling within the tearms or notions of those () first principles and () foundations of the Christian Profession, to wit, Repen∣tance from dead workes, Faith towards God, the doctrine of Bap∣tismes, and of laying on of hands, the Resurrection, and eternall Judgement, Heb. 6. 2. &c. Concerning these Fundamentalls (although nothing is so little in the Christian Worship, but may be referred to one of these six, yet) doth not Paul to Timothy or Titus speake in those places by me alledged, o of any of these, as may evidently appeare by the context and scope? The beloved Spouse of Christ is no receptacle for any filthy person, obstinate in any filthynesse against the purity of the Lord Jesus, who hath commanded his people to purge out the old leaven, not only grea∣ter portions, but a little leaven which will leaven the whole lumpe; and therefore this Hereticke or obstinate person in these vaine and un∣profitable questions, was to be rejected, as well as if his obstinacie had been in greater matters. Againe, if there were a doore or window left open to vaine and unprofitable questions, and sinnes of smaller nature, how apt are per∣sons to cover with a silken covering, and to say, Why, I am no He∣reticke in Fundamentalls, spare me in this or that little one; this or that opinion or practice, these are of an inferiour circumstantiall nature? &c. So that the coherence with the former verses, and the scope of the Spirit of God in this and other like Scriptures being carefully observed, this Greek word Hereticke is no more in true English and in Truth,The word Hereticke generally mistaken. then an obstinate and wilfull person in the Church of Creet, striving and conten∣ding about those unprofitable Questions and Genealogies, &c. and is not such a monster intended in this place, as mo Interpreters run upon, to wit, One obstinate in Fundamentalls, and as the Answerer makes the
Apostle to write in such Fundamentalls and principall points, wherein the Word of God is so cleare that a man cannot but be convinced in consci∣ence, and therefore is not persecuted for matter of conscience, but for sinning against his conscience. CHAP. XIV. Peace. NOw in the second place, What is this Self-condemnation? Truth. The Apostle seemeth to make this a ground of the rejecting of such a person, because he is subverted and sinneth, being condemned of himselfe: It will appeare upon due search that this selfe∣condemning is not here intended to be in Hereticks (as men say) in fun∣damentalls only, but as it is meant here, in men obstinate in the lesser Questions, &c. First, he is subverted or turned crooked, , a word opposite to streightnesse or rightnesse: So that the scope is, as I conceive, upon true and faithfull admonition once or twice, the pride of heart, or heat of wrath, drawes a vaile over the eyes and heart, so that the soule is tur∣ned loosed and from the checks of truth. Secondly, he sinneth, , that is, being subverted or turned aside; he sinneth or wanders from the path of Truth, and is condemned by him∣selfe , that is, by the secret checkes and whisperings of his owne conscience,Checks of conscience which will take Gods part against a mans selfe, in smiting, accusing, &c. Which checks of conscience we finde even in Gods owne dear people, as is most admirably opened in the 5 of Cant. in those sad, drowsie and unkinde passages of the Spouse in her answer to the knocks and calls of the Lord Iesus; which Gods people in all their awakening acknowledge how sleightly they have listned to the checks of their owne consciences. This the Answerer pleaseth to call sinning against his conscience, for which he may lawfully be persecuted, to wit, for sinning against his conscience. Which conclusion (though painted over with the vermillion of mista∣ken Scripture, and that old dreame of Iew and Gentile, that the Crowne of Iesus will consist of outward materiall gold, and his sword be made of iron or steele, executing judgement in his Church and Kingdome by cor∣porall punishment) I hope (by the assistance of the Lord Jesus) to ma∣nifest it to be the overturning and rooting up the very foundation and
roots of all true Christianity, and absolutely denying the Lord Iesus the Great Anointed to be yet come in the Flesh. CHAP. XV. THis will appeare, if we examine the two last Quaries of this place of Titus: to wit, First, What this Admonition is? Secondly, What is the Rejection here intended? Reject him. First then, Titus, unto whom this Epistle & these directions were writ∣ten, (and in him to all that succeed him in the like work of the Gospell to the Worlds end) he was no Minister of the Civill State, armed with the majestie and terrour of a materiall sword,What is the first & second ad∣monition. who might for offences a∣gainst the civill state, inflict punishments upon the bodies of men, by im∣prisonments, whippings, sines, banishment, death. Titus was a Minister of the Gospel or Glad tidings, armed onely with the Spirituall sword of the Word of God, and such Spirituall weapons as (yet) through God were mighty to the casting down of strong holds, yea every high thought of the highest head and heart in the world, 2 Cor. 10. 4. Therefore these first and second Admonitions were not civill or cor∣porall punishments on mens persons or purses, which the Courts of Men may lawfully inflict upon Malefactors: but they were the reprehensions,What the rejecting of the He∣retick was. convictions, exhortations, and perswasions of the Word of the Eternall God, charged home to the Conscience, in the name and presence of the Lord Iesus, in the middest of the Church. Which being despised and not hearkned to, in the last place followes rejection; which is not a cutting off by heading, hanging, burning, &c. or an expelling of the Country and Coasts: neither which (no nor any lesser civill punishment) Titus nor the Church at Crete had any power to exercise. But it was that dreadfull cutting off from that visible Head and Body,Corporall killing in the Law, typing out Spirituall killing by Excom∣municati∣on in the Gospell. Christ Iesus and his Church; that purging out of the old leaven from the lumpe of the Saints; the putting away of the evill and wicked person from the holy Land and Commonwealth of Gods Israel, 1 Cor. 5. where it is observable, that the same word used by Moses for putting a malefactor to death in typicall Israel, by sword, stoning, &c. Deut 13. 5. is here used by Paul for the spirituall killing or cutting off by Excommunication, 1 Cor. 5. 13. Put away that evill person, &c. Now I desire the Answerer, and any, in the holy awe and feare of God to consider, That
From whom the first and second Admonition was to proceed, from them also was the rejecting or casting out to proceed, as before. But not from the Civill Magistrate (to whom Paul writes not this Epistle, and who also is not bound once and twice to admonish, but may speedily punish, as he sees cause, the persons or purses of Delinquents against his Civill State:) but from Titus the Mini∣ster or Angel of the Church, and from the Church with him, were these first and second Admonitions to proceed; And Therefore at last also this Rejecting, which can be no other but a casting out, or excommunicating of him from their Church∣societie. Indeed, this rejecting is no other then that avoyding which Paul writes of to the Church of Christ at Rome, Rom. 16. 17. which avoyding (however wofully perverted by some to prove persecution) belonged to the Governours of Christs Church & Kingdom in Rome, and not to the Romane Emperour for him to rid and avoyd the World of them, by bloo∣dy and cruell Persecution. CHAP. XVI. Peace. THe third Conclusion is;The third Conclusiō discussed. In points of lesser moment, there ought to be a Toleration. Which though I acknowledge to be the Truth of God, yet 3 things are very observable in the manner of laying it down;Sathans policie. for Sathan useth excellent arrowes to bad markes, and sometimes beyond the intent, and hidden from the eye of the Archer. First (saith he) such a person is to be tolerated,The An∣swerer granteth a Tolerati∣on. till God may be pleased to reveale his Truth to him. Truth. This is well observed by you; for indeed this is the very ground why the Apostle calls for meekenesse and gentlenesse toward all men, and toward such as oppose themselves, 2 Tim. 2. because there is a peradventure or it may be;Patience to be used toward the opposite. It may be God may give them Repentance. That God that hath shewen mercy to one, may shew mercy to another: It may be that eye-salve that anointed one mans eye who was blinde and opposite, may anoint another as blinde and opposite: He that hath given Repentance to the husband, may give it to his wise, &c. Hence that Soule that is lively and sensible of mercy received to it selfe in former blindnesse, opposition and enmitie against God, cannot but be patient and gentle toward the Iewes, who yet deny the Lord Ie∣sus
to be come,The cari∣age of a Soule sen∣sible of mercy, to∣ward other sinners in their blind∣nesse and opposition. and justifie their Fore-fathers in murthering of him: To∣ward the Turkes, who acknowledge Christ a great Prophet, yet affirme lesse than Mahomet. Yea to all the severall sorts of Antichristians, who set up many a false Christ in stead of him. And lastly to the Pagans and wildest sorts of the sons of men, who have not yet heard of the Father, nor the Son. And to all these sorts, Iewes, Turkes, Antichristians, Pagans, when they oppose the light presented to them; In sense of its ow for∣mer opposition, and that God peradventure may at last give repentance: I adde, such a Soule will not onely be patient, but earnestly and con∣stantly pray for all sorts of men, that out of them Gods elect may be called to the fellowship of Christ Iesus, And lastly, not only pray, but endeavour (to its utmost abilitie) their participation of the same grace and mercy. That great Rock upon which so many gallant Ships miscarrie, viz. That such persons, false Prophets, Hereticks, &c. were to be put to death in Israel, I shall (with Gods assistance) remove: as also that fine silken covering of the Image, viz. that such persons ought to be put to death or banished, to prevent the infecting and seducing of others, I shall (with Gods assistance) in the following discourse pluck off. Secondly, I observe from the Scriptures he quoteth for this Tolerati∣on, (Phil. 3. & Rom. 14) how closely, yet I hope unadvisedly, he makes the Churches of Christ at Philippi and Rome,The An∣swerer cō∣founds the Churches in Philippi and Rome with the Cities Phi∣lippi and Rome. all one with the Cities Philippi and Rome, in which the Churches were, and to whom onely Paul wrote. As if what these Churches in Philippi and Rome must tole∣rate amongst themselves, that the Ciies Philippi and Rome must tole rate in their citizens: and what these Churches must not tolerate, that these Cities Philippi and Rome must not tolerate within the compasse of the City, State and Jurisdiction. Truth. Upon that ground, by undeniable consequence, these Cities Philippi and Rome were bound not to tolerate themselves, that is, the Cities and Citizens of Philippi and Rome, in their own Civill life and being, but must kill or expell themselves from their own Cities, as be∣ing Idolatrous worshippers of other gods then the true God in Iesus Christ. But as the Lilie is amongst the Thornes, so is Christs Love among the Daughters:Difference between  the Church and the World. and as the Apple-tree among the Trees of the Forrest, so is her Beloved among the Sons: so great a difference is there between the Church in a Citie or Country, and the Civill state, City or Country in which it is.
No lesse then (as David in another case, Psal. 103. as far as the Hea∣vens are from the Earth) are they that are truly Christs (that is, anoin∣ted truly with the Spirit of Christ) from many thousands who love not the Lord Iesus Christ, and yet are and must be permitted in the World or Civill State, although they have no right to enter into the gates of Ierusalem the Church of God. And this is the more carefully to bee minded,The Church and Civill Scare con∣fusedly made all one. because when ever a toleration of others Religion and Conscience is pleaded for, such as are (I hope in truth) zealous for God, readily produce plenty of Scriptures written to the Church, both before and since Christs comming, all com∣manding and pressing the putting forth of the uncleane, the cutting off the obstinate, the purging out the Leaven, rejecting of Heretickes. As if because brians, thornes, and phistles may not be in the Garden of the Church, therefore they must all bee pluckt up out of the Wildernesse: whereas he that is a Briar, that is, a Iew, a Turke, a Pagan, an Anti∣christian to day, may be (when the Word of the Lord runs freely) a member of Iesus Christ to morrow cut out of the wilde Olive, and plan∣ted into the true. Peace. Thirdly, from this toleration of persons but holding lesser er∣rours,Persecu∣tors have forgotten the bles∣sednesse promised to the mercifull, Math. 5. I observe the unmercifulnesse of such doctrines and hearts, as if they had forgotten the Blessednesse, Blessed are the mercifull, for they shall obtaine mercy, Math. 5. He that is sleightly and but a little hurt, shall be suffered, and meanes vouchsafed for his cure. But the deepe wounded sinners, and leprous, ulcerous, and those of bloudy issues twelve yeares to∣gether, and those which have been bowed down 38. years of their life, they must not be suffered untill peradventure God may give them repen∣tance; but either it is not lawfull for a godly Magistrate to rule and go∣verne such a people (as some have said) or else if they be under govern∣ment, and reforme not to the State Religion after the first and second admonition, the Civill Magistrate is bound to persecute, &c. Truth. Such persons have need, as Paul to the Romanes, Chap. 12. 1. to be besought by the mercy of God to put on bowels of mercy toward such as have neither wronged them in body or goods, and therefore just∣ly should not be punished in their goods or persons. CHAP. XVII. Peace. I Shall now trouble you (deare Truth) but with one conclusion more, which is this: viz. That if a man hold forth errour with
a boysterous and arrogant spirit, to the disturbance of the civill Peace, he ought to be punished, &c. Truth. To this I have spoken too, confessing that if any man com∣mit ought of those things which Paul was accused of (Act. 25. 11.) he ought not to be spared, yea he ought not, as Paul saith, in such ca∣ses to refuse to dye. But if the matter be of another nature, a spirituall and divine nature, I have written before in many cases,What per∣sons are guilty of breach of civil peace and might in many more, that the Worship which a State professeth may bee contradicted and preached a∣gainst, and yet no breach of Civill Peace. And if a breach follow, it is not made by such doctrines, but by the boysterous and violent opposers of them. Such persons onely breake the Cities or Kingdomes peace,The most peaceable wrongful∣ly accused of peace∣breaking. who cry out for prison and swords against such who crosse their judgement or pra∣ctice in Religion. For as Iosephs mistris accused Ioseph of uncleannesse, and calls out for civill violence against him, when Ioseph was chaste, and her selfe guilty: So commonly the meeke and peaceable of the earth are traduced as rebells, factious, peace-breakers, although they deale not with the State or State-matters, but matters of divine and spirituall na∣ture, when their traducers are the onely unpeaceable, and guilty of breach of Civill Peace. Peace. We are now come to the second part of the Answer, which is a particular examination of such grounds as are brought against such persecution. The first sort of grounds are from the Scriptures. CHAP. XVIII. FIrst,The exa∣mination of what is meant by the Tares, and the command of the L. Jesus to let them alone. Matth. 13. 30, 38. because Christ commandeth to let alone the Tares to grow up together with the Wheat, untill the Harvest. Unto which he answereth: That Tares are not Bryars and Thornes, but partly Hypocrites, like unto the godly, but indeed carnall (as the Tares are like to Wheat, but are not Wheat,) or partly such corrupt doctrines or practices as are indeed unsound, but yet such as come very near the truth (as Tares do to the Wheat) and so neer that good men may be taken with them, and so the persons in whom they grow cannot bee rooted out, but good Wheat will be rooted out with them. In such a case (saith he) Christ calleth for peaceable toleration, and not for penall prosecution, ac∣cording to the third Conclusion.
Truth. The substance of this Answer I conceive to be first negative,The An∣swerers fallacious exposition that Tares signifie either Persons, Doctrines or Practi∣ces. that by Tares are not meant persons of another Religion and Worship, that is (saith he) they are not Briars and Thornes. Secondly, affirmative, by Tares are meant either persons, or doctrines, or practices; persons, as hypocrites, like the godly: doctrines or practices corrupt, yet like the truth. For answer hereunto I confesse that not onely those worthy witnesses (whose memories are sweet with all that feare God) Calvin, Beza, &c. but of later times many conjoyne with this worthy Answerer, to satis∣fie themselves and others with such an Interpretation. But alas,The An∣swerer baely af∣firming a most strange in∣terpreta∣tion. how darke is the soule left that desires to walke with God in holy feare and trembling, when in such a waighty and mighty point as this is, that in matters of conscience concerneth the spilling of the bloud of thousands, and the Civill Peace of the World in the taking up Armes to suppresse all false Religions! when I say no evidence or demon∣stration of the Spirit is brought to prove such an interpretation, nor Ar∣guments from the place it selfe or the Scriptures of truth to confirme it; but a bare Affirmation that these Tares must signifie persons, or doctrines and practices. I will not imagine any deceitfull purpose in the Answerers thoughts in the proposall of these three,Sathans subtlete about the opening of Scrip∣ture. persons, doctrines, or practices, yet dare I confidently avouch that the Old Serpent hath deceived their precious soules, and by Tongue and Pen would deceive the soules of others by such a method of dividing the word of truth. A threefold Cord, and so a threefold Snare is strong, and too like it is that one of the three, either Persons, Doctrines, or Practices may catch some feet. CHAP. XIX. Peace. THe place then being of such great importance as concer∣ning the truth of God, the bloud of thousands, yea the bloud of Saints, and of the Lord Iesus in them, I shall request your more diligent search (by the Lords holy assistance) into this Scripture. I shall make it evident, that by these Tares in this Parable are meant persons in respect of their Religion and way of Worship, open and visible professours, as bad as briars and thornes; not onely suspected Foxes, but as bad as those greedy Wolves which Paul speakes of, Acts 20. who with perverse and evill doctrines labour spiritually to devoure the flocke, and to draw away Dis∣ciples after them, whose mouthes must be stopped, and yet no carnall
force or weapon to be used against them, but their mischiefe to bee resisted with those mighty weapons of the holy Armoury of the Lord Iesus, wherein there hangs a thousand shields, Cant. 4. That the Lord Iesus intendeth not doctrines or practices by the tares in this Parable is cleare: for First, the Lord Iesus expresly interpreteth the good seed to be persons, and those the children of the Kingdome; and the tares also to signifie Men, and those the children of the Wicked one, ver. 38. Secondly,Tolera∣tion in Rom. 14. conside∣red. Toleratiō of Jewsh ceremo∣nies for a time upon some grounds in the Je∣wsh Church, proves not toleration of Popish and Anti christian Ceremo∣nies in the Christian Church, although in the State. such corrupt doctrines or practices are not to bee tolerated now as those Iewish observations (the Lords owne Ordinances) were for a while to be permitted, Rom. 14. Nor so long as till the Angels the Reapers come to reape the Harvest in the end of the world. For can we thinke that because the tender Consciences of the Iewes were to be ten∣dred in their differences of meats, that therefore persons must now bee tolerated in the Church (for I speake not of the Civill State) and that to the worlds end, in superstitious forbearing and forbidding of flesh in Popish Lents, and superstitious Fridayes, &c. and that because they were to be tendred in their observation of Iewish Holidayes, that therefore un∣till the Harvest or Worlds end, persons must now be tolerated (I meane in the Church) in the observation of Popish Christmas, Easter, Whitson∣tide, and other superstitious Popish Festivals? I willingly acknowledge, that if the members of a Church of Christ shall upon some delusion of Sathan kneele at the Lords Supper, keep Christ∣mas, or any other Popish observation, great tendernesse ought to bee used in winning his soule from the errour of his way: and yet I see not that persons so practising were sit to be received into the Churches of Christ now, as the Iewes weake in the Faith, (that is, in the Liberties of Christ) were to be received, Rom. 14. 1. And least of all (as before) that the toleration or permission of such ought to continue till Doomes day, or the end of the world, as this Parable urgeth the Toleration: Let them alone untill the Harvest. CHAP. XX. AGaine,Tares proved not to signifie hypocrites Hypocrites were not intended by the Lord Iesus in this fa∣mous Parable. First, the Originall word , signifying all those Weeds which spring up with the Corne, as Cockle, Darnell, Tares, &c. seemes to imply such a kinde of people as commonly and generally are knowne to bee
manifestly different from,Hence were the witnes∣ses of Christ  and others in H. 4. his reigne called Lo∣lards (as some say) from , weeds known well enough, hene taken for signe of barrenesse: Iuslix  & sterl∣l doan∣u a va: others con∣ceive they were so cal∣led from one Lollad, &c. but all Papiss ac∣counted them as Tares be∣cause of their pro∣fession. and opposite to the true worshippers of God, here called the children of the Kingdom; as these weeds, tares, cockle, darnell, &c. are commonly and presently knowne by every husbandman to differ from the wheat, and to be opposite, and contrary, and hurtfull unto it. Now whereas it is pleaded that these tares are like the wheat, and so like that this consimilitude or likenesse is made the ground of this inter∣pretation, viz. That tares must needs signifie hypocrites, or doctrines, or pra∣ctices, who are like Gods children, Truth, &c. I answer, first, The Parable holds forth no such thing, that the like∣nesse of the tares should deceive the servants to cause them to suppose for a time that they were good wheat, but that as soone as ever the tares appeared, ver. 26. the servants came to the housholder about them, ver. 27. the Scripture holds forth no such time wherein they doubted or suspe∣cted what they were. Peace. It may be said they did not appeare to be tares untill the cone was in the blade, and put forth its fruit. Truth. I answer,The false and coun∣terfeit Christians appeare as soon as the true and faithfull. The one appeared as soone as the other, for so the word clearly carries it, that the seed of both having been sowne, when the wheat appeared and put forth its blade and fruit, the tares also were as early, and put forth themselves as appeared also. Secondly, there is such a dissimilitude or unlikenesse, I say such a dissi∣militude, that as soone as tares and wheat are sprung up to blade and fruit, every husbandman can tell which is wheat, and which are tares and cockle, &c. Peace. It may be said true: So when the hypocrite is manifested, then all may know him, &c. but before hypocrites be manifested by fruits they are unknowne. I answer, search into the Parable, and aske when was it that the ser∣vants first complained of the tares to the housholder, but when they ap∣peared or came in sight, there being no interim, wherein the servants could not tell what to make of them, but doubted whether they were wheat or tares, as the Answerer implies. Secondly, when was it that the housholder gave charge to let them alone, but after that they appeared, and were known to be tares, which should imply by this interpretation of the Answerer, that when men are discovered and knowne to be Hypocrites,Hypocriti∣call Christi∣ans. yet stil uch a generation of Hypocrites in the Church must be let alone and tolerated untill the har∣vest or end of the world, which is contrary to all order, piety and safety in the Church of the Lord Iesus, as doubtlesse the Answerers will grant;
so that those Tares being notoriously knowne to be different from the Corne,The Tares cannot sig∣nifie Hypo∣crites. I conclude that they cannot here be intended by the Lord Iesus to signifie secret Hypocrites, but more open and apparent Sinners. CHAP. XXI. THe second reason why these tares cannot signifie hypocrites in the Church,Two sorts of Hypo∣cites: 1. In the Church as Iudas, St. o Mg, and these must be to leated un¦till discove∣red, and no longer. 2. Hypocrites in the world which ae false Chri¦stians, ae Churches, & these the Lord Iesus wi have let alone unto Harvest. I take from the Lord Iesus His own Interpretation of the field (in which both wheat and tares are sowne, which saith he is the World, out of which God chooseth and calleth His Church. The World lyes in wickednesse, is like a Wildernesse or a Sea of wilde Beasts innumerable, fornicators, covetous, Idolaters, &c. with whom Gods people may lawfully converse and cohabit in Cities, Townes, &c. else must they not live in the World, but goe out of it, In which world as soone as ever the Lord Iesus had sowne the good seed, the children of the Kingdome, true Christianity, or the true Church; the Enemy Sathan presently in the night of security, Ignorance and Errour (whilest men slept) sowed also these tares which are Antichristians or false Christians. These strange Professours of the Name of Iesus, the Ministers and Pro∣phets of God, beholding they are ready to runne to Heaven to fetch fie∣ry judgements from thence to consume these strange Christians, and to pluck them by the roots out of the world: But the Son of Man, the meek Lamb of God (for the Elect sake which must be gathered out of Iew and Gentile, Pagan, Antichristian, commands a permission of them in the World,The Field by most, ge∣nerally, but falsely in∣terpreted the Church. untill the time of the end of the World, when the Goats and Sheep, the Tares and Wheat shall be eternally separated each from other. Peace. You know some excellent Worthies (dead and living) have laboured to turne this Field of the World into the Garden of the Church. Truth. But who can imagine that the Wisdome of the Father, the Lord Iesus Christ,The Lord Iesus the great tea∣cher by Pa∣rables, and the only expounder of them. would so open this Parable (as He professedly doth) as that it should be close shut up, and that one difficulty or locke should be opened by a greater and harder, in calling the World the Church? contrary also to the way of the Light and Love that is in Jesus, when he would purposely teach and instruct His scholars contrary to the nature of Parables and similitudes. And lastly, to the nature of the Church or Garden of Christ. CHAP. XXII. IN the former Parable the Lord Iesus compared the Kingdome of Hea∣ven to the sowing of Seed.The scope of the Pa∣rable. The true Messengers of Christ are the
Sowers, who cast the Seed of the Word of the Kingdome upon foure sorts of ground,Foue sorts of ground or hearers of the word in the world and but one properly in the Church, the rest sel∣dome come or acciden∣ally to hear the word in the Church, which word ought to be itted for the feedng of the Church or flocke: prea∣ching for conversion is properly out of the Church. which foure sorts of ground or hearts of men, cannot be sup∣posed to be of the Church, nor will it ever be proved that the Church consisteth of any more sorts or natures of ground properly, but one, to wit, the honest and good ground, and the proper worke of the Church concernes the flourishing and prosperity of this sort of ground, and not the other unconverted ree sorts, who it may be seldome or never come the Church unlesse they be forced by the Civill sword, which the patern or first sowers never used, and being forced they are put into a way of Religion by such a course, if not so, they are forced to live with∣out Religion, for one of the two must necessarily follow, as I shall prove afterward. In the field of the World then are all those sorts of ground, high way hearers, stony and thorny ground hearers, as well as the honest and good ground, and I suppose it will not now be said by the Answerer, that those three sorts of bad grounds were hypocrites or tares in the Church. Now after the Lord Iesus had propounded that great leading Parable of the Sower and the Seed, He is pleased to propound this Parable of the Tares,The scope of the Pa∣rable of the Tares. with admirable coherence and sweet consolation to the honest and good ground, who with glad and honest hearts having received the word of the Kingdome, may yet seem to be discouraged and troubled with so many Antichristians and false Professours of the Name of Christ. The Lord Iesus therefore gives direction concerning these tares, that unto the end of the World successively in all the sorts and generations of them they must be (not approved or countenanced, but) let alone or permitted in the World. Secondly, he gives to His owne good seed this consolation,The Lord Iesus in this arable of the Taes gives dire∣ction and consolation to His ser∣vants. that those heavenly Reapers the Angells in the harvest or end of the World, will take an order and course with them, to wit, they shall binde them in∣to bundles, and cast them into the everlasting burnings, and to make the cup of their consolation run over: He addes vers. 4. Then, then at that time shall the Righteous shine as the Sun in the Kingdome of their Father. These tares then neither being erronious doctrines,The Tares proved pro∣perly to sig∣nifie Anti∣christians. nor corrupt pra∣ctises, nor hypocrites in the true Church intended by the Lord Jesus in this Parable; I shall in the third place by the helpe of the same Lord Jesus) evidently prove that these tares can be no other sort of sinners, but false worshippers, Idolaters, and in particular properly, Antichristians.
CHAP. XXIII. FIrst then, these Tares are such sinners as are opposite and contrary to the children of the Kingdome visibly so declared and manifest, ver. 38.Math. 8. 12 Mat. 21. 43 Gods king¦dome on Earth the visible Church. Now the Kingdome of God below, is the visible Church of Christ Jesus, according to Matth. 8. 12. The children of the Kingdome which are threatned to be cast out, seeme to be the Iewes, which were then the onely visible Church in Covenant with the Lord, when all other Nations followed other gods and worships. And more plaine is that fearefull threatning, Matth. 21. 43. The Kingdome of God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation that will bring forth the fruits thereof. Such then are the good seed, good wheat, children of the Kingdome, as are the disciples, members and subjects of the Lord Iesus Christ his Church & Kingdom: and therefore consequently such are the tares, as are opposite to these, Idolaters, Will-worshippers, not truly but falsly submitting to Iesus: and in especiall, the children of the wicked one, visibly so appea∣ring. Which wicked one I take not to be the Devill; for the Lord Ie∣sus seemes to make them distinct:The diffe∣rence be∣tween the Wheat & the Tares, as also be∣tween these Tares and all other. He that sowes the good seed (saith he) is the Son of man, the field is the World, the good seed are the Chil∣dren of the Kingdome, but the Tares are the children of the wicked, or wickednesse, the enemy that sowed them, is the Devill. The Originall here, , agrees with that, Luk. 11. 4. Deliver us , from evill or wickednesse; opposite to the children of the Kingdome and the righteousnesse thereof. CHAP. XXIV. Peace. IT is true, that all drunkards, thieves, uncleane persons, &c. are opposite to Gods children. Truth. Answ. Their opposition here against the children of the King∣dome, is such an opposition as properly sights against the Religious state or Worship of the Lord Iesus Christ. Secondly, it is manifest, that the Lord Jesus in this parable intends no other sort of sinners, unto whom he saith, Let them alone, in Church or State; for then he should contradict other holy and blessed ordinances for the punishment of offenders both in Christian and Civill State. First, in Civill state, from the beginning of the World, God hath ar∣med
Fathers, Masters, Magistrates, to punish evill doers,Civill Ma∣gistracie from the beginning of the World. that is, such of whose actions Fathers, Masters, Magistrates are to judge, and accor∣dingly to punish such sinners as transgresse against the good and peace of their Civill state, Families, Townes, Cities, Kingdomes: their States, Governments, Governours, Lawes, Punishments and Weapons being all of a Civill nature:Offenders against the Civill lawes not to be per∣petually tolerated. Nor of∣fenders in the Church of Christ Jesus to be sured. and therefore neither disobedience to parents or magi∣strates, nor murther nor quarrelling, uncleannesse nor lasciviousnesse, stea∣ling nor extortion, neither ought of that kinde ought to be let alone, ei∣ther in lesser or greater families, townes, cities, kingdomes, Rom. 13. but seasonably to be supprest, as may best conduce to the publike safetie. Againe secondly, in the Kingdome of Christ Iesus, whose kingdoms, officers, lawes, punishments, weapons, are spirituall and of a Soule-nature, he will not have Antichristian idolaters, extortioners, covetous, &c. to be let alone, but the uncleane and lepers to be thrust forth, the old leaven purged out, the obstinate in sinne spiritually stoned to death, and put away from Israel; and this by many degrees of gentle admonition in private and publique, as the case requires. Therefore if neither offenders against the civill Lawes, State and peace ought to be let alone; nor the Spirituall estate, the Church of Iesus Christ ought to beare with them that are evill, Revel. 2. I conclude, that these are sinners of another nature, Idolaters, False-worshippers, Antichristians, who without discouragement to true Christians must be let alone and permitted in the world to grow and fill up the measure of their sinnes, after the image of him that hath sowen them, untill the great Harvest shall make the difference. CHAP. XXV. THirdly, in that the officers unto whom these Tares are referred, are the Angels the heavenly Reapers at the last day, it is cleare as the light,The great Reapers are the Angels. that (as before) these Tares cannot signifie Hypocrites in the Church, who when they are discovered and seen to be Tares opposite to the good fruit of the good seed, are not to be let alone to the Angels at Harvest or end of the world, but purged out by the Governors of the Church, and the whole Church of Christ. Againe, they cannot be of∣fenders against the civill state and Common welfare, whose dealing with is not suspended unto the comming of the Angels, but unto Men,
who (although they know not the Lord Iesus Christ, yet) are lawfull Governours and Rulers in Civill things. Accordingly in the 4. and last place, in that the plucking up of these tares out of this field must bee let alone unto the very harvest or end of the world, it is apparent from thence, that (as before) they could not signifie hypocrites in the Church, who when they are discovered to be so, (as these tares were discovered to be tares) are not to be suffered (after the first and second Admonition) but to be rejected, and every Brother that walketh disorderly to be withdrawen or separated from: So like∣wise no offendour against the Civill state, by robbery, murther, adultery, oppression, sedition, mutinie, is for ever to be connived at, and to enjoy a perpetuall toleration unto the Worlds end, as these tares must. Moses for a while held his peace against the sedition of Korah, Da∣than,The Tares to be tole∣rated the longest of any sin∣ners. and Abiram. David for a season tolerated Shimei, Ioab, Adonijah; but till the Harvest or end of the World, the Lord never intended that any but these spirituall and mysticall Tares should be so permitted. CHAP. XXVI. NOw if any imagine that the time or date is long,The dan∣ger of in∣fection by these tares assoyled. Lamenta∣ble expe∣rience hath pro∣ved this true of late in Eu∣rope, and lamenta∣bly true in the slugh∣ter of some hun∣dred thou∣sands of the Eng∣lish. that in the meane season they may doe a world of mischiefe before the Worlds end, as by infection, &c. Truth. First, I answer, that as the civill State keepes it selfe with a civill Guard, in case these Tares shall attempt ought against the peace and welfare of it, let such civill offences be punished, and yet as Tares oppo∣site to Christs Kingdome, let their Worship and Consciences be tolerated. Secondly, the Church or spirituall State, City, or Kingdome hath lawes, and orders, and armories, (whereon there hang a thousand Bucklers, Cant. 4.) Weapons and Ammunition, able to break down the strongest Holds, 1 Cor. 10. and so to defend it selfe against the very Gates of Earth or Hell. Thirdly, the Lord himself knows who are his, & his foundation remai∣neth sure, his Elect or chosen cannot perish nor be finally deceived. Lastly, the Lord Iesus here in this Parable layes downe two Reasons, able to content and satisfie our hearts to beae patiently this their con∣tradiction and Antichristianity, and to permit or let them alone. First, lest the good Wheat bee pluckt up and rooted up also out of this Field of the World, if such combustions and fightings were, as to pluck up all the false professours of the name of Christ, the good wheat also
would enjoy little peace, but be in danger to bee pluckt up and torne out of this world by such bloody stormes and tempests. And therefore as Gods people are commanded, Ier. 29. to pray for the peace of materiall Babell, wherein they were captivated, and 1 Time. 2. to pray for all men, and specially Kings and Governors, that in the peace of the civill State they may have peace. So contrary to the opinion and practice of most (drunke with the Cup of the Whores fornication) yea, and of Gods owne people fast asleepe in Antichristian Dalilahs laps, obedience to the command of Christ to let the tares alone, will prove the onely meanes to preserve then Civill Peace, and that without obedi∣ence to this command of Christ, it is impossible (without great trans∣gression against the Lord in carnall policy, which will not long hold out to preserve the civill peace. Beside, Gods people the good Wheat are generally pluckt up and persecuted, as well as the vilest idolaters, whether Jewes or Antichri∣stians, which the Lord Jesus seemes in this Parable to foretell. The second Reason noted in the Parable which may satisfie any man from wondring at the patience of God,The great & dread∣full Har∣vest. is this: when the world is ripe in sinne, in the sinnes of Antichristianisme (as the Lord spake of the sinnes of the Amorites, Gen. 12.) then those holy and mighty Officers and Exe∣cutioners, the Angels, with their sharpe and cuting sickles of eternall vengeance, shall downe with them, and bundle them up for the everla∣sting burnings. Then shall that Man of Sin, 2 Thess. 2. be consumed by the breath of the mouth of the Lord Iesus, and all that worship the Beast and his pi∣cture, and receive his mark into their forehead or their hands, shall drink of the Wine of the wrath of God which is poured out without mixture into the Cup of his indignation, and he shall be tormented wit ie and brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lambe, and the smoake of their torment shall ascend up for ever and e∣ver, Rev. 14. 10. 11. CHAP. XXVII. Peace. YOu have beene larger in vindicating this Scripture from the violence offered unto it, because as I said  such great consequence, as also because so many excellent  have not rightly vided it, to the great misguiding of many precious , which
otherwise might have beene turned into the paths of more peaceable∣nesse in themselves and towards others. Truth. I shall be briefer in the Scriptures following.The charge of Christ Je∣sus, Let a¦lone the Tares, was not spoken to Magi∣strates, Ministers of the ci∣vill state, but to Mi∣nisters of the Gos∣pel. Peace. Yet be∣fore you depart from this, I must crave your patience to satisfie one Ob∣jection, and that is; These servants to whom the Housholder answereth, seem to be the Ministers or Messengers of the Gospel, not the Magistrates of the civill State, and therfore this charge of the Lord Jesus is not given to Magistrates to let alone false worshippers and idolaters. Againe, being spoken by the Lora Iesus to his Messengers, it seemes to concern Hypocrites in the Church, as before was spoken, and not false worshippers in the State or World. Truth. I answer, first,The civill Magistrate not so particular∣ly spoken to as Fa∣thers and Masters in the New Testamēt, and why. Eph. 5. 6. Col. 3. 4. &c. I beleeve I have sufficiently and abundantly proved, that these tares are not offenders in the civill State. Nor second∣ly, Hypocrites in the Church, when once discovered so to bee, and that therefore the Lord Iesus intends a grosser kinde of Hypocrites, professing the name of Churches and Christians in the field of the World or Com∣monwealth. Secondly, I acknowledge this command [Let them alone] was ex∣presly spoken to the Messengers or Ministers of the Gospel, who have no civill power or authority in their hand, and therefore not to the civill Magistrate, King, or Governour, to whom it pleased not the Lord Iesus by himselfe or by his Apostles to give particular Rules or directions con∣cerning their behaviour and carriage in Civill Magistracy, as they have done expresly concerning the duty of fathers, mothers, children, masters, servants, yea and of Subjects towards Magistrates, Ephes. 5. & 6. Colos. 3. & 4. &c. I conceive not the reason of this to be (as some weakly have done) because the Lord Jeus would not have any followers of his to hold the place of civill Magistracy, but rather that he foresaw, and the Holy Spi∣rit in the Apostles foresaw how few Magistrates,A twofold state of Christia∣nity, the persecuted under the Roman Emperors, and the Apostate ever since. either in the first per∣secuted, or apostated state of Christianity would imbrace his yoake: in the persecuted state, Magistrates hated the very name of Christ or Christianity: In the state apostate some few Magistrates (in their per∣sons holy and precious, yet) as concerning their places, as they have professed to have beene Governours or Heads of the Church, have beene so many false Heads, and have constituted so many false visible Christs. Thirdly, I conceive this charge of the Lord Jesus to his Messengers the Preachers and Proclaimers of his minde, is a sufficient declaration
of the minde of the Lord Iesus, if any civill Magistrate should make question what were his duty concerning spirituall things. The Apostles, and in them all that succeed them, being commanded not to pluck up the Tares, but let them alone, received from the Lord Iesus a threefold charge. First,Christs Messen∣gers re∣ceive a threefold charge in that pro∣hibition of Christ, Let them alone. Gods people not to pray for h pre∣sent ruine and de∣struction of idola∣ters, al∣though their per∣secutors, but for their peace and salva∣tions. The word of God ghtly de∣ounced plucks up kngms. to let them alone, and not to plucke them up by prayer to God for their present temporall destruction. Ieremie had a Commission to plant and build, to pluck up and destroy Kingdomes, Ier. 1. 10. therefore hee is commanded not to pray for that people whom God had a purpose to pluck up, Jer. 14 11. and he plucks up the whole Nation by prayer, Lament. 3. 66. Thus Elijah brought fire from heaven to consume the Captaines and the ifties, 2 King. 1. and the Apostles desired also so to practise against the Samaritanes, Luc. 9. 54. but were reproved by the Lord Iesus. For contrarily, the Saints and Servants and Churches of Christ are to pray for all men, especially for all Magistrates (of what sort or Religions soever) and to seeke the peace of the City (what ever City it be) because in the peace of the place Gods people have peace also, Ier. 297. 2 Tim. 2. &c. Secondly, Gods Messengers are herein commanded not to prophe∣sie or denounce a present destruction or extirpation of all false professours of the name of Christ, which are whole Townes, Cities, and Kingdomes full. Ieremy did thus pluck up Kingdomes in those fearfull Prophecies hee poured forth against all the Nations of the World, throughout his Chap. 24. 25. 26. &c. as did also the other Prophets in a measure, though none comparably to Ieremy and Ezekiel. Such denunciations of present temporall judgements are not the Mes∣sengers of the Lord Iesus to poure forth. Tis true, many fore and fearfull plagues are poured forth upon the Romane Eperours and Romane Popes in the Revelation, yet not to their utter extirpation or plucking up untill the Harvest. Thirdly, I conceive Gods Messengers are charged to let them alone and not pluck them up, by exciting and stirring up Civill Magistrates, Kings, Emperours, Governours, Parliaments, or Generall Couts or Assemblies, to puish and persecute all such persons out of their Domi∣nions and Territories, as worship not the true God according to the revealed will of God in Christ Iesus.Gods Mi∣nisters are  to provoke  Tis  Eliiah thus stirred up A∣hab to kill all the Priests and Prophets of Baal, ut that was in  sig∣raive state of the Land of Canaan (as I have already and shall further
manifest) not to be matcht or paralleld by any other State, but the spiri∣tuall State or Church of Christ in all the world,1 et. 2. 9. putting the false Pro∣phets and Idolaters spiritually to death by the two-edged sword and po∣wer 1 Cor. 5. of the Lord Iesus, as that Church of Israel did corporally. Ad therefore aith Paul expresly, 1 Cor. 5. 10.Compa∣nying with . 1 Cor. 5 discussed. we must goe out of the world, in case we may not company in civill converse with Idola∣ters &c. Peace. It may be said some sorts of sinners are there mentioned, as Drunkards, Raylers, Extortioners, who are to bee punished by the Ci∣vill Sword, why not Idolaters also? for although the Subject may law∣fully converse, buy and fell, and live with such, yet the Civill Magistrate shall neverthelesse be justly blamed in suffering of them. Truth. I answer,Lawfull converse with ido∣laters in civill, but not in spi∣rituall things. the Apostle in this Scripture speakes not of per∣mission of either, but expresly showes the difference betweene the Church and the World, and the lawfulnesse of conversation with such persons in civill things, with whom it is not lawfull to have converse in spirituals: secretly withall foretelling, that Magistrates and Peo∣ple, whole States and Kingdomes should bee Idolatrous and Anti∣christian, yet with whom notwithstanding the Saints and Churches of God might lawfully cohabit, and hold civill converse and conversation. Concerning their permission of what they judge Idolatrous, I have and shall speake at large. Peace. Oh how contrary unto this command of the Lord Iesus haveDange∣rous and ungoun∣ded zeale. such as have conceived themselves the true Messengers of the Lord Ie∣sus, in all ages, not let such Professours and Prophets alone, whom they have judged Tares, but have provoked Kings and Kingdomes (and some one of good intentions and zeale to God) to prosecute and per∣secute such even unto death? Amongst whom Gods people (the good wheat) hath also beene pluckt up, as all Ages and Histories testifie, and too too oft the World laid upon bloody heapes in civill and intestine de∣solations on this occasion. All which would bee prevented, and the greatest breaches made up in the peace of our owne or other Coun∣tries, were this command of the Lord Jesus obeyed, to wit, to let them alone untill the Harvest. CHAP. XXVIII. I Shall conclude this controversie about this Parable in this briefe and recapitulation of what hath beene said, I hope by the evident de∣monstration
of Gods Spirit to the conscience I have First, that the Tares in this Parable cannot signifie Doctrines or Pra∣ctices (as was affirmed) but Persons. Secondly, the Tares cannot signifie Hypocrites in the Church either undiscovered or discovered. Thirdly, the Tares here cannot signifie Scandalous Offenders in the Church. Fourthly, nor scandalous offenders in life and conversation against the Civill state. Fifthly, The field in which these Tares are sowne, is not the Church Againe affirmatively: First, the Field is properly the World, the Civill State or Common-wealth. Secondly, The Tares here intended by the Lord Iesus, are Anti∣christian idolaters, opposite to the good seed of the Kingdome, true Chri∣stians. Thirdly, the ministers or messengers of the Lord Iesus ought to let them alone to live in the world,  neither seeke by prayer or prophesie to pluck them up before the Harvest. Fourthly, this permission or suffering of them in the field of the World, is not for hut, but for common good, even for the good of the good Wheat, the people of God Lastly, the patience of God is, and the patience of Men ought to be exercised toward , and yet notwithstanding their doome is fearfull at the harvest, even gathering, bundng, and everlasting burnings by the mighty hand of the Angels in the end of the World. CHAP. XXIX. Peace. THe second Scripture brought against such persecution for cause of Conscience,Mth. 15. 14. the se∣ Scri∣pture con∣trovrted in this cause. is Matth. 15. 14. where the Disciples being troubled at the Pharises cariage toward the Lord Iesus and his doctrines, and relating how they were offended at him, the Lord Iesus commandeth his Disciples to let them alone, and gives this , that the blinde lead the blinde, and both should fall into the ditc. Unto which, Answer is made, That it makes nothing to the Cause, because it was spoken to his private Disciples, and not to publique Officers in Church or State: and also, because
it was spoken in regard of not troubling themselves, or re∣garding the offence which the Pharises tooke. Truth. I answer, (to passe by his assertion of the privacie of the Apostles) in that the Lord Iesus commanding to let them alone, that is, not onely not be offended themselves, but not to meddle with them; it appeares it was no ordinance of God nor Christ for the Disciples to have gone fur∣ther, and have complained to,Christ Je∣sus never directed his Disci∣ples to the civill Ma∣gistrate for help in his cause. and excited the Civill Magistrate to his duty: which if it had been an Ordinance of God and Christ, either for the vindicating of Christs doctrine, or the recovering of the Pharises, or the preserving of others from infection, the Lord Iesus would never have commanded them to omit that which should have tended to these holy ends. CHAP. XXX. Peace. IT may be said, that neither the Romane Caesar, nor Herod, no Pilate knew ought of the true God, or of Christ; and it had been in vaine to have made complaint to them who were not sit and compe∣tent, but ignorant and opposite Iudges. Truth. I answer first,Pauls ap∣pealing to Caesar. Civill Ma∣gistrates never ap∣pointed by God, D∣fenders of the Faith of Jesus. Every o is bound to put forth him selfe to his utmost power in Gods bu∣sinesse; & whre it stops, the guilt will lie. this removes (by the way) that stumbling block which many fall at, to wit, Pauls appealing to Caesar; which since he could not in common sense doe unto Caesar as a competent Iudge in such cases, and wherein he should have also denied his own Apostle∣ship or office, in which regard (to wit in matters of Christ) he was higher then Caesar himselfe: it must needs follow, that his appeale was meerly in respect of his Civill wrongs, and false accusations of sediti∣on, &c. Secondly, if it had been an Ordinance of God, that all Civill Magi∣strates were bound to judge in causes spirituall or Christian, as to sup∣presse heresies, defend the faith of Iesus; although that Caesar, Herod, Pi∣late were wicked, ignorant and opposite, yet the Disciples and the Lord Christ himselfe had been bound to have performed the duty of faithfull Subjects, for the preventing of further evill, and the clearing of them∣selves, and so to have left the matter upon the Magistrates care and conscience, by complaining unto the Magistrate against such evils; for every person is bound to goe so far as lies in his power for the pre∣venting and the redressing of evill; and where it stops in any, and runs nor cleere, there the guilt, like filth or mud, will lie. Thirdly, had it been the holy purpose of God to have established the
doctrine and kingdome of his Son this way,Christ could have easi∣ly been furnished with god∣ly Magi∣strates, if he had so appointed, since his comming, he would have furnished Common-weales, Kingdomes, Cities, &c. then and since, with such temporall Powers and Magistrates as should have been ex∣cellently sit and competent: for he that could have had legions of An∣gels, if he so pleased, could as easily have been, and still be furnished with legions of good and gracious Magistrates to this end and pur∣pose. CHAP. XXXI. IT is generally said, that God hath in former rimes, and doth still, and will hereafter stirre up Kings and Queenes, &c. I answer, that place of Isa. 49. 23. will appeare to be far from pro∣ving such Kings and Queenes Iudges of Ecclesiasticall causes: and if not Iudges, they may not punish. In Spirituall things, themselves are subject to the Church, and cen∣sures of it, although in Civill respects superior. How shall those Kings and Queenes be supreme Governours of the Church, and yet lick the dust of the Churches feet?Gods Is∣rael ear∣nest with God for in Arme of Flesh, which God gives in his anger, and takes a∣way in his wrath. The pu∣nishment of blind Pharises, though let alone, yet is greater then any corporall punish∣ment in the world, in 4 re∣spects. as it is there exprest. Thirdly, Gods Israel of old were earnest with God for a King, for an Arme of Flesh, for a King to protect them, as other Nations had. Gods Israel still have ever been restlesse with God for an Arme of flesh. God gave them Saul in his anger, and took him away in his wrath: And God hath given many a Saul in his Anger, that is, an Arm of Flesh in the way of his Providence, (though I judge not all persons whom Saul in his Calling typed out, to be of Sauls spirit) for I speake of a State and outward visible Power only. I adde, God will take away such stayes on whom Gods people rest, in his wrath, that King David, that is, Christ Iesus the Antitype, in his own Spirituall power in the hands of the Saints, may spiritually and for ever be advanced. And therefore I conclude, it was in one respect that the Lord Iesus said, Let them alone, because it was no Ordinance for any Disciple of Iesus to prosecute the Pharises at Caesars Bar. Beside, let it be seriously considered by such as plead for present cor∣porall punishment, as conceiving that such sinners (though they breake nor Civill peace) should not escape unpunished, I say, let it be consi∣dered, though for the present their punishment is deferred, yet the pu∣nishment inflicted on them will be found to amount to an higher pitch
then any corporall punishment in the World beside, and that in these foure respects. CHAP. XXXII. FIrst by just judgement from God false teachers are starke blinde, Gods sword hath strucke out the right eye of their minde and spirituall under∣derstanding,The eye of the  struck out is worse then for both right and left eye of the body to be  out tenne thousand times. ten thousand times a greater punishment then if the Magi∣strate should command both the right and left eye of their bodies to bee bored or pluckt out, and that in so many fearfull respects if the blinde∣nesse of the soule and of the body were a little compared together, whe∣ther we looke at that want of guidance, or the want of joy and pleasure, which the light of the eye affordeth; or whether we looke at the dam∣age, shame, deformity and danger, which blindenesse brings to the out∣ward man, and much more true in the want of the former, and miseris of the latter in spirituall and soule blindenesse to all eternity. Secondly, how fearfull is that wound that no Balme in Gilead can cure? How deadfull is that blindenesse which for ever to all eye-salve is incurable? For if persons be wilfully and desperately obstinate (af∣ter light shining forth) let them alone faith the Lord.Some soules in∣curable, whom not only cor∣porall b spirituall physke can no∣thing availe. So spake the Lord once of Ephraim, Ephraim is joyned to Idolls, let him alone, Hos. 7. what more lamentable condition then when the Lord hath given a poor sinner over as a hopelesse patient, incurable, which we are wont to ac∣count a orer affliction, then if a man were torne and rack'd, &c. And this I speake not that I conceive that all whom the Lord Iesus commands His servants to passe from, and let alone, to permit and to∣lerate (when it is in their power corporally to molest them) I say that all are thus curale, yet that sometimes that word is spoken by Christ Jesus to is servants to be patient, for neither can corporall or spiritu∣all or Physicke ever heale or cure em. Thirdly, their end is the Ditch, that bottomlesse pit of everlasting se∣paration the holy and sweet Presence of the Father of Lights, Goodnesse and Mercy it selfe,The bot∣tom  blind all. enalesse, , in extremity, universality, and eternity of torments, which most direfull and lamenable downe∣fall, should strike a oly fear & trembling into all  see the Pit, whi∣th are umbling, and cause us to strive so far as by the spirituall eye-salve of the Word of God to heale and  hei soule-destroying blindenesse. , of those that fall into this efull Ditch, both leader and followers, how deplorable in more especiall manner is the leaders case,
upon whose necke the followers tumble, the ruine not only of his owne soule, being horrible, but also the ruine of the followers soules eternal∣ly galling and tormenting. Peace. Some will say these things are indeed full of horrour, yet such is the state of all sinners and of many Malefactours, whom yet the State is bound to punish, and sometimes by death it selfe. Truth. I answer, The Civill Magistrate beareth not the sword in vaine, but to cut off Civill offences, yea and the offendours too in case: But what is this to a blinde Pharisce, resisting the Doctrine of Christ, who happily may be as good a subject, and as peaceable and profitable to the Civill State as any, and for his spirituall offence against the Lord Iesus, in denying Him to be the true Christ, he suffereth the vengeance of a dreadfull judgement both present and eternall, as before. CHAP. XXXIII. Peace. YEa but it is said that the blinde Pharises misguiding the sub∣jects of a Civill State,Soul kil∣ling the chefest murder. No Magi∣strate can execute true justice in killing soule for soule, but christ Je∣sus who by typicall death in the Law, typed out spirituall in the Gospel. A great mistake in most to conceive that dead men, that is, soules dead in sin may be in∣fected by false do∣ctrine. greatly sinne against a Civill State, and therefore justly suffer civill punishment; for shall the Civill Magistrate take care of outsides only, to wit, of the bodies of men, and not of soules, in labouring to procure their everlasting welfare? Truth. I answer, It is a truth, the mischiefe of a blinde Pharises blinde guidance is greater then if he acted Treasons, Murders, &c. and the losse of one soule by his seduction is a greater mischiefe then if he blew up Parliaments, and cuts the throats of Kings or Emperours, so pretious is that invaluable Jewell of a Soul, above all the present lives and bodies of all the men in the world I and therefore a firme Justice calling for eye for eye, tooth for tooth, life for life; calls also soule for soule, which the blinde-guiding seducing Pharisee shall surely pay in that dreadfull Ditch, which the Lord Jesus speakes of, but this sentence a∣gainst him the Lord Jesus only pronounceth in His Church, His spiritu∣all judicature, and executes this sentence in part at present and hereafter to all eternity: Such a sentence no Civill Iudge can passe, such a Death no Civill sword can inlict. I answer secondly, Dead men cannot be infected, the civill state the world, being in a naturall state dead in sin (what ever be the State-Reli∣gion unto which persons are forced) it is impossible it should be infected: Indeed the living, the beleeving, the Church and spirituall state, that and that onely is capable of infection; for whose helpe we shall presently
see what preservatives, and remedies the Lord Iesus hath appointed. Moreover as we see in a common plague or infection the names are ta∣ken how many are to dye,All natu∣rall men being dead in sin, yet none die everlast∣ingly but such as are thereunto ordained. and not one more shall be strucke, then the destroying Angel hath the names of. So here, what ever be the soule infection breathed out from they lying lips of a plague-sicke Pharisee, yet the names are taken, not one elect or chosen of God shall perish, Gods sheep are safe in His eternall hand and counsell, and he that knowes his ma∣teriall, knows also his mysticall stars, their numbers, and calls them every one by name, none fall into the Ditch on the blinde Pharises backe, but such as were ordained to that condemnation, both guid and followers, 1 Pet. 2. 8. Iude 4. The vessells of wrath shall breake and split, and only they to the praise of Gods eternall justice, Rom. 9. CHAP. XXXIV. Peace. BUt it is said, be it granted that in a common plague or infection none are smitten and dye but such as are appointed, yet it is not only every mans duty, but the common duty of the Magistrate to prevent infection, and to preserve the common health of the place; like∣wise though the number of the Elect be sure, and God knowes who are His, yet hath He appointed meanes for their preservation from perdition, and from infection, and therefore the Angel is blamed for suffering Ba∣laams doctrine, and Iesabel to seduce Christ Jesus His servants, Rev. 2. Tit. 3. 10. Rom. 16. 17. Truth. I answer,The Lord Jesus hath not lest his Church without spirituall antidotes and reme∣dies a∣gainst in¦fection. Let that Scripture and that of Titus reject an He∣reticke, and Rom. 16. 17. avoid them that are contentious, &c. let them, and all of like nature be examined, and it will appeare that the great and good Physitian Christ Iesus, the Head of the Body, and King of the Church hath not been unfaithfull in providing spirituall antidotes and preservatives against the spirituall sicknesses, sores, weaknosses, dangers of his Church and people; but he never appointed the civill sword for ei∣ther antidote or remedy, as an addition to those spiritualls, which he hath left with his wife, his Church or People. Hence how great is the bondage, the captivity of Gods owne People to Babylonish or confused mixtures in Worship,The mise∣rable bon∣dage Gods people live in. and unto worldly and earthly policies to uphold State Religions or Worships, since that which is written to the Angel and Church at Pergamus, shall be interpreted as sent to the Governour and City of Pergamus, and that which is sent to Titus, and the Church of Christ at Creet must be delivered to the civill officers and City thereof.
But as the Civill Magistrate hath his charge of the bodies and goods of the subject: So have the spirituall Officers, Governours and overseers of Christs City or Kingdome, the charge of their souls, and soule safety: Hence that charge of Paul to Tim. 1 Tim. 5. 20. Them that sinne rebuke before all, that others may learne to fear. This is in the Church of Christ a spirituall meanes for the healing of a soule that hath sinned, or taken infection, and for the preventing of the infecting of others, that others may learne to feare, &c. CHAP. XXXV. Peace. IT is said true that Titus and Timothy, and so the Officers of the Church of Christ are bound to prevent soule infecti∣on: But what hinders that the Magistrate should not be charged also with this duty? Truth. I answer, many things I have answered, and more shall; at present I shall only say this:The Kings and Queens of England Go∣vernours of the Church. If it be the Magistrate duty or of∣fice, then is he both a Temporall and Ecclesiasticall officer; con∣trary to which most men will affirme: and yet we know the poli∣cie of our owne Land and Country hath established to the Kings and Queens thereof, the supreme heads or governours of the Church of England. That doctrine and distinction that a Magistrate may punish an Heretick civilly will not here availe;Strange confu∣sion in punish∣ments. for what is Babel if this be not confusedly to punish corporall or civill offences with spirituall or Church censures (the offendour not being a member of it) or to pu∣nishWoe were it with the civill Magistrate if he bloud of soules (beside the ordinary care of the bo∣ies d goods f ) shuld ry  him. soule or spirituall offences with corporall or temporall weapons proper to Delinquents against the temporall or civill state. Lastly, woe were it with the civill Magistrate (and most intole∣rable burthens do they lay upon their backs that teach this doctrine) if together with the common care and charge of the Commonwealth (the peace and safety of the Towne, City, State or Kingdome) the bloud of every soule that perisheth should cry against him, unlesse he could say with Paul, Acts 20. (in spirituall regards) I am clear from the blould of all men, that is the bloud of soules, which was his charge to looke after,The Magi∣strates duties toward the Church the Spse of Christ. so far as his preaching went, not the bloud of bodies which belongeth to the civill Magistrate. I acknowledge he ought to cherish (as a foster-father) the Lord Iesus in his truth, in his Saints, to cleave unto them himselfe, and
to countenance them even to the death, yea also to breake the teeth of the Lions, who offer Civill violence and injury unto them. But, to see all his Subjects Christians, to keepe such Church or Christians in the purity of worship, and see them doe their duty, this belongs to the Head of the Body Christ Iesus, and such spiritu∣all Officers as he hath to this purpose deputed, whose right it is ac∣cording to the true paterne:Usurpers and true heires of the spirituall Crowne of Je∣sus. Abimelech, Saul, Adonijah, Athalia were but usurpers: David, Salomon, Ioash, &c. they were the true heires and types of Christ Iesus in His true Power and Authority in His Kingdome. CHAP. XXXVI. Peace. THe next Scripture brought against such persecution is Luke 9. 54, 55.Luke 9. 54. 55 discussed. where the Lord Jesus reproved His Disciples, who would have had fire come downe from Heaven, and devoure those Samaritanes that would not receive Him in these words: You know not of what spirit you are, the Son of Man is not come to destroy mens lives, but to save them. With this Scripture Mr. Cotton joynes the fourth, and answers both in one, which is this, 2 Tim. 2. 24. The servant of the Lord must not strive, but must be gentle toward all men, suffering the evill men, instructing them with meeknesse that are contrary minded and oppose themselves, proving if God peradventure will give them repentance that they may acknowledge the truth, and that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Divell who are taken captive by him at his will. Unto both these Scriptures it pleaseth him thus to answer: Both these are directions to Ministers of the Gospel how to deale (not with obstinate offendors in the Church who sin against con∣science, but) either with men without as the Samaritanes were, and many unconverted Christians in Creet, whom Titus (as an Evan∣gelist) was to seek to convert: Ot at best with some Iewes or Gentiles in the Church, who though carnall, yet were not convinced of the errour of their way: And it is true it became not the Spirit of the Gospel to con∣vert Aliens to the Faith (such as the Samaritanes were) by fire and brimstone,An excellent saying of per∣secutors them∣selves nor to deale harshly in publicke Ministery or pri∣vate conference with all such severall minded men as either had
not yet entred into Church fellowship, or if they had did hitherto sin of ignorance, not against Conscience: But neither of both these Texts doe hinder the Minister of the Gospel to proceed in a Church way against Church members, when they become scandalous offenders either in life o doctrine, much lesse doe they speake at all to the Civill Magistrate. CHAP. XXXVII. Truth. THis perplexed and ravelled Answer, wherein so many things and so doubtfull are wrapt up and intangled to∣gether, I shall take in pieces. First,The Answerer when he should speake to toleration in the State, unnes to pu∣nishments in the Church, which none can deny. concerning that of the Lord Iesus rebuking his Disciples for their rash and ignorant bloudy zeale (Luc. 9.) desiring corporall destruction upon the Samaritanes for refusing the Lord Iesus, &c. the Answerer affirmeth, that hindreth not the Ministers of the Gospell to proceed in a Church way against scandalous offenders, which is not here questioned, but maintained to bee the holy will of the Lord, and a sufficient censure and punishment, if no civill offence a∣gainst the Civill State be committed. Secondly (saith hee) Much lesse doth this speake at all to the Civill Magistrate. Where I observe that he implyes that beside the censure of the Lord Iesus, in the hands of his spirituall governours, for any spirituall evill in life or doctrine,If the Civill Magistrate be a Christian, he is bound to be like Christ in saving, not de∣stroying mens bodies. The civill Magistrate bound not to inflict nor to suffer any o∣ther to inflict violence, stripes, or any corporall pu∣nishment for evill against Christ. the Civill Magistrate is also to inflict corpo∣rall punishment upon the contrary minded: whereas First, if the Civill Magistrate be a Christian, a Disciple or follow∣er of the meeke Lambe of God, he is bound to be far from destroying the bodies of men, for refusing to receive the Lord Iesus Christ, for otherwise hee should not know (according to this speech of the Lord Iesus) what spirit he was of yea and to be ignorant of the sweet end of the comming of the Son of Man, which was not to destroy the bodies of Men, but to save both bodies and soules, vers. 55. 56. Secondly, if the Civill Magistrate, being a Christian, gifted, pro∣phesie in the Church, 1 Corinth. 1. 14. although the Lord Iesus Christ, whom they in their owne persons hold forth, shall be refused, yet they are here forbidden to call for fire from heaven, that is, to pro∣cure or inflict any corporall judgement upon such offenders, remem∣bring the end of the Lord Iesus his comming, not to destroy mens lives, but to save them.
Lastly, this also concernes the conscience of the Civill Magistrate, as he is bound to preserve the civill peace and quiet of the place and people under him, he is bound to suffer no man to breake the Civill Peace, by laying hands of violence upon any, though as vile as the Samaritanes for not receiving of the Lord Iesus Christ. It is indeed the ignorance and blinde zeale of the second Beast, the false Prophet, Rev. 13. 13.Revel. 13. 13. Fire from heaven. What the fire from heaven is which the fals Prophet brin∣geth downe. to perswade the civill Powers of the earth to persecute the Saints, that is, to bring fiery judgements upon men in a judiciall way, and to pronounce that such judgements of imprison∣ment, banishment, death, proceed from Gods righteous vengeance upon such Hereticks. So dealt divers Bishops in France, and England too in Queene Maries dayes with the Saints of God at their putting to death, declaiming against them in their Sermons to the people, and proclaiming that these persecutions even unto death were Gods just judgements from heaven upon these Heretickes. CHAP. XXXVIII. Peace. DOubtlesse such fiery spirits (as the Lord Jesus said) are not of God: I pray speake to the second place out of Timo∣thy, 2. Epist. 25. 26.2 Tim. 3. 25. 26. examined. Truth. I acknowledge this instruction to be meeke and patient, &c. is properly an instruction to the Ministers of the Gospel. Yet divers Arguments from hence will truly and fairly be collected, to manifest and evince how farre the civill Magistrate ought to bee from dealing with the civill sword in spirituall cases. And first by the way I desire to aske, What were these uncon∣verted Christians in Crete, which the Answerer compareth with the Samaritanes, whom Titus (saith he) as an Evangelist was to seek to convert; and whether the Lord Iesus have any such Disciples and Followers, who yet are visibly in an unconverted estate. O that it may please the Father of mercies, the Father of lights, to awaken and open the eyes of all that feare before him, that they may see whe∣ther this be the Language of Canaan, or the Language of Ashdod. What is an unconverted Christian but in truth an unconverted Con∣vert?A quaere what the Answerer meanes by his unconverted Christian in Crete. that is in English, one unturned turned: unholy holy: Disciples or Followers of Iesus not following of him: In a word, that is Chri∣stians or anointed by Christ, Antichristians not anointed with the Spirit of Iesus Christ.
Certaine it is,The originall of Christians. such they were not unto whom the Spirit of God gives that name, Act. 11. And indeed whither can this tend but to uphold the blasphemy of so many as say they are Iewes, that is, Chri∣stians, but are not? Rev. 2. But as they are not Christians from Christ, but from the Beast and his Picture, so their proper name from An∣tichrist, is Antichristians. How sad yet and how true an evidence is this,The Answe∣rer yet in the unconverted Churches and worships. that the soule of the Answerer (I speake not of his inward soule and person, but of his worship) hath never yet heard the call of the Lord Iesus, to come out from those unconverted Churches, from that unconverted An∣tichristian Christian world, and so from Antichrist Belial, to seeke fellowship with Christ Iesus, and his converted Christians, Disciples after the first patterne. Againe, I observe the haste and light attention of the Answerer to these Scriptures (as commonly the spirits of Gods children in matters of Christs Kingdome are very sleepy) for these persons here spoken of were not (as he speakes) unconverted Christians in Crete,Gods people sleepy in the matters of Christs King∣dome, Cant. 5. 2. whom Titus as an Evangelist was to convert, but they were such opposites as Timothy (to whom Paul writes this Letter at Ephesus) should meet withall. CHAP. XXXIX. Peace. BUt what is there in this Scripture of Timothy alledged concerning the civill Magistracy? Truth. I argue from this place of Timothy in particular, thus.1 Cor. 14. Patience and eeknesse re∣quired in all that open Christs my∣steries. First, if the civill Magistrates hee Christians, or members of the Church, able to prophesie in the Church of Christ, then I say as before, they are bound by this command of Christ to suffer opposition to their doctrine, with meeknesse and gentlenesse, and to be so farre from striving to subdue their opposites with the civill sword, that they are bound with patience and meeknesse to wait if God peradventure will please to grant repentance unto their opposites. So also it pleaseth the Answerer to acknowledge in these words: It becomes not the Spirit of the Gospel to convert Aliens to the Faith (such as the Samaritanes, and the unconverted Christi∣ans in Crete) with Fire and Brimstone. Secondly, be they oppositions within, and Church members (as the Answerer speakes) become scandalous in doctrine, (I speake not of
scandals against the civill State, which the civill Magistrate ought to punish) it is the Lord onely (as this Scripture to Timothy implyes) who is able to give them repentance,The civill Sword may make a Nati∣on of Hypo∣crites & Anti∣christians, but not one Chri∣stian. and recover them out of Sa∣thans snare: to which end also he hath appointed those holy and dreadfull censures in his Church or Kingdome. True it is, the Sword may make (as once the Lord complained, Isa. 10.) a whole Nation of Hypocrites: But to recover a Soule from Sathan by repentance, and to bring them from Antichristian doctrine or worship, to the do∣ctrine or worship Christian, in the least true internall or externall sub∣mission, that only works the All-powerfull God, by the sword of his Spirit in the hand of his Spirituall officers. What a most wofull proofe hereof have the Nations of the Earth given in all Ages?Wonderfull changes of Religion in England. And to seeke no further then our native Soyle, within a few scores of yeeres, how many wonderfull changes in Religion hath the whole Kingdome made, according to the change of the Governours thereof, in the severall Religious which they themselves imbraced! Henry the 7. finds and leaves the king∣dome absolutely Popish. Henry the 8. casts it into a mould half Popish halfe Protestant.Englands changes in point of Reli∣gion. Edward the 6. brings forth an Edition all Prote∣stant. Queene Mary within few yeares defaceth Edwards worke, and renders the Kingdome (after her Grandfather Hen. 7. his pattern) all Popish. Maries short life and Religion ends together: and Eli∣zabeth reviveth her Brother Edwards Modell, all Protestant: And some eminent Witnesses of Gods Truth against Antichrist, have en∣clined to believe, that before the downfall of that Beast, England must once againe how down her faire Neck to his proud usurping yoake and foot. Peace. It hath been Englands sinfull shame, to fashion & change their Garments and Religions with wondrous ease and lightnesse, as a higher Power, a stronger Sword hath prevailed; after the ancient patterne of Nebuchaanezzars bowing the whole world in one most solemne uniformitie of worship to his Golden Image, Dan. 3. CHAP. XL. BUt it hath been thought, or said, Shall oppositions against the Truth escape unpunished? will they not prove mischie∣vous, &c. Truth. I answer (as before) concerning the blinde Guides (in
case there be no Civill offence committed) the Magistrates,The miserie of opposites a∣gainst the Truth. & all men that by the mercy of God to themselves discerne the miserie of such Opposites, have cause to lament and bewaile that fearfull condition wherein such are entangled, to wit, in the snares & chains of Satan, with which they are so invincibly caught and held, that no power in Heaven or Earth, but the Right hand of the Lord in the meeke and gentle dispensing of the Word of Truth, can release and quit them. Those many false Christs (of whom the Lord Jesus forewarnes, Mat. 24.) have sutably their false bodies, faith, spirit, Baptisme, as the Lord Jesus, hath his true body,A difference between the true and false Christ and Christians. faith, spirit, &c. Ephes. 4. corre∣spondent also are their weapons, and the successe, issue, or operation of them. A carnall weapon or sword of steele may produce a carnall repentance, a shew, an outside, an uniformitie through a State or Kingdome: But it hath pleased the Father to exalt the Lord Iesus only, to be a Prince (armed with power and meanes sufficient) to give repentance to Israel, Acts 5. 31. Accordingly an unbelieving Soule being dead in sinne (although he be changed from one worship to another, like a dead man shifted into severall changes of apparell) cannot please God, Heb. 11. and consequently, whatever such an unbelieving & unregenerate person acts in Worship or Religion,The worship of unbelieving unregenerate persons. it is but sinne, Rom. 14. Preaching sinne, praying (though without beads or booke) sinne; breaking of bread, or Lords supper sinne, yea as odious as the oblation of Swines blood, a Dogs neck, or killing of a Man, Isa. 66. But Faith it is that gift which proceeds alone from the Father of Lights, Phil. 1. 29. and till he please to make his light arise and open the eyes of blind sinners, their soules shall lie fast asleep (and the faster, in that a sword of steele compells them to a worship in hypo∣crisie) in the dungeons of spirituall darknesse and Sathans slavery. Peace. I adde, that a civill swordThe danger & mischiefe of a civill sword in Soule matters, which makes the civill Ma∣gistrate deeply guilty of all those evils which he aims to suppresse. (as wofull experience in all ages hath proved) is so far from bringing or helping forward an opposite in Religion to repentance, that Magistrates sinne grievously against the worke of God and blood of Soules, by such proceedings. Because as (commonly) the suffrings of false and Antichristian Teachers harden their followers, who being blind, by this meanes are occasioned to tumble into the ditch of Hell after their blind leaders, with more inflamed zeale of lying confidence. So secondly, vio∣lence and a sword of steele begets such an impression in the sufferers,
that certainly they conclude (as indeed that Religion cannot be true which needs such instruments of violence to uphold it so) that Per∣secutors are far from soft and gentle commiseration of the blindnesse of others.That cannot be a true Reli∣gion, which needs carnall weapons to uphold it. Persecutors beget a per∣swasion of their crueltie in the hearts of the persecu∣ted. To this purpose it pleased the Father of Spirits, of old, to constraine the Emperour of Rome, Antoninus Pius,Antoninus Pi∣us his golden act. to write to all the Governours of his Provinces to forbeare to persecute the Christi∣ans, because such dealing must needs be so far from converting the Christians from their way, that it rather begat in their mindes an o∣pinion of their crueltie, &c. CHAP. XLI. Peace. THe next Scripture against such persecution, is that of the Prophet, Isa. 24. together with Mic. 4. 3. they shall break their swords into plough-shares,Isa. 2. 4. Mic. 4. 3. Isa. 11. 9. concerning Christs peace able Kingdom discussed. and their speares into pruning-hookes, Isa. 11. 9. There shall none hurt or destroy in all the mountaine of my Holinesse. Unto which it pleased Mr. Cotton to say, That these predictions doe onely shew, first, with what kinde of weapons he should sub∣due the Nations to the obedience of the faith of the Gospell, not by fire and sword, and weapons of War, but by the power of the Word and Spirit of God, which faith he, no man doubts of. Secondly,Mr. Cottons excellent in∣terpretation of those Prophe∣cies. those predictions of the Prophets shew, what the meeke and peaceable temper will be of all true converts to Christi∣anity; not Lyons or Leopards, not cruell oppressors nor malignant op∣posers or biters one of another: but doth not forbid them to drive ravenous wolves from the sheep-fold, and to restraine them from devouring the sheep of Christ. Truth. In this first excellent and truly Christian Answer, me thinks the Answerer may heare a voyce from Heaven,His doctrine and practice condemned by that inter¦pretation. Out of thine owne mouth will I judge thee: For what can be said more hea∣venly by the tongues of Men and Angels, to shew the heavenly meek temper of all the Souldiers of the Lambe of God, as also to set forth what are the Spirituall weapons and ammunition of the holy war and battle of the Gospell and Kingdome of Iesus Christ, for the subduing of the Nations of the World unto him. Peace. And yet out of the same mouth (which should not be, faith Iames) proceeds good and evill, sweet and sowre; for he addes: But this doth not forbid them to drive ravenous wolves from the
sheepfold, and to restraine them from devouring the sheepe of Christ. Truth. In these words (according to the judgement here main∣tained by him) he fights against the former truth (to wit, that by spirituall weapons Christ Iesus will subdue the Nations of the Earth to the obedience of the Gospel) for by driving away these Wolves hee intends not onely the resistance and violence which the Shepherds of Christ ought spiritually to make, but the civill resistance of the materi∣all Swords,Spirituall and mysticall Wolves. Staves Guns, &c. Whence I argue, that same power that forceth the evill (or Wolves) out, forceth the good (the Sheepe) in; for of the same or like things is the same or like reason; as the same arme of flesh that with a staffe beats off a Wolfe, with a Rod and Hooke brings in the Sheepe: the same dog that assaulteth and teareth the Wolfe, frighteth and forceth in the straggling Sheep. CHAP. XLII. Peace. BVt for the clearer opening of this mystery, I pray expli∣cate that Scripture where the Spirit of God is pleased to use this similitude of Wolves,Act. 20. 29. opened. Acts 20. 29. out of which (keeping to the Allegory) I shall propose these Quaeries. First, what Wolves were these Paul warnes of? Truth. Answ. Wolves literally he will not say: Nor secondly, persecutors of the Flock, such as the Romane Emperours were, Magi∣strates under him. Therefore (thirdly) such as brought other Religions and Worships,What those Wolves were Act. 20. 29. as the Spirit of God opens it, vers. 30. Such as amongst themselves should speake perverse things, as many Antichrists did, and especial∣ly The Antichrist. And I aske whether or no such as may hold forth other Worships or Religions, (Iewes, Turkes, or Antichristians) may not be peaceable and quiet Subjects, loving and helpfull neighbours, faire and just dealers, true and loyall to the civill government? It is cleare they may from all Reason and Experience in many flourishing Cities and Kingdomes of the World, and so offend not against the civill State and Peace; nor incurre the punishment of the civill sword, notwithstanding that in spirituall and mysticall account they are rave∣nous and greedy Wolves. Peace. 2. I quaere to whom Paul gave this charge to watch a∣gainst them, vers. 31.
Truth. They were not the Magistrates of the City of Ephesus, but the Elders or Ministers of the Church of Christ (his mysticall flock of sheepe) at Ephesus: Vnto them was this charge of watching given, and so consequently of driving away these Wolves. And however that many of these charges and exhortations given by that One Shepherd Christ Iesus to the Shepherds or Ministers of Churches,Charges dire∣cted to Mini∣sters of the spiritual king∣dome, fasly applyed to the Magistrates of the civill. be commonly attributed and directed (by the Answerer in this discourse) to the civill Magistrate; yet I desire in the feare and holy presence of God it may bee inquired into, whether in all the Will or Testament of Christ there bee any such word of ChristNo word of Christ to the civill Magi∣strate to feed his flock, but to his Mini∣sters, who (if true) have spi∣rituall power sufficient a∣gainst spiritu∣all Wolves. by way of command, promise, or example, countenancing the Governors of the civill State to meddle with these Wolves, if in civill things peaceable and obedient. Peace. Truly if this charge were given to the Magistrates at E∣phesus, or any Magistrate in the World, doubtlesse they must bee able to discerne and determine (out of their owne officiall abilities in these spirituall Law questions) who are spirituall Sheep, what is their food, what their poison, what their properties, who their Keepers, &c. So on the contrary who are Wolves, what their properties, their haunts, their assaults, the manner of taking, &c. spiritually: (and this beside the care and study of the Civill Lawes, and the discern∣ing of his owne proper Civill Sheep, obedient Sheepe, &c. as also wolvish oppressors, &c. whom he is bound to punish and suppresse) Truth. I know that Civill Magistrates (in some places) have de∣clined the name of Head of the Church,Magistrates decline the name of Head of the Church, and yet pra∣ctise the head∣ship or go∣vernment. and Ecclesiasticall Judge, yet can they not with good conscience decline the name, if they doe the worke, and performe the office of determining and punishing a meerly spirituall Wolfe. They must be sufficiently also able to judge in all spirituall causes, and that with their owne, and not with other mens eyes, (no more then they doe in civill causes) contrary to the common practice of the Governours and Rulers of Civill States, who often set up that for a Religion or Worship to God, which the Clergie or Churchmen (as men speake) shall in their Consciences agree upon. And if this be not so, to wit, that Magistrates must not be Spiri∣tuall Iudges (as some decline it in the title, Supreme Head and Go∣vernour) why is Gallio wont to be exclaimed against for refusing to be a Iudge in such matters as concerned the Iewish Worship and Reli∣gion? How is he censured for a Prophane person, without conscience,
&c. in that he would bee no Iudge or Head? (for that is all one in point of Government.) Peace. In the third place I quaerie whether the Father who gave,The Elect shall not be devou∣red. and the Sonne who keepes the Sheepe, bee not greater then all? Who can pluck these Sheepe the Elect out of his hand, which an∣swers that common objection of that danger of devouring, al∣though there were no other weapons in the world appointed by the Lord Jesus. But CHAP. XLIII. FOurthly,Christ Jesus furnisheth his Shepherds with power sufficient to drive away Wolves. I ask, Were not these Elders or Ministers of the Church of Ephesus sufficiently furnished from the Lord Iesus to drive a∣way these mysticall and spirituall Wolves? Truth. True it is, against the inhumane and uncivill violence of Persecutors, they were not, nor are Gods children able and provided: but to resist, drive away, expell, and kill spirituall & mysticall Wolves by the word of the Lord, none are fit to be Christs Shepherds who are not able Tit. 1. 9. 10. 11.Tit. 1. 9. 10. opened. The Bishop or Overseer must be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince the Gainsayers: which Gainsayers to be by him convinced, that is, overcome or subdued (though it may be in themselves ever obstinate) they were I say as greedy Wolves in Crete, as any could be at Ephesus: for so saith Paul vers. 10. they were unruly and vaine talkers, deceivers, whose mouthes must bee stopped, who subverted whole houses; and yet Titus (and every ordinary Shepherd of a flocke of Christ) had abi∣lity sufficient to defend the flock from spirituall and mysticall wolves without the helpe of the Civill Magistrate. Peace. In this respect therefore me thinks we may itly allude to that excellent answer of Iob to Bildad the Shuhite, Iob 26.Job 26. 1, 2. How hast thou helped him that is without power? How savest thou the arme that hath no strength? How hast thou counselled him that hath no wisedome? how hast thou plentifully declared the thing as it is? 5. Lastly, I ask, whether (as men deale with Wolves) these wolves as Ephesus were intended by Paul to be killed, their braines dasht out with stones, staves, halberts, guns, &c. in the hands of the Elders of Ephesus, &c? Truth. Doubtlesse (comparing spirituall things with spirituall)
all such mysticall wolves must spiritually and mystically so be slain. And the Witnesses of Truth, Revel. 11. speake fire, and kill all that hurt them, by that sierie Word of God, and that two-edged sword in their hand, Psal. 149. But oh what streames of the blood of Saints have been and must be shed (untill the Lambe have obtained the Victorie,Unmercifull and: bloody doctrine. Revel. 17.) by this unmercifull (and in the state of the New Testament, when the Church is spread all the World over) most bloody doctrine, viz. The wolves (Hereticks) are to be driven away, their braines knock out and killed, the poore sheepe to be preserved for whom Christ died, &c. Is not this to take Christ Iesus, and make him a temporall King by force? Iohn 6. 15. Is not this to make his Kingdome of this world, to set up a civill and temporall Israel, to bound out new Earthly holy Lands of Canaan, yea and to set up a Spanish Inquisition in all parts of the World, to the speedy destruction of thousands, yea of millions of Soules, and the frustrating of the sweet end of the com∣ming of the Lord Iesus, to wit, to save mens soules (and to that end not to destroy their bodies) by his own blood? CHAP. XLIV. Peace. THe next Scripture produced against such Persecution, is 2 Cor. 10. 4.John 6. 15. 2. Cor. 10. 4. discussed. The weapons of our warfare are not carnall, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds, ca∣sting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth it selfe against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, and having in a readinesse to avenge all disobedience, &c. Unto which it is answered, When Paul saith, The weapons of our warfare are not carnall, but spirituall: he denieth not ci∣vill weapons of Iustice to the civill Magistrate, Rom. 13. but only to Church-officers: and yet the weapons of Church officers he ac∣knowledgeth to be such, as though they be spirituall, yet are ready to take vengeance on all disobedience, 2 Cor. 10. 6. which hath re∣ference, amongst other Ordinances, to the censures of the Church against scandalous offenders. Truth. I acknowledge that herein the Spirit of God denieth not
civill weapons of justice to the Civill Magistrate, which the Scrip∣ture he quotes, Rom. 13. abundantly testifie. Yet withall I must aske, why he here affirmeth the Apostle de∣nies not civill weapons of Justice to the civill Magistrate? of which there is no question, unlesse that (according to his scope of proving persecution for conscience) he intends withall, that the Apostle denies not civill weapons of justice to the Civill Magistrate in Spirituall and Religious causes: The contrary whereunto (the Lord assisting) I shall evince, both from this very Scripture, and his owne obser∣vation, and lastly by that 13 of the Romanes, by himsefe quo∣ted. First then from this Scripture and his owne Observation: The weapons of Church officers (saith he) are such, which though they be spirituall, are ready to take vengeance on all disobedience; which hath reference (saith he) amongst other Ordinances, to the Cen∣sures of the Church against scandalous offenders. I hence observe,The difference of the civill & spirituall e∣state. that there being in this Scripture held forth a two-fold state, a Civill state and a Spirituall, Civill officers and spi∣rituall, civill weapons and spirituall weapons, civill vengeance and pu∣nishment, and a spirituall vengeance and punishment: although the Spirit speakes not here expresly of Civill Magistrates and their civill weapons,Civill wea∣pons most improper in spirituall cau∣ses: fitly exem∣plified by that similitude, 2 Cor. 10. 4. yet these States being of different Natures and Con∣siderations, as far differing as Spirit from Flesh, I first observe, that Civill weapons are most improper and unfitting in matters of the Spirituall state and kingdome, though in the Civill state most proper and sutable. CHAP. XLV. FOr (to keepe to the similitude which the Spirit useth, for in∣stance) To batter downe a strong hold, high wall, fort, tower or castle, men bring not a first and second Admonition, and after obsti∣nacie, Excommunication, which are spirituall weapons concerning them that be in the Church: nor exhortations to Repent and be bap∣tized, to beleeve in the Lord Jesus, &c. which are proper weapons to them that be without, &c. But to take a strong hold, men bring Canons, Culverins, Saker, Bullets, Powder, Musquets, Swords, Pikes, &c. and these to this end are weapons effectuall and proportio∣nable.
On the other side, to batter downe Idolatry, false worship, heresie, schisme, blindnesse, hardnesse, out of the soule and spirit, it is vaine, improper,Spirituall wea∣pons, only ef∣fectuall in spi¦rituall & soule causes. and unsutable to bring those weapons which are used by persecutors, stocks, whips, prisons, swords, gibbets, stakes, &c. (where these seem to prevaile with some Cities or Kingdomes, a stronger force sets up againe, what a weaker pull'd downe) but against these spirituall strong holds in the soules of men, Spirituall Artillery and weapons are proper, which are mighty through God to subdue and bring under the very thought to obedience, or else to binde fast the soule with chaines of darknesse, and locke it up in the prison of unbeleefe and hardnesse to eternity. 2. I observe that as civill weapons are improper in this businesse,Civill weapons not only im∣proper, but un∣necessary in spirituall cau∣ses. and never able to effect ought in the soule: So (although they were proper, yet) they are unnecessary, for if as the Spirit here saith (and the Answerer grants) spirituall weapons in the hand of Church officers are able and ready to take vengeance on all disobedience, that is able and mighty, sufficient and ready for the Lords worke either to save the soule, or to kill the soule of whomsoever, be the party or parties opposite, in which respect I may againe remember that speech of Iob, How hast thou helped him that hath no power? Iob 26. Peace. Offer this (as Malachie once spake) to the Governours the Kings of the Earth,No earthly Kings or Go∣vernours will be so served, as we pretend to serve the King of Kings. when they besiege, beleagure, and assault great Cities, Castles, Forts, &c. should any subject pretending his service bring store of pins, sticks, strawes, bulrushes, to beat and bat∣ter downe stone walls, mighty Bulwarkes, what might his expe∣ctation and reward be, but at least the censure of a man distract, beside himself? &c. Truth. What shall we then conceive of His displeasure, (who is the chiefe or Prince of the Kings of the earth, and rides upon the Word of Truth and meeknesse, which is that white Horse, Rev. 6. and Rev. 19.Psal. 45. The white Troopers. with His holy witnesses the white Troopers upon white hor∣ses) when to His helpe and aid men bring and adde such unnecessary, improper and weake munition? Will the Lord Iesus (did He ever in His owne Person practice, or did he appoint to) joyne to His Breastplate of Righteousnesse,Spirituall Am∣munition. Eph. 6. applied Materiall and Spirituall htly joyned toge∣ther. the breastplate of iron and steele? to the Helmet of righteousnesse and salvation in Christ, an helmet and crest of iron, brasse, or steel, a tar∣get of wood to His shield of Faith? His two edged sword comming forth of the mouth of Iesus, the materiall sword, the worke of Smiths
and Cutlers? or a girdle of shooes leather to the girdle of truth, &c. Excellently fit and proper is that alarme and item,An alarme to civill or earth∣ly Rulers. Psal. 2. Be wise therefore O ye Kings (especially those ten Horns, Rev. 17.) who under pretence of fighting for Christ Iesus give their power to the Beast against Him, and be warned ye Iudges of the Earth: Kisse the Son, that is with subjection and affection, acknowledge Him only the King and Iudge of soules (in that power bequeathed to His Ministers and Churches) lest if His wrath be kindled, yea but a little, then blessed are they that trust in Him. CHAP. XLVI. Peace. NOw in the second place concerning that Scripture, Rom. 13.Concerning the civill Ru∣lers power in spirituall cau∣ses discust. which it pleaseth the Answerer to quote, and himselfe, and so many excellent servants of God have insisted upon to prove such persecution for Conscience; how have both he and they wrested this Scripture (not as Peter writes of the wicked, to their eternall, yet) to their owne and others temporall destruction by Civill wars and combustions in the world? My humble request therefore is to the Father of Lights, to send out the bright beames of the Sun of Righteousnesse, and to scatter the mist which that old serpent, the great jugler Sathan, hath raised about this holy Scripture, and my request to you (divine Truth) is for your care and paines to inlighten and cleare this Scripture. Truth. First then upon the serious examination of this whole Scripture it will appeare that from the ninth verse of 12 Chap.Rom. 13. speakes not at all of spirituall but civill af∣faires. to the end of this whole 13 Chap. the Spirit handles the duties of the Saints in the carefull observation of the second Table in their civil conversation, or walking towards men, and speaks not at all of any point or matter of the first Table concerning the Kingdome of the Lord Iesus. For, having in the whole Epistle handled that great point of free Iustification by the free Grace of God in Christ in the beginning of the 12 Chap. he exhorts the Beleevers to give and dedicate them∣selves unto the Lord both in soule and body, and unto the 9 verse of the 12 Chap. he expressely mentioneth their conversation in the Kingdome or Body of Christ Iesus, together with the severall Officers thereof. And from the 9 ver. to the end of the 13 he plainly discourseth of
their civill conversation, and walking, one toward another and with all men, from whence he hath faire occasion to speake largely concerning their subjection to Magistrates in the 13 Chap.The scope of Rom 13. Hence it is that verse 7 of this 13 Chap. Paul exhorts to per∣formance of love to all men (Magistrates and subjects) verse 7. 8. Render therefore to all their due,Love to man, the duty of the whole second Table. tribute to whom tribute is due, custome to whom custome, feare to whom feare, honour to whom honour. Owe nothing to any man, but to love one another, for he that loveth another hath fulfilled the Law. If any man doubt (as the Papists speak) whether a man may perfectly fulfill the Law;How love ful∣filleth the Law every man of found judgement is ready to answer him that these words [He that loveth hath fulfilled the Law] concerneth not the whole Law in the first Table, that is the worship and Kingdome of God in Christ. Secondly, That the Apostle speaks not here of perfect observa∣tion of the second Table without failing in word or act toward men, but layes open the summe and sustance of the Law, which is love, and that he that walkes by the rule of love toward all men (Magistrates and subjects) he hath rightly attained unto what the Law aimes at, and so in Evangelicall obedience fulfills and keeps the Law. Hence therefore againe in the 9 verse having discoursed of the 5 Command in this point of Superiours, he makes all the rest of the Commandements of the second Table, which concerne our wal∣king with man (viz. Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not commit adul∣tery, Thou shalt not steale, Thou shalt not beare false witnesse, Thou shalt not covet: and if there be any other Commandement, to be briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy selfe. And verse 10 Love worketh no ill to his neighbour, therefore love is the fulfilling of the Law, that is (as before) the Law concer∣ning our civill conversation toward All men, Magistrates or Gover∣nours, and fellow subjects of all conditions. CHAP. XLVII. Peace. ALthough the Scripture is sufficient to make the man of God perfect,Rom. 13 so in∣terpreted even by them that held persecuti∣on for consci∣ence. and the foole Wise to salvation, and our faith in God must be only founded upon the Rocke Christ, and not upon
the sand of mens judgements and opinions: Yet as Paul alledgeth the judgement and sayings of unbeleevers for their conviction out of their owne tenets and grants: So I pray you to set downe the words of one or two (not unbeleevers in their persons, but excellent and prestious servants and witnesses of God in their times, whose names are sweet and pretious to all that feare God) who although their judgement ran in the common streame, viz. That Magistrates were keepers of the 2 Tables, defendors of the Faith against Hereticks, and notwithstanding what ever they have written for defence of their judgements, yet the light of truth so evidently shined upon their soules in this Scripture, that they absolutely denied the 13 of the Romanes to concerne any matter of the first Table. Truth. First, I shall produce that excellent servant of God,Calvins judge∣ment of Rom. 13. Cal∣vin, who upon this 13 to the Romanes writes; Tot a autem haec dispu∣tatio est de civilibus praefecturis: It a{que}, frustr á inde sacrilegam suam tyrannidem stabilire mosiuntur qui Dominatum in conscientias exerce∣ant. But (saith he) this whole discourse concerneth civill Magi∣strates, and therefore in vaine doe they who exercise power over consciences, goe about from this place to establish their sacrilegious tyranny. Peace. I know how far most men (and especially the sheep of Iesus will lie from the thought of exercising tyranny over consci∣ence) that happily they will disclaime the dealing of all with mens consciences: Yet if the Acts and Statutes which are made by them concerning the worship of God be attended to; their professi∣on (and that out of zeale according to the patterne of that cere∣moniall and figurative state of Israel) to suffer no other Religion nor worship in their Territories,Gods people loath to be found, yet pro∣ved persecu∣tors. but one; their profession and practice to defend their Faith from reproach and blasphemy of Hereticks by Civill weapons, and all that from this very 13 of the Romanes; I say if these particulars and others be with feare and trembling in the presence of the most High examined; the wonderfull deceit of their owne hearts shall appeare unto them, and how guilty they ill ap∣peare to be of wrestling this Scripture before the Tribunall of the most High. Truth. Again Calvin speaking concerning fulfilling of the Law by love, writes thus on the same place: Sed Pauls in totam respic tantum de officiis lequitur, quae nobis erg  demandnur à lig: That is, Paul hath not respect unto the whole Law, he speaks
only of those duties which the Law commands towards our neigh∣bours, and it is manifest, that in this place by our neighbours hee meanes high and low, Magistrates and subjects, unto whom we ought to walke by the rule of love, paying unto every one their due. Againe, Caeterùm Paulus hic tantùm memînit secundae Tabulae quia de ea tantum erat quaestio. But Paul here only mentioneth the second Table, because the question was only concerning that. And againe,Caelvin confes∣seth that the first Table concerning Gods worship, is not here in Rom. 13. tou∣ched. Quod autem repetit complementum legis esse dilectio∣nem, intellige (ut prius) de ea legis parte quod hominum societatem spe∣ctat: Prior enim legis tabula quae est de cultu Dei minimé hic attingi∣tur: But in that he repeateth that love is the fulfilling of the Law, understand as before, that he speakes of that part of the Law which respects humane society; for the first Table of the Law which concerneth the Worship of God is not in the least manner here touched. After Calvin, his successour in Geneva that holy and learned BezaBeza upon Rom. 13. upon the word , if there be any other Com∣mandement it is summed up in this, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy selfe, writes thus: Tota lex nihil aliud quám amorem Dei & proximi praecipit, sed tamen cum Apostolus hoc Ioco de mutuis hominum officiis disserat, legis vocabulum ad secundam Tabulam restringendam puto. The whole Law (saith he) commands nothing else but the love of God, and yet neverthelesse since the Apostle in this place dis∣courseth of the duties of men one toward another, I thinke this terme law ought to be restrained to the second Table. CHAP. XLVIII. Peace. I Pray now proceed to the second Argument from this Scri∣pture against the use of civil weapons in matters of Religion and spirituall worship. Truth. The Spirit of God here commands subjection and obedi∣ence to higher Powers, even to the Romane Emperours and all subor∣dinate Magistrates; and yet the Emperours and Governours under them were strangers from the life of God in Christ, yea most averse and opposite, yea cruell and bloody Persecutors of the name and Fol∣lowers of Iesus: and yet unto these is this subjection and obedience
commanded. Now true it is, that as the civill Magistrate is apt not to content himselfe with the majesty of an earthly Throne, Crowne, Sword, Scepter, but to seat himselfe in the Throne of David in the Church: So Gods people (and it may be in Pauls time) considering their high and glorious preferment and priviledges by Iesus Christ, were apt to be much tempted to despise Civill Governours, especi∣ally such as were ignorant of the Son of God, and persecuted him in his servants. Now then I argue,Paul writes not to the Ro∣mane Gover∣nors to defend the truth, and to punish he∣reticks. if the Apostle should have commanded this subjection unto the Romane Emperours and Romane Magistrates in spi∣rituall causes, as to defend the truth which they were no way able to discerne, but persecuted, (and upon trust from others no Magistrate (not perswaded in his owne conscience) is to take it.) Or else to punish Hereticks, whom then also they must discerne and judge, or else condemne them as the Iewes would have Pilate condemne the Lord Iesus upon the sentence of others, I say if Paul should have (in this Scripture) put this worke upon these Romane Governours, and commanded the Churches of Christ to have yeelded subjection in any such matters, he must (in the judgement of all men) have put out the eye of Faith and Reason and Sense at once. CHAP. XLIX. Peace. IT is said by some, Why then did Paul himselfe, Act. 25. ap∣peale to Caesar, unlesse that Caesar (though he was not, yet) he ought to have beene a fit Iudge in such matters? Truth. I answer, if Paul in this Appeale to Caesar,Pauls appeale to Caesar dis∣cussed. had referred and submitted simply and properly the cause of Christ, his Ministry and Ministration to the Romane Emperours Tribunall, knowing him to be an Idolatrous stranger from  true God,If Paul had ap∣pealed to Caesar in spirituall things, he had committed 5. evils. and a Lion-like bloo∣dy persecutor of the Lord Iesus, the Lambe of God, I say let it be con∣sidered whether or no he had committed these 5. Evils. The first against the dimmest light of Reason in appealing to dark∣nesse to judge light, to unrighteousnesse to judge righteousnesse, the spi∣ritually blinde, to judge and end the controversie concerning hea∣venly colours. Secondly, against the cause of Religion, which if condemned by every inferiour Idolater, must needs bee condemned by the Caesars themselves, who (Nabuchadnezzar-like) set up their State-images or
Religions, commanding the Worlds uniformity of worship to them. Thirdly, against the holy State and Calling of the Christians themselves, who (by virtue of their subjection to Christ) even the least of them are in spirituall things above the highest Potentates or Emperours in the world, who continue in enmity against, or in an ignorant naturall state without Christ Iesus. This honour or high ex∣altation above all his Holy ones, to binde (not literally but spiritu∣ally) their Kings in Chaines, and their Nobles in Linkes of Iron, Psal. 49. Fourthly, against his owne Calling, Apostleship, or office of Mi∣nistery, unto which Caesar himselfe and all Potentates (in spirituall and soule matters) ought to have submitted: and unto which in controversies of Christs Church and Kingdome, Caesar himself ought to have appealed, the Church of God being built upon the founda∣tion of the Apostles and Prophets, Ephes. 2. 20. And therefore in case that any of the Romane Governours,Imperours than them selves if, Christians, subject to the Apostles and Churches in spirituall things. or the Emperour himselfe had beene humbled and converted to Christia∣nity, by the preaching of Christ, were not they themselves bound to subject themselves unto the power of the Lord Iesus in the hands of the Apostles and Churches, and might not the Apostles and Churches have refused to have baptized or washed them into the profession of Christ Iesus, upon the apprehension of their unwor∣thinesse? Or if received into Christian Fellowship, were they not to stand at the Bar of the Lord Iesus in the Church, concerning either their opinions or practices, were they not to be cast out and delivered un∣to Sathan by the power of the Lord Iesus, if after once and twice admonition they persist obstinate, as faithfully and impartially, as if they were the meanest in the Empire: Yea, although the Apostles, the Churches, the Elders or Governours thereof were poore and meane despised persons in civill respects, and were themselves bound to yeeld all faithfull and loyall obedience to such Emperours and Governours in Civill things. Were they not (if Christians) bound themselves to have submit∣ted to these spirituall decrees of the Apostles and Elders, as well as the lowest and meanest members of Christ, Act. 16? And if so, how should Paul appeale in spirituall things to Caesar, or write to the Churches of Iesus to submite in Christian or Spirituall matters? Fifthly, if Paul had appealed to Caesar in spirituall respects, hee
had greatly prophaned the holy name of God in holy things, in so improper and vaine a prostitution of spirituall things to carnall and naturall judgements, which are not able to comprehend spirituall matters, which are alone spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. And yet Caesar (as a civill supreme Magistrate) ought to defend Paul from Civill violence,Lawfull ap∣peales in civill things to Ci∣vill Magi∣strates. and staderous accusations about sedition, mutiny, civill disobedience, &c. And in that sense who doubts but God's people may appeale to the Romane Caesar, an Egyptian Phara∣ch, a Philistian Abimelecke, an Assyrian Nabuchadnezzar, the great Mgol, Prester Iohn, the great Turke, or an Indian Sachim? CHAP. L. Peace. WHich is the third Argument against the civill Magi∣strates power in spirituall and soule matters out of this Scripture, Rom. 13? Truth. I dispute from the nature of the Magistrates weapons, vers. 4. He hath a sword (which hee beares not in vaine) delivered to him, as I acknowledge from Gods appointment in the free consent and choice of the subjects for common good. We must distinguish of swords. We finde foure sorts of swords mentioned in the New Testament.Foure sorts of swords men∣tioned in the New Testa∣ment. First, the sword of persecution, which Herod stretched forth against Iames, Act. 12. Secondly, the sword of Gods Spirit, expresly said to be the Word of God, Ephes. 6. A sword of two edges caried in the mouth of Christ, Rev. 1. which is of strong and mighty operation, piercing betweene the bones and the marrow, betweene the soule and the spirit, Heb. 4. Thirdly, the great sword of War and Destruction, given to him that rides that terrible Red Horse of War, so that he takes Peace from the Earth, and men kill one another, as is most lamentably true in the slaughter of so many hundred thousand soules within these few yeares in severall parts of Europe, our owne and others. None of these 3 swords are intended in this Scripture: Therefore, fourthly, there is a Civill sword,The Civill Sword. called the Sword of Civill justice; which being of a materiall civill nature, for the defence of Persons, Estates, Families, Liberties of a City or Civill State, and the suppressing of uncivill or injurious persons or actions by such civill punishment, It cannot according to its utmost reach and capa∣citie
(now under Christ, when all Nations are meerly civill, with∣out any such typicall holy respect upon them, as was upon Israel a Nationall Church) I say, cannot extend to spirituall and Soul-causes, Spirituall and Soule punishment, which belongs to that spirituall sword with two edges, the soule-piercing (in soule-saving or soule-killing) the Word of God. CHAP. LII. Truth. A Fourth Argument from this Scripture I take in the 6. verse,Tribute, Cu∣stome, &c. meerly civill recompences for civil work. from Tribute, custome, &c. which is a meerly ci∣vill Reward or Recompence for the Magistrates worke. Now as the wages are, such is the worke: But the wages are meerely civill, Cu∣stome, Tribute, &c. not the contributions of the Saints or churches of Christ (proper to the Spirituall and Christian state) and such work only must the Magistrate attend upon, as may properly deserve such civill wages, reward or recompence. Lastly,Magistrates called by God Gods Mini∣sters. that the Spirit of God never intended to direct or warrant the Magistrate to use his Power in spirituall affaires and Religious worship: I argue, from the terme or title it pleaseth the wisedome of God to give such Civill officers, to wit, (vers. 6.) Gods Mini∣sters. Now at the very first blush, no man denies a double Mini∣sterie. The one appointed by Christ Iesus in his Church, to gather, to governe, receive in, cast out,The spirituall Ministery. and order all the affaires of the Church, the House, Citie or Kingdome of God, Ephes. 4. 1 Cor. 12. Secondly, a Civill Ministery or office,The civill Mi∣nistery or ser∣vice. meerely humane and civill, which Men agree to constitute (called therefore an humane creati∣on, (1 Pet. 2.) and is as true and lawfull in those Nations, Cities, Kingdomes, &c. which never heard of the true God, nor his holy Sonne Iesus, as in any part of the World beside, where the Name of Iesus is most taken up. From all which premises, viz. that the scope of the Spirit of God in this Chapter is to handle the matters of the second Table (having handled the matters of the first in the 12.) since the Magistrates of whom Paul wrote, were naturall, ungodly, persecuting, and yet lawfull Magistrates, and to be obeyed in all lawfull Civill things. Since all Magistrates are Gods Ministers, essentially civill, boun∣ded
to a civill work, with civill weapons or instruments, and paid or rewarded with civill rewards. From all which, I say, I undeniably collect, that this Scripture is generally mistaken, and wrested from the scope of Gods Spirit, and the nature of the place, and cannot truly be alleadged by any for the Power of the Civill Magistrate to be exercised in spirituall and Soule-matters. CHAP. LII. Peace. AGainst this I know many object out of the 4. verse of this Chapter,What is to b understood b Evill, Rom. 13 4. that the Magistrate is to avenge or punish Evill: from whence is gathered, that Heresie, false Christs, false Churches, false Ministeries, false Seales, being evill, ought to be pu∣nished Civilly, &c. Truth. I answer, that the word  is generally opposed to Civill Goodnesse or Virtue in a Common-wealth, and not to Spirituall Good or Religion in the Church. Secondly, I have proved from the scope of the place, that here is not intended Evill against the Spirituall or Christian Estate, handled in the 12 Chap. but Evill against the Civill State, in this 13. properly falling under the cognizance of the Civill Minister of God, the Magistrate, and punishable by that civill sword of his, as an incivilitie, disorder, or breach of that civill order, peace and civili∣ty, unto which all the Inhabitants of a City, Town, or Kingdome ob∣lige themselves. Peace. I have heard that the Elders of the New-English Churches, (who yet out of this 13 Rom. maintaine Persecution) grant that the Magistrate is to preserve the peace and welfare of the State, and therefore that he ought not to punish such sinnes as hurt not his peace. In particular, they say, the Magistrae may not punish secret sinnes in the Soule: Nor such sinnes as are yet handling in the Church in a private way: Nor such sinnes which are private in Families; and therefore they say, the Magistrate transgresteth to prosecute complaints of children against their parents, servants agaist ma∣sters, wives against husbands, (and yet this proper to the Civill State) Nor such sinnes as are between the Members and Churches them∣selves. And they confesse, that if the Magistrate punish, and the Church punish, there will be a greater Rent in their Peace.
Truth. From thence (sweet Peace) may we well observe,Some give to the Magistrate what is not his, and take from him that which is pro¦per to him. First, the Magistrate is not to punish all Evill, according to this their confession. The distinction of private and publike Evill will not here availe, because such as urge that terme Evill, viz, that the Magistrate is to punish Evill, urge it strictly, eo nomine, because Heresie, Blasphemie, false Church, false Ministerie is evill, as well as Disorder in a Civill State. Secondly, I observe, how they take away from the Magistrate that which is proper to his cognisance, as the complaints of servants, children, wives, against their parents, masters, husbands, &c. (Families as families, being as stones which make up the common building, and are properly the object of the Magistrates care, in respect of Civill Government, Civill order and obedience.) CHAP. LIV. Peace. I Pray now (lastly) proceed to the Authours Reason why Christs Disciples should be so far from persecuting, that they ought to blesse them that curse them, and pray for them that persecute them, because of the freenesse of Gods grace, and the deepe∣nesse of his Councels, calling them that are Enemies, Persecutors, No people, to become meeke Lambes, the sheep and people of God, accor∣ding to 1 Pet. 2. 20. You which were not a people, are now a people, &c. and Matth. 20. 6. Some come at the Last houre, which if they were cut off because they came not sooner, would be prevented, and so should never come. Unto this Reason the Answerer is pleased thus to reply: First in generall; We must not doe Evill, that Good may come thereof. Secondly, in particular, he affirmeth, that it is evill to tolerate seditious evill doers, seducing Teachers, scandalous livers:Toleration discussed. Upon this point hath Mr. John Good∣win excellent∣ly of late dis∣coursed. and for proof of this he quotes Christs reproofe to the Angel of the Church at Pergams, for tolerating them that hold the doctrine of Balaam; and against the Church of Thiatyra, for tolerating Iesabel to teach and seduce, Revel. 2. 14. 20. Truth. I answer, first, by assenting to the generall Proposition, that it is most true, like unto Christ Jesus himselfe, a sure foundation, 1 Cor. 3. Yet what is built upon it, I hope (by Gods assistance) to
make it appeare is but hay and stubble, dead and withered, not suiting that golden foundation, nor pleasing to the Father of mercies, nor comfortable to the Soules of men. It is evill (saith he) to tolerate notorious evill doers, seducing Teachers, scandalous livers. In which speech I observe 2 evills: First that this Proposition is too large and generall, because the Rule admits of exception, and that according to the will of God. 1. It is true, that Evill cannot alter its nature, but it is alway Evill, as darknesse is alway darknesse, yet 2. It must be remembred, that it is one thing to command,Evill is always Evill, yet per∣mission of it may in case be good. to con∣ceale, to councell, to approve Evill, and another thing to permit and suffer Evill with protestation against it, or dislike of it, at least with∣out approbation of it. Lastly, this sufferance or permission of Evill is not for its ownsake, but for the sake of Good, which puts a respect of Goodnesse upon such permission. Hence it is, that for Gods owne Glorie sake (which is the highest Good) he endures, that is, permits or suffers the Vessels of Wrath, Rom. 9. And therefore although he be of pure eyes, and can behold no iniquitie, yet his pure eyes patiently and quietly beholds and permits all the idolatries and prophanations, all the thefts and rapines, all the whoredomes and abominations, all the murthers and poysonings; and yet I say, for his glory sake he is patient, and long permits. Hence for his peoples sake (which is the next Good in his Son) he is oftentimes pleased to permit and suffer the wicked to enjoy a longer reprive. Therefore he gave Paul all the lives that were in the ship, Acts 27. Therefore he would not so soone have destroyed Sodome, but granted a longer permission, had there been but 10 righteous, Gen. 19. Therefore, Ierem. 5. had he found some to have stood in the gap, he would have spared others. Therefore gave he Iesabel a time or space, Revel. 2. Therefore for his Glory sake hath he permitted longer great sin∣ners, who afterward have perished in their season, as we see in the case of Ahab, the Ninevites and Amorites. &c. Hence it pleased the Lord not onely to permit the many evills against his owne honourable ordinance of Mariage in the world,Deut. 24. but was pleased after a wonderfull manner to suffer that sin of many
wives in Abraham, Iacob, David, Salomon, yea with some expression which seeme to give approbation, as 2 Sam. 12. Peace. It may be said, this is no patterne for us, because God is a∣bove Law, and an absolute Soveraigne. Truth. I answer, although wee finde him sometime dispensing with his Law, yet we never finde him deny himselfe, or utter a fals∣hood: And therefore when it crosseth not an absolute Rule to per∣mit and tolerate (as in the case of the permission of the soules and consciences of all men in the world, I have shewne and shall shew further it doth not) it will not hinder our being holy as hee is holy in all manner of conversation. CHAP. LIV. Peace. IT will yet bee said, it pleaseth God to permit Adulteries, Murthers, Poisons: God suffers men like fishes to devoure each other, Habac. 1. the wicked to flourish, Ier. 12. yea sends the Tyrants of the world to destroy the Nations, and plunder them of their riches, Isa. 10. Should men doe so, the world would be a Wil∣dernesse, and beside we have command for zealous execution of Ju∣stice impartially, speedily. Truth. I answer,Two sorts of commands both by Moses and Christ. we finde two sorts of commands both from Mo∣ses and from Christ, the two great Prophets and Messengers from the living God, the one the type or figure of the later: Moses gave positive Rules both spirituall and civill, yet also hee gave some not positive but permissive for the common good: So the Lord Iesus ex∣poundeth it. For, whereas the Pharises urged it, that Moses commanded to give a Bill of Divorcement and to put away: the Lord Iesus expoun∣deth it, Moses for the hardnesse of your heart suffered or permitted, Math. 19. 17, 18.Math 16. 17. 18. This was a permissiveThe permissi¦on of divorce in Israel. command universall to all Israel, for a generall good, in preventing the continuall fires of Dissentions & Combusti∣ons in families (yea it may be Murthers, Poysons, Adulteries which that people (as the wisedome of God foresaw) was apt out of the hardnesse of their heart to breake out into, were it not for this pre∣venting permission. Hence it was that for a further publike good sake, and the publike safety, David permitted Ioab, a notorious malefactor, and Shimei
and Adonijah, &c. And civill States and Governours in like cases have and doe permit and suffer what neither David nor any civill Governour ought to doe or have done, were it not to prevent the hazard of the whole, in the shedding of much innocent blood (together with the ncent) in civill combustions. Peace. It may be said, Ioab, Shimei, Adonijah, &c. were only (as it were) reprived for a time, and proves only that a season ought to be attended for their punishment. Truth. Answ. I answer, I produce not these instances to prove a permission of Tares (Antichristians, Heretikes) which other Scrip∣tures abundantly prove, but to make it cleare (against the Answe∣rers allegation, that even in the civill State permission of notorious evill doers, even against the civill State, is not disapproved by God himselfe, and the wisest of his servants in its season. CHAP. LV. Truth. I Proceed.Usurie in a Common∣weale or Ci∣vill State law∣fully per∣mitted. Hence it is that some Generals of Armies, and Governours of Cities, Townes, &c. doe, and (as those for∣mer instances prove) lawfully permit some evill persons and pra∣ctices. As for instance, in the civill State, Vsury, for the preven∣ting of a greater evill in the civill Body, as stealing, robbing, murthering, perishing of the poore, and the hindrance or stop of commerce and dealing in the Commonwealth. Just like Physicians, wisely permitting noysome humours, and sometimes diseases, when the cure or purging would prove more dangerous to the destruction of the whole, a weake or crazy body, and specially at such a time. Thus in many other instances it pleased the Father of lights the God of Israel, to permit that people, especially in the matter of their demand of a King,Permission of the Tares in the field of the world for a twofold good. (wherein he pleaded that himselfe as well as Sa∣muel was rejected.) This ground, to wit, for a common good of the whole, is the same with that of the Lord Iesus commanding the Tares to be permitted in the World, because otherwise the good wheat should be indangered to be rooted up out of the Field or World also, as well as theOf the good Whee. ares: and therefore for the good sake the Tares, which are indeed evill, were to be permitted: Yea and for the generall good of the whole world, the field it selfe,Of the whole world, he field it selfe. which for want of this obedience to that command of Christ, hath beene and is laid waste and desolate, with the fury
and rage of civill War, professedly raised and maintained (as all States professe for the maintenance of one true Religion (after the patterne of that typicall land of Canaan) and to suppresse and pluck up these Tares of false Prophets and false Professors, Antichristians, Heretickes, &c. out of the world. Hence illae lachrymae: hence Germanies, Irelands, and now Eng∣lands teares and dreadfull desolations, which ought to have beene, and may bee for the future (by obedience to the command of the Lord Iesus, concerning the permission of Tares to live in the world, though not in the Church) I say ought to have beene, and may bee mercifully prevented. CHAP. LVI. Peace. I Pray descend now to the second evill which you observe in the Answerers position, viz. that it would bee evill to tole∣rate notorious evill doers, seducing teachers, &c. Truth. I say, the evill is, that he most improperly and confused∣ly joynes and couples seducing teachers with scandalous livers. Peace. But is it not true that the world is full of seducing teachers, and is it not true that seducing teachers are notorious evill doers? Truth. I answer: far be it from me to deny either: and yet in two things I shall discover the great evill of this joyning and cou∣pling seducing teachers, and scandalous livers as one adaequate or pro∣per object of the Magistrates care and worke to suppresse and pu∣nish. First, it is not an Homogeneall (as we speake) but an Heterogeneall commixture or joyning together of things most different in kindes and natures, as if they were both of one consideration. For who knowes not but that many seducing teachers,Seducing tea∣chers, either Pagan, Jewish or Antichri∣stian, may yet be obedient subjects to the Civill lawes. either of the Paganish, Iewish, Turkish, or Antichristian Religion, may be clear and free from scandalous offences in their life, as also from disobedience to the Civill Lawes of a State? Yea the Answerer himselfe hath elsewhere granted, that if the Lawes of a Civill State be not bro∣ken, the Peace is not broken. Againe, who knowes not that a seducing teacher properly sinnes against a Church or Spirituall estate and Lawes of it, and therefore ought most properly and onely to bee dealt withall in such a way, and by such weapons as the Lord Iesus himselfe hath appointed
gainsayers, opposites and disobedients (either within his Church or without) to be convinced, repelled, resisted, and slaine withall. Whereas scandalous offendours against Parents,Scandalous li∣vers against the Civill state who they are. against Magi∣strates in the 5 Command. and so against the life, chastity, goods or good name in the rest, is properly transgression against the Civill State and Commonweale, or the worldly state of Men: And there∣fore consequently if the World or Civill State ought to be preser∣ved by Civill Government or Governours; such scandalous effen∣dours ought not to be tolerated, but supprest according to the wis∣dome and prudence of the said Government. Secondly, as there is a fallacious conjoying and confounding together persons of severall kindes and natures, differing as much as Spirit and Flesh, Heaven and Earth each from other. So is there a silent and implicite justification to all the unrighteous and cruell proceedings of Iews and Gentiles against all the Prophets of God, the Lord Iesus Himselfe, and all His Messengers and Witnesses, whom their Accusers have ever so coupled and mixed with notorious e∣vill doers and scandalous livers. Elijah was a troubler of the State; Ieremy weakned the hand of the people: yea Moses made the people neglect their worke: the Iewes built the Rebellious and bad City: the three Worthies regarded not the command of the King: Christ Iesus deceived the people, was a conjurer and a traytor against Caesar in being King of the ewes (indeed He was so spiritually over the true Jew the Christian) therefore He was numbred with notorious evill doers, and nailed to the Gallowes between two Malefactours. Hence Paul and all true Messengers of Iesus Christ are estee∣med seducing and seditious teachers and turners of the World up∣side downe: Yea and to my knowledge (I speake with honourable respect to the Answerer, so far as he hath laboured for many Truths of Christ) the Answerer himselfe hath drunke of this cup to be esteemed a seducing Teacher. CHAP. LVII. Peace. YEa but he produceth Scriptures against such toleration, and for persecuting men for the cause of conscience: Christ (saith he) had something against the Angel of the Church of Pergamus for tolerating them that held the doctrine of Balaam,
and against the Church of Thiatira for tolerating Iesabel to teach and seduce, Rev. 2. 14. 20. Truth. I may answer with some admiration and astonishment how it pleased the Father of lights, and most jealous God to darken and vaile the eye of so pretious a man, as not to seek out and pro∣pose some Scriptures (in the proofe of so weighty an assertion) as at least might have some colour for an influence of the Civill Ma∣gistrate in such cases: for First,Toleration. Rev. 2. 14. 20. examined. he saith not that Christ had ought against the City Per∣gamus, (where Sathan had his throne Rev. 2.) but against the Church at Pergamus, in which was set up the Throne of Christ. Secondly, Christs Charge is not against the Civill Magistrate of Pergamus, but the Messenger or Ministry of the Church in Per∣gamus. Thirdly, I confesse so far as Balaams or Iesabels doctrine main∣tained a liberty of corporall fornication, it concerned the City of Pergamus and Thiatira, and the Angel or Officers of those Cities to suppresse not only such practices, but such Doctrines also, as the Ro∣man Emperour justly punished Ovid the Poet, for teaching the wan∣ton Art of Love, leading to and ushering on laciviousnesse and un∣cleannesse. 4. Yet so far as Balaams teachers or Iesabel did seduce the mem∣bers of the Church in Pergamus or Thiatira, to the worship of the Idolaters in Pergamus or Thiatira (which will appeare to be the case) I say so far I may well and properly answer, as himselfe an∣swered before those Scriptures, brought from Luc. 9. & 2 Tim. 2. to prove patience and permission to men opposite, viz. These Scriptures (saith he) are directions to Ministers of the Gospel, and in the end of that passage he addes, Much lesse doe they speake at all to Civill Magistrates. Fifthly, Either these Churches and the Angels thereof had power to suppresse these doctrines of Balaam,Christ Mini∣sters & Chur∣ches have po∣wer sufficient from Christ to suppresse Bala∣am and Iesabel seducing to false worship. and to suppresse Iesabel from teaching, or they had not: That they had not cannot be affirmed, for Christs Authority is in the hands of his Ministers and Churches, Matth. 16. & 18. & 1 Cor. 5. If they had power, as must be granted, then I conclude sufficient power to suppresse such persons, who ever they were that maintai∣ned Balaams doctrine in the Church at Pergamus, although the ve∣ry
Magistrates themselves of the City of Pergamus, (if Christians) and to have suppressed Iesabel from teaching and seducing in the Church had she been Lady, Queen, or Empresse, if there were no more but teaching without hostility: And if so, all power and autho∣rity of Magistrates and Governours of Pergamus and Thiatira, and all submitting or appealing to them, in such cases, must needs fall as none of Christs appointment. Lastly, From this perverse wresting of what is writ to the Church and the Officers thereof, as if it were written to the Civill State and Officers thereof; all may see how since the Apostacie of Antichrist,The Christian world hath swallowed up Christianity. the Christian World (so called) hath swallowed up Christianity, how the Church and civill State, that is the Church and the World are now become one flocke of Iesus Christ; Christs sheepe, and the Pastors or Shepherds of them, all one with the severall un∣converted, wilde or tame Beasts and Cattell of the World and the civill and earthly governours of them: The Christian Church or Kingdome of the Saints, that stone cut out of the mountaine without hands, Daniel 2. now made all one with the mountaine or Civill State, the Roman Empire, from whence it is cut or taken: Christs lilies, garden and love, all one with the thornes, the daughers and wildernesse of the World, out of which the Spouse or Church of Christ is called, and amongst whom in civill things for a while here below, she must necessarily be mingled and have converse, unlesse she will goe out of the World (before Christ Iesus her Lord and Husband send for her home into the Heavens, 1 Cor. 5. 10.) CHAP. LVIII. Peace. HAving thus (by the help of Christ) examined those Scrip∣tures or writings of truth,The second head of Rea∣sons against such persecuti∣on, viz. the pro∣fession of fa∣mous Princes, K. James, Ste∣ven of Poland, and K. of Bo∣hemia. brought by the Author against Persecution, and cleared them from such vailes & mists wherewith Mr. Cotton hath endeavored to obscure & darken their light: I pray you now (by the the same gracious assistance) proceed to his an∣swer to the second head of Reasons from the profession of famous Princes against persecution for conscience, K. Iames, Steven of Poland, K. of Bohemia, unto whom the Answerer returneth a treble answer. First, saith he, We willingly acknowledge that none is to be persecuted at all no more then they may be oppressed for righteous∣nesse sake.
Againe, we acknowledge that none is to be punished for his conscience though misinformed (as hath been said) unlesse his Er∣ror be fundamentall or seditiously and turbulently promoted, and that after due conviction of his conscience, that it may appeare he is not punished for his conscience, but for sinning against his con∣science. Furthermore, we acknowledge none is to be constrained to be∣leeve or professe the true Religion, till he be convinced in judge∣ment of the truth of it, but yet restrained he may be from blasphe∣ming the truth, and from seducing any unto pernicious error. Truth. This first answer consists of a repetition and enumeration of such grounds or conclusions, as Mr. Cotton in the entrance of this Discourse laid downe, and I beleeve that (through the helpe of God) in such replies as I have made unto them, I have made it e∣vident what weak foundations they have in the Scriptures of truth;Isa. 40 6. 2 Pet. 2. as also that, when such conclusions (excepting the first) as grasse, and the flower of the grasse shall sade, that holy Word of the Lord, which the Author against such persecution produced, and I have cleared, shall stand for ever, even when these Heavens and Earth are burnt. Peace. His second answer is this: What Princes professe and practice is not a rule of conscience. They many times tolerate that in point of State-policie, which cannot justly be tolerated in point of true Christianity. Againe, Princes many times tolerate offendours out of very necessity, when the offenders are either too many or too mighty for them to punish, in which respect David tolerated Ioab and his murders, but against his will. CHAP. LIX. VNnto those excellent and famous speeches of those Princes worthy to be written in golden letters or rows of Diamonds up∣on all the gates of all the Cities and Palaces in the World, the An∣swerer (without any particular reply) returnes two things. Truth. First, that Princes profession and practice is no rule of conscience:Mr. Cottons unequall dea∣ling with Princes. unto this as all men will subscribe, so may they also ob∣serve how the Answerer deales with Princes. One while they are the nursing Fathers of the Church, not only to feed, but also to correct, and therefore consequently bound to
iudge what is true feeding and correcting: and consequently all men are bound to submit to their feeding and correcting. Another while, when Princes crosse Mr. Cottons judgement and practice, then it matters not what the profession and practice of Prin∣ces is; for (saith he) their profession and practice is no Rule to Con∣science. I aske then, unto what Magistrates or Princes will themselves or any so perswaded submit, as unto keepers of both Tables, as unto the Antitypes of the Kings of Israel and Iudah, and nursing Fathers and Mothers of the Church? First, will it not evidently follow, that by these Tenents they ought not to submit to any Magistrates in the world in these cases, but to Magistrates just of their owne conscience: and Secondly, that all other Consciences in the world (except their owne) must be persecuted by such their Magistrates? And lastly, is not this to make Magistrates but steps and stirrops to ascend and mount up into their rich and honourable Seats and Sadles; I meane great and setled maintenances, which neither the Lord Iesus, nor any of his first Messengers, the true patternes, did ever know? CHAP. LX. Truth. IN the second place hee saith that Princes out of State policy tolerate what suits not with Christianity, and out of State necessity tolerate (s David did Ioab) against their wils. To which I answer, First, that although with him in the first I confesse that Princes may tolerate that out of State policy which will not stand with Christianity,The Answe∣rer a know∣ledgeth a ne∣cessiy of some tolration. yet in the second he must acknowledge with me, that there is a necessity sometime of State Toleration, as in the case of Ioab, and so his former affirmation generally laid downe [viz. that it is evill to tolerate seducing Teachers, or scandalous livers] was not duly waighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary,Christ Jesus the deepest politician that ever was, and yet he com∣mands a tole∣ration of An∣tichristians. and is too light. Secondly, I affirme that that State policy and State necessity, which (for the peace of the State and preventing of Rivers of civill Blood) permits the Consciences of men, will bee found to agree most punctually with the Rules of the best Politician that ever the World saw, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, in comparison of whom
Salomon himselfe had but a drop of wisedome, compared to Christs Ocean, and was but a Farthing Candle compared with the All and Ever glorious Son of Righteousnesse. That absolute Rule of this great Politician for the peace of the Field, which is the World, and for the good and peace of the Saints, who must have a civill being in the World, I have discoursed of in his command of permitting the Tares, that is, Antichristians or false Christians to be in the Field of the World, growing up together with the true Wheat, true Christians. CHAP. LXI. Peace. HIs third Answer is this: For those three Princes named by you who tole∣rated Religion, we can name you more and greater who have not tolerated Heretickes and Schismatickes, notwithstanding their pre∣tence of Conscience, and their arrogating the Crowne of Martyr∣dome to their sufferings. Constantine the Great at the request of the Generall Councell at Nice, banished Arrius, with some of his Fellowes, Sozom. lib. 1. Eccles hist. cap 19 20. The same Constantine made a severe Law against the Donatists: and the like proceedings against them were used by Valentinian, Gratian, and Theodosius, as Augustine reports in Ep. 166. Onely Iulian the Apostate granted liberty to Heretickes, as well as to Pagans, that he might by tolerating all weeds to grow, choake the vitals of Christianity: which was also the practice and sinne of Valens the Arrian. Queene Elizabeth, as famous for her Government as most of the former, it is well knowne what Lawes she made and executed a∣gainst Papists: yea and K. Iames (one of your owne Witnesses) though he was slow in proceeding against Papists (as you say) for Conscience sake, yet you are not ignorant how sharply and se∣verely he punished those whom the malignant World calls Puri∣tans, men of more Conscience and better Faith then the Papists whom he tolerated. Truth. Unto this I answer: First, that for mine owne part I would not use an argument from the number of Princes, witnessing in profession of practice against Persecution for cause of Conscience;
for the truth and faith of the Lord Iesus must not bee received with respect of faces,The Princes of the world seldome take put with Christ. be they never so high, princely and glorious. Precious Pearles and Iewels, and farre more precious Truth are found in muddy shells and places. The rich Mines of golden Truth lye hid under barren hills, and in obscure holes and corners. The most High and Glorious God hath chosen the poore of the World:Princes not persecuting are very rare. and the Witnesses of Truth (Rev. 11.) are cloathed in sack∣cloth, not in Silke or Sattin, Cloth of Gold, or Tissue: and therefore I acknowledge, if the number of Princes professing persecution bee considered, it is rare to finde a King, Prince or Governour like Christ Iesus the King of Kings, and Prince of the Princes of the Earth, and who tread not in the steps of Herod the Fox, or Nero the Lyon, o∣penly or secretly persecuting the name of the Lord Iesus; such were Saul, Ieroboam, Ahab, though under a maske or pretence of the name of the God of Israel. To that purpose was it a noble speech of Buchanan,Buchanans Item to King Iames. who lying on his death-bed sent this Item to King Iames: Remember my humble service to his Majestie, and tell him that Buchanan is going to a place where few Kings come. CHAP. LXII. Truth. SEcondly, I observe how inconsiderately (I hope not willingly) he passeth by the Reasons and Grounds urged by those three Princes for their practices; for as for the bare examples of Kings or Princes, they are but like shining Sands, or guilded Rockes, giving no solace to such as make wofull shipwrack on them. In K. Iames his Speech he passeth by that Golden Maxime in Di∣vinity,King Iames his sayings against persecution. that God never loves to plant his Church by Blood. Secondly, that Civill Obedience may be performed from the Pa∣pists. Thirdly, in his observation on Revel 20. that true and certaine note of a false Church, to wit, persecution: The wicked are besiegers, the faithfull are besieged. In K. Steven of Poland his Speech,King Steven of Poland his speech against Persecution. hee passeth by the true diffe∣rence betweene a Civill and a Spirituall Government: I am (said Steven) a Civill Magistrate over the bodies of men, not a spirituall over their soules.
Now to confound these, is Babel; and Jewish it is to seek for Moses, and bring him from his grave (which no man shall finde, for God buried him) in setting up a Nationall state or Church in a land of Canaan, which the great Messiah abolished at his comming. Thirdly, he passeth by in the speech of the King of Bohemia, that foundation in Grace and Nature, to wit, that Conscience ought not to be violated or forced: and indeed it it is most true, that a Soule or spirituall RapeForcing of Conscience is a Soule rape. is more abominable in Gods eye, then to force and ravish the Bodies of all the Women in the World. Secondly, that most lamentably true experience of all Ages, which that King observeth, viz. that persecution for cause of ConsciencePersecution for conscience, the Launcet that letteth blood Kings & Kingdomes. hath ever proved pernicious, being the causes of all those wonder∣full innovations of, or changes in the Principalities and mightiest Kingdomes of Christendome. He that reads the Records of Truth and Time with an impartiall eye, shall finde this to be the Launcet that hath pierc'd the veines of Kings and Kingdomes, of Saints and Sin∣ners, and fill'd the streames and Rivers with their blood. Lastly,All spirituall Whores are bloody. that Kings observation of his own time,, viz. that Perse∣cution for cause of Conscience, was practised most in England, and such places where Popery raigned, implying (as I conceive) that such practises commonly proceed from that great whore the Church of Rome, whose Daughters are like their Mother, and all of a bloody nature, as most commonly all Whores be. CHAP. LXIII. NOw thirdly, in that the Answerer observeth, that amongst the Romane Emperours, they that did not persecute, were Iulian the Apostate, and Valens the Arrian; whereas the good Emperours, Constantine, Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius, they did persecute the Arrians, Donatists, &c. Answ. It is no new thing for godly and eminently godly men,The Godly somotimes e∣vill actors, and the Ungodly good actors. Poligamie, or the many wives of the Fathers. to performe ungodly actions: nor for ungodly persons, for wicked ends to act what in it selfe is good and righteous. Abraham, Iacob, David Salomon, &c. (as well as Lamech, Saul, &c.) lived in constant transgression against the institution of so holy and so ratified a Law of Mariage, &c. and this not against the light and checks of conscience, (as other sinnes are wont to be recorded
of them) but according to the dictate and perswasion of a Resolved Soule and Conscience. David out of zeale to God,Davids advan∣cing of Gods Worship a∣gainst Gods Order. with 30 thousand of Israel, and Maje∣sticall solemnity, carries up the Arke, contrary to the Order God was pleased to appoint: the issue was both Gods and Davids great offence 2 Sam. 6. David in his zeale would build an house to entertaine his God? what more pious? and what more (in shew) seriosly consulted, when the Prophet Nathan is admitted Councellour? 2 Sam. 7. And probable it is, that his slaughter of Vriiah was not without a good end, to wit, to prevent the dishonour of Gods name, in the discoverrie of his Adulterie with Bathsheba: yet David was holy and precious to God still, (though like a jewell fallen into the dirt) whereas K. Ahab, though acting his fasting & humiliation, was but Ahab still, though his Act (in it selfe) was a duty, and found suc∣cesse with God. CHAP. LXIV. Peace. I Have often heard that Historie reports, and I have heard that Mr. Cotton himselfe hat affirmed it, that Christianitic fell asleep in Constantines bosome, and the laps and bosomes of those Emperours professing the name of Christ. Truth. The unknowing zeale of Constantine and other Empe∣rours,Constantine and the good Emperours are confest to have done more hurt to the name and crown of the Lord Jesus, then the perse∣cuting Neroes &c. did more hurt to Christ Iesus his Crowne and Kingdome, then the raging fury of the most bloody Neroes. In the persecutions of the later, Christians were sweet and fragrant, like spice pounded and beaten in morters: But those good Emperours, persecuting some erroneous persons, Arrius, &c. and advancing the professours of some Truths of Christ (for there was no small number of Truths lost in those times) and maintaining their Religion by the materiall Sword, I say by this meanes Christianity was ecclipsed, and the Professors of it fell asleep, Cant. 5. Babel or confusion was usher'd in, and by degrees the Gardens of the Churches of Saints were tur∣ned into the wildernesse of whole Nations, untill the whole World became Christian or Christendome,The Garden of the Church and Field of the World made all one by Antichristi∣stianisme. Revel. 12. & 13. Doubtlesse those holy men, Emperours and Bishops, intended and aimed right, to exalt Christ: but not attending to the Command of Christ Iesus, to permit the Tares to grow in the field of the World,
they made the Garden of the Church, and Field of the World to be all one; and might not onely sometimes in their zealous mistakes per∣secute good wheat in stead of Tares, but also pluck up thousands of those precious stalkes by commotions and combustions about Religion, as hath been since practised in the great and wonderfull changes wrought by such Wars in many great and mighty States and King∣domes, as we heard even now in the Observation of the King of Bohemia. CHAP. LXV. Peace. DEare Truth, before you leave this passage concerning the Emperours, I shall desire you to glance your eye on this not unworthy observation, to wit, how fully this worthy An∣swerer hath learned to speake the roaring language of Lyon-like Per∣secution, far from the purity and peaceablenesse of the Lambe, which he was wont to expresse in England. For thus he writes: More and greater Princes then these you mention (saith he) have not tolerated Hereticks and Schismaticks, notwithstanding their pretence of Conscience, and their arrogating the Crown of Martyrdome to their suffings. Truth. Thy tender eare and heart (sweet Peace) endures not such language: 'Tis true, that these termes, Hereticks (or wilfully obstinate) and Schismaticks (or Renders) are used in Holy Writ: 'tis true also, that such pretend conscience, and challenge the crowne of Martyrdome to their suffrings:The language of Persecuters, the wolves and hunters of the World. Yet since (as King Iames spake in his [Marke of a false Church] on Revel. 20.) the Wicked perse∣cute and besiege, and the Godly are persecuted and besieged; this is the common clamour of Persecuters against the Messengers and Witnesses of Iesus in all Ages, viz. You are Hereticks, Schismaticks, factious, seditious, rebellious. Have not all Truths witnesses heard such reproaches? You pretend conscience; You say you are persecuted for Religion; You will say you are Martyrs? Oh it is hard for Gods children to fall to opinion and practice of Per∣secution, without the ready learning the language thereof: And doubtlesse, that Soule that can so readily speake Babels language, hath cause to fear that he hath not yet in point of Worship left the Gates or Suburbs of it. Peace. Againe, in blaming Iulian and Valens the Arrian, for to∣lerating
all weeds to grow, he notes their sinfull end, that thereby they might choake the vitals of Christianity; and seemes to con∣sent (in this and other passages foregoing and following on a speech of Ierome) that the weeds of false Religions tolerated in the world, have a power to choake and kill true Christianity in the Church. Truth. I shall more fully answer to this on Ieromes speech, and shew that if the weeds be kept out of the Garden of the Church, the Roses and Lilies therein will flourish, notwithstanding that weeds abound in the Field of the Civill State.Christs Lilies may flourish in his Church, notwithstan∣ding the abun∣dance of weeds (in the world) permitted. When Christianity began to be choaked, it was not when Christians lodged in cold Prisons, but Downe beds of ease, and persecuted others, &c. CHAP. LXVI. Peace. HE ends this passage with approbation of Q. Elizabeth for persecuting the Papists, and a reproofe to King Iames for his persecuting the Puritans, &c. Truth. I answer, if Queene ElizabethThe persecu∣tion of Queen Elizabeth and King Iames compared to∣gether. according to the Answe∣rers Tenent and Conscience, did well to persecute according to her conscience, King Iames did not ill in persecuting according to his: For Mr. Cotton must grant, that either King Iames was not fit to be a King, had not the essentiall qualifications of a King, in not being able rightly to judge who ought to be persecuted, and who not, or else he must confesse that King Iames and all Magistrates must per∣secute such whom in their Conscience they judge worthy to be per∣secuted. I say it againe (though I neither approve Queen Elizabeth or K. Iames in such their persecutions, yet) such as hold this Tenent of persecuting for Conscience, must also hold that Civill Magistrates are not essentially fitted and qualified for their function and office, except they can discerne clearly the difference betweene such as are to be punished and persecuted, and such as are not. Or else if they be essentially qualified, without such a religious spirit of discerning, and yet must persecute the Hereticke, the Schis∣maticke, &c. must they not persecute according to their conscience and perswasion. And then doubtlesse (though he bee excellent for Civill Government) may he easily, as Paul did ignorantly, persecute the Son of God, in stead of the Son of perdition.
Therefore (lastly) according to Christ Iesus his command, Ma∣gistrates are bound not to persecute, and to see that none of their sub∣jects be persecuted and oppressed for their conscience and worship, being otherwise subject and peaceable in Civill Obedience. CHAP. LXVII. IN the second place I answer and aske, what glory to God what good to the soules or bodies of their subjects shall Princes, did these Prin∣ces bring in persecuting? &c. Peace. Mr. Cotton tells us in his discourse upon the third Violl,In his open∣ing of the 7. Viols, in print. Mr. Cotton confesseth that Queen Eli∣zabeth her per∣secuting the Papists, had almost ruined the English Nation. that Queene Elizabeth had almost fired the world in civill combustions by such her pesecuting: For, though hee bring it in to another end, yet he confesseth that it raised all Christendome in combustion, raised the Warres of 88. and the Spanish Invasion: and he addes (both concerning the English Nation and the Dutch) that if God had not born witnesse to his people, and their Laws, in defeating the intendments of their enemies against both the Nations, it might have beene the ruine of them both. Truth. That those Lawes and Practices of Queene Elizabeth rai∣sed those combustions in Christendome I deny not: That they might likely have cost the ruine of English and Dutch I grant. That it was Gods gracious worke in defeating the Intendments of their enemies I thankfully acknowledge.The Wars be∣tweene the Papists and the Prote∣stants. But that God bore wit∣nesse to such persecutions and lawes for such persecutions I deny, for First, event and successe come alike to all, and are no Arguments of love or hatred, &c. Secondly, the Papists in their warres have ever yet had both in Peace and War victory and dominion; and therefore (if successe be the measure) God hath borne witnesse unto them. It is most true what Daniel in his 8. and 11. and 12. Chapters, and Iohn in his Revel. 11. 12. and 13. Chapters write of the great suc∣cesse of Antichrist against Christ Iesus for a time appointed. Successe was various betweene Charles the fift and some German Princes:Eventus omnis . Philip of Spaine and the Low Countries: The French King and his Protestant Subjects, sometimes losing, sometimes winning, interchangeably. But most memorable is the famous history of the Waldnses and Albingenses, those famous Witnesses of Iesus Christ, who rising from
Wald at Lyons in France (1160.) spread over France,The wars and successe of the Waldenan witnesses a∣gainst three Popes and their popish Armies. Italy, Ger∣many, and almost all Countries, into thousands and ten thousands, making separation from the Pope and Church of Rome. These fought many Battels with various successe, and had the assistance and pro∣tection of divers great Princes against three succeeding Popes and their Armies, but after mutuall slaughters and miseries to both sides, the finall successe of victory fell to the Popedome and Romish Church in the utter extirpation of those famous Waldensian witnesses. Gods servants are all overcommers when they war with Gods wea∣pons in Gods cause and Worship: and Revel. 2. and 3. Chapters, seven times is it recorded,Gods people victorious o∣vercommers, and with what weapons. To him that overcommeth in Ephesus, To him that overcommeth in Sardis, &c. and Revel. 12. Gods servants over∣came the Dragon or Devill in the Romane Emperours by three wea∣pons, The blood of the Lambe, The word of their Testimony, and The not loving of their lives unto the death. CHAP. LXVIII. Peace. THe Answerer in the next place descends to the third and last Head of Arguments produced by the Authour,The third head of Argu∣ments from ancient and later writers. taken from the judgement of ancient and later Writers, yea even of the Pa∣pists themselves, who have condemned persecution for conscience sake: some of which the Answerer pleaseth to answer, and thus writeth. You begin with Hilarie,The Christian Church doth not persecute, but is persecu∣ted. whose testimony without prejudice to the Truth we may admit: For it is true, the Christian Church doth not persecute, but is persecuted. But to excommunicate an Hereticke is not to persecute, that is, it is not to punish an innocent, but a culpable and damnable person, and that not for conscience, but for persisting in errour against light of conscience, whereof he hath beene convinced. Truth. In this Answer here are two things. First, his confession of the same Truth affirmed by Hilarius, to wit, that the Christian Church doth not persecute, but is persecuted: suing wih that foeging observation of King Iames from Rev. 20. Peace. Yet to this he addes a colour thus: which, saith he, wee may admit without prejudice to the truth. Truth. I answer,Persecuting  can∣not be Christs Churches. if it bee a marke of the Christian Church to bee persecuted, and of the Antichristian o false Church to persecute, then those Churches cannot be truly Christian (according to the first in∣stitution)
which either actually themselves, or by the Civill power of Kings and Princes given to them (or procured by them to fight for them) doe persecute such as dissent from them or be opposite a∣gainst them. Peace. Yea, but in the second place he addeth, that to excommu∣nicate an Heretick, is not to persecute, but to punish him for sinning against the light of his own conscience, &c. Truth. I answer, if this worthy Answerer were throughly awa∣ked from the Spouses spirituall slumber, (Cant. 5.) and had recovered from the drunkennesse of the great Whore, who intoxicateth the Na∣tions, Revel. 17. It is impossible that he should so answer: for. First,The nature of excommuni∣cation. who questioneth, whether to excommunicate an Heretick, (this is, an obstinate Gainsayer) as we have opened the word upon Tit. 3.) I say, who questioneth whether that be to persecute? Ex∣communication being of a spirituall nature, a Sentence denounced by the Word of Christ Iesus the Spirituall King of his Church; and a Spi∣rituall killing by the most sharpe two-edged Sword of the Spirit, in delivering up the person excommunicate to Sathan. Therefore who sees not that his Answer comes not neere our Question? Peace. In the Answerers second conclusion (in the entrance of this Discourse) he proves persecution against an Heretick for sinning against his conscience, and quotes Tit. 3. 10. which only proves (as I have there made it evident) a Spirituall rejecting or excommuni∣cating from the Church of God, and so comes not neer the question. Here again he would prove Churches charged to be false, because they persecute: I say he would prove them not to be false, because they persecute not: for, saith he, Excommunication is not Perse∣cution. Whereas the Question is (as the whole discourse,What persecu¦tion or hun∣ting is. and Hila∣ries own amplification of the matter in this speech, and the practice of all Ages testifies) whether it be not a false Church that doth per∣secute other Churches or Members (opposing her in Spirituall and Church matter) not by Excommunications, but by imprisonments, stocking, whipping, sining, banishing, hanging, burning, &c. notwith∣standing that such persons in Civill obedience and subjection are un∣reproveable. Truth. I conclude this passage with Hilarius and the Answerer, That the Christian Church doth not persecute; no more then a Lilie doth scratch the Thornes,Christs Spouse noser tcher or fighter. or a Lambe pursue and teare the olves, or a Turtle dove hunt the Hawkes and Eagles, or a chaste and modest
Virgin fight and scratch like whores and harlots. And for punishing the Heretick for sinning against his conscience after conviction, which in the second conclusion he affirmeth to be by a civill sword I have at large there answered. CHAP. LXIX. Peace. IN the next place he selecteth one passage out of Hilarie, (although there are many golden passages there exprest against the use of Civill Earthly Powers in the Affaires of Christ.) The passage is this: It is true also what he saith that neither the Apostles nor We may propogate Christian Religion by the Sword:Who cannot be won by the Word, must not be compel∣led by the Sword. but if Pagans cannot he won by the Word, they are not to be compelled by the Sword: Neverthelesse this hindreth not (saith he) but if they or any other should blaspheme the true God and his true Religion, they ought to be severely punished: and no lesse doe they deserve, if they seduce from the Truth to damnable Heresie or Idolatrie. Truth. In which Answer I observe, first his Agreement with Hilarie, that the Christian Religion may not be propagated by the Civill Sword. Unto which I reply, and aske then what meanes this passage in his first answer to the former speeches of the Kings, viz. We ac∣knowledge that none is to be constrained to beleeve or professe the true Religion, till he be convinced in judgement of the Truth of it: implying 2 things. First, that the Civill Magistrate, who is to constraine with the Civill Sword, must judge all the Consciences of their Subjects, whe∣ther they be convinced or no. Secondly, when the Civill Magistrate discerns that his Subjects consciences are convinced, then he may constraine them vi & armi, hostily. And accordingly,Constraine upon Consci∣ences in Old and New Eng∣land. the Civill State and Magistracie judging in spirituall things, who knowes not what constraint lies upon all con∣sciences in Old and New England, to come to Church, and pay Church duties, which is upon the point (though with a sword of a finer gilt and trim in New England) nothing else but that which he confes∣seth Hilarie saith true, should not be done, to wit, a propagation of Religion by the Sword.
Againe, although he confesseth that propagation of Religion ought not to be by the sword: yet he maintaineth the use of the sword, when persons (in the judgement of the Civill State, for that is im∣plied) blaspheme the true God, and the true Religion, and also seduce others to damnable Heresie and Idolatrie. Which because he barely affirmeth in this place, I shall defer my Answer unto the after Rea∣sons of Mr Cotton and the Elders of New English Churches; where Scriptures are alleadged, and in that place (by Gods assistance) they shall be examined and answered. CHAP. LXX. Peace. THe Answerer thus proceeds: Your next Writer is Tertullian,Tertullian his speech discus∣sed. who speaketh to the same purpose in the place alleadged by you. His intent is only to restraine Scapula the Roman Governour of Africa, from persecuting the Christi∣ans, for not offering sacrifice to their Gods: and for that end, fetcheth an Argument from the Law of Naturall equity, not to compell any to any Religion, but permit them to believe or not to believe at all. Which we acknowledge; and accordingly we judge, the English may permit the Indians to continue in their unbeliefe: ne∣verthelesse it will not therefore be lawfull to tolerate the worship of Devils or Idols, to the seduction of any from the Truth. Truth. Answ. In this passage he agrees with Tertullian, and gives instance in America of the English permitting the Indians to continue in their unbeleefe: yet withall he affirmeth it not lawfull to tolerate worshipping of Devils,The Indians of New Eng∣land permitted by the English not only to continue n their unbelef (which they can ure) but also in their flse worshp which they might by the civil swor∣restraine. or seduction from the Truth. I answer, that in New England it is well known that they not onely permit the Indians to continue in their unbeliefe, (which neither they, nor all the Ministers of Christ on Earth, nor Angels in Heaven can helpe, not being able to worke beleefe) but they also permit or tolerate them in their Paganish worship, which cannot be denied to be a worshipping of Devils, as all false Worship is. And therefore consquently ccording to the same practice, did they walke by Rule and impartially, not onely the Indians, but their Countrymen, French, Dutch, Spanish, Persians, Turkes, Iewes, &c. should also be permitted in their Worships, if correspondent in civill obedience.
Peace. He addes further, when Tertullian saith, That another mans Religion neither hurteth nor profiteth any; It must be under∣stood of private worship and Religion professed in private: other∣wise a false Religion professed by the members of the Church, or by such as have given their names to Christ, will be the ruine and desolation of the Church, as appeareth by the threats of Christ to the Churches Revel. 2. Truth. I answer (passing by that unsound distinction of members of the Church, or those that have given their Names to Christ, which in point of visible profession and Worship will appeare to be all one) it is plaine, First, that Tertullian doth not there speake of private, but of pub∣like Worship and Religion. Secondly, Although it be true in a Church of Christ, that a false Religion or Worship permitted, will hurt, according to those threats of Christ, Revel. 2. Yet in 2 cases I believe a false Religion will not hurt (which is most like to have been Tertullians meaning) First,In a cases a false Religion will not hurt the true Church, or the State. a false Religion out of the Church will not hurt the Church, no more then weedes in the Wildernesse hurt the inclosed Garden, or poyson hurt the body when it is not touched or taken, yea and anti∣dotes are received against it. Secondly, a false Religion and Worship will not hurt the Civill State, in case the worshippers breake no civill Law: and the Answe∣rer (elswhere) acknowledgeth, that the civill Lawes not being bro∣ken, civill Peace is not broken: and this only is the Point in Que∣stion. CHAP. LXXI. Peace. YOur next Authour (saith he) Ierome, crosseth not the Truth, nor advantageth your Cause; for we grant what he saith, that Heresie must be cut off with the sword of the Spirit: but this hinders not, but being so cut down if the Heretick will persist in his Heresie, to the seduction of others, he may be cut off also by the Civill Sword,The seducing or infecting of others discussed. to prevent the perdition of others. And that to be Ieromes meaning, appeareth by his note upon that of the Apostle, (A little Leaven leaveneth the whole lumpe) Therefore (saith he) a sparke as soon as it appeareth, is to be ex∣tinguished, and the leaven to be removed from the rest of the
dough; Rotten pieces of flesh are to be cut off, and a scabbed beast is to be driven from the sheepfold; lest the whole House, Body, masse of Dough, and Flock, be set on fire with the sparke, be putrified with the rotten slesh, sowred with the leaven, perish by the scabbed beast. Truth. I answer,The Answerer truseth not to the sword of the Spirit only in Spiri∣tuall causes. first, he granteth to Tertullian, that Heresie must be cut off with the sword of the Spirit: yet withall he maintaineth a cutting off by a second sword, the sword of the Magistrate; and conceiveth that Tertullian so meanes, because he quoteth that of the Apostle, A little leaven leaveneth the whole lumpe. Answ. It is no Argument to prove that Tertullian meant a civill sword, by alleadging 1 Cor. 5. or Gal. 5. which properly and only appove a cutting off by the sword of the Spirit in the Church, and the purging out of the leaven in the Church in the Cities of Corinth and Galatia. And if Tertullian should so meane as himselfe doth, yet First,The absolute sufficiencie of the sword of the Spirit. that grant of his, that Heresie must be cut off with the sword of the Spirit, implies an absolute sufficiencie in the sword of the Spirit to cut it down, according to that mighty operation of Spiri∣tuall weapons, (2 Cor. 10. 4.) powerfully sufficient either to convert the Heretick to God, and subdue his very thoughts into subjection to Christ, or else spiritually to slay and execute him. Secondly, it is cleare to be the meaning of the Apostle, and of the Spirit of God, not there to speake to the Church in Corinth or Galatia,The Church of Christ to be kept pure. or any other Church, concerning any other dough, or house, or body, or lock, but the dough, the body, the house, the lock of Christ his Church: Out of which such spaks, such leaven, such rotten slesh and scabbed sheep are to be avoided. Nor could the eye of this worthy Answerer ever be so obscured, as to run to a Smiths shop for a Sword of iron and steale to helpe the Sword of the Spirit,A Nationall Church not insttd by Christ Jesus. if the Sun of Righteousnesse had once been plea∣sed to shew him, that a Nationall Church (which elsewhere he pro∣fesseth against) a state Church (whether explicite, as in Ola England, or implicite, as in New) is not the Institution of the Lord Iesus Christ. The Nationall typicall State-Church of the Iewes necessarily called for such weapons:The nationall Church of the Jewes. but the particular Churches of Christ in all parts of the World, consisting of Iewes or Gentiles, is powerfully able by the sword of the Spirit to defend it selfe, and ffend Men or Devils, al∣though the Stat or Kingdome (wherein such a Church or Churches
of Christ are gathered) have neither carnall speare nor sword, &c.1 Sam. 13. as once it was in the Nationall Church of the Land of Canaan. CHAP. LXXII. Peace. BReutius (whom you next quote,Man hath no power to mke lawes to binde con∣science. saith he) speaketh not to your cause. Wee willingly grant you, that man hath no power to make Lawes to binde conscience, but this hinders not, but men may see the Lawes of God observed which doe binde conscience. Truth. I answer, In granting with Breutius that man hath not power to make Lawes to binde conscience, hee overthrowes such his tenent and practice as restraine men from their Worship, according to their Conscience and beleefe, and constraine them to such worships (though it bee out of a pretence that they are convinced) which their owne soules tell them they have no satisfaction nor faith in. Secondly, whereas he affirmeth that men may make Lawes to see the Lawes of God observed. I answer, as God needeth not the helpe of a materiall sword of steele to assist the sword of the Spirit in the affaires of conscience, so those men, those Magistrates, yea that Commonwealth which makes such Magistrates, must needs have power and authority from Christ Iesus to sit Iudge and to determine in all the great controversies concerning doctrine, discipline, government, &c. And then I aske,Desperate con∣sequences un∣avoidable. whether upon this ground it must not evidently follow, that Either there is no lawfull Commonwealth nor civill State of men in the world, which is not qualified with this spirituall discerning: (and then also that the very Commonweale hath more light concer∣ning the Church of Christ, then the Church it selfe.) Or, that the Commonweale and Magistrates thereof must judge and punish as they are perswaded in their owne beleefe and consci∣ence, (be their conscience Paganish, Turkish, or Antichristian) what is this but to confound Heaven and Earth together, and not onely to take away the being of Christianity out of the World, but to take away all civility, and the world out of the world, and to lay all upon heapes of confusion?
CHAP. LXXIII. Peace. THe like answer (saith he) may bee returned to Luther,Luthers testi∣mony in this case discussed. whom you next alledge. First, that the government of the civill Magistrate extendeth no further then over the bodies and goods of their subjects, not over their soules, and therefore they may not undertake to give Lawes unto the soules and consciences of men. Secondly, that the Church of Christ doth not use the Arme of se∣cular power to compell men to the true profession of the truth, for this is to be done with spirituall weapons, whereby Christians are to be exhorted, not compelled. But this (saith hee) hindreth not that Christians sinning against light of faith and conscience, may justly be censured by the Church with excommunication, and by the civill sword also, in case they shall corrupt others to the perdi∣tion of their soules. Truth. I answer, in this joynt confession of the Answerer with Luther, to wit, that the government of the civill Magistrate exten∣deth no further then over the bodies and goods of their subjects, not over their soules: who sees not what a cleare testimony from his own mouth and pen is given, to wit, that either the Spirituall and Church estate, the preaching of the Word, and the gathering of the Church, the Baptisme of it, the Ministry, Government and Administrations thereof belong to the civill body of the Commonweale? that is, to the bodies and goods of men, which seemes monstrous to imagine: Or else that the civill Magistrate cannot (without exceeding the bounds of his office) meddle with those spirituall affaires. Againe,Mr. Cottons positions evi∣dently proved contradictory to themselves. necessarily must it follow, that these two are contradi∣ctory to themselves: to wit, The Magistrate power extends no further then the bodies and goods of the subject, and yet The Magistrates must punish Christians for sinning against the light of faith and conscience, and for corrupting the soules of men. The Father of Lights make this worthy Answerer and all that feare him to see their wandring in this case, not only from his feare, but also from the light of Reason it selfe, their owne convictions and confessions. Secondly, in his joint confession with Luther, that the Church
doth not use the secular power to compell men to the Faith and Profession of the truth, he condemneth (as before I have observed) First, his former Implication, viz that they may bee compelled when they are convinced of the truth of it. Secondly, their owne practice, who suffer no man of any diffe∣rent conscience and worship to live in their jurisdiction, except that he depart from his owne exercise of Religion and Worship differing from the worship allowed of in the civill State, yea and also actually submit to come to their Church. Which howsoever it is coloured over with this varnish,Hearing of the Word of God in a Church estate a part of Gods worship. viz. that men are compelled no further then unto the hearing of the word, unto which all men are bound: yet it will appeare that teaching and be∣ing taught in a Church estate is a Church worship, as true and pro∣per a Church worship as the Supper of the Lord, Act. 2. 46. Secondly, all persons (Papist and Protestant) that are conscien∣tious, have alwayes suffered upon this ground especially, that they have refused to come to each others Church or Meeting. CHAP. LXXIV. Peace. THe next passage in the Author which the Answerer de∣scends unto,Papists plea for toleration of conscience. is the testimony of the Papists themselves, a lively and shining testimony from Scriptures alledged both against themselves and all that associate with them (as power is in their hand) in such unchristian and bloody both tenents and practices. As for the testimony of the Popish booke (saith he) we weight it not, as knowing what ever they speake for toleration of Religion, where themselves are under Hatches, when they come to sit at Stern they judge and practise quite contrary, as both their writings and judiciall proceedings have testified to the world these many yeares. Truth. I answer, although both writings and practices have been such, yet the Scriptures and expressions of truth alledged and uttered by them, speake loud and fully for them when they are under the Hatches, that for their conscience and religion they should not there be choaked and smothered, but suffered to breathe and walke upon the Deckes in the ayre of civill liberty and conversation in the Ship of the commonwealth, upon good assurance given of civill obedience to the civill State.
Againe, if this practice bee so abominable in his eyes from the Papists, viz.The Prote∣stants partiall in the case of persecution. that they are so partiall as to persecute when they sit at Helme, and yet cry out against persecution when they are under the Hatches, I shall beseech the Righteous Judge of the whole world to present as in a Water or Glasse (where face answereth to face) the faces of the Papist to the Protestant, answering to each other in the samenesse of partiality, both of this doctrine and practice. When Mr. Cotton and others have formerly been under hatches, what sad and true complaints have they abundantly powred forth against persecution? How have they opened that heavenly Scrip∣ture, Cant 4. 8. Where Christ Iesus calls his tender Wife and Spouse from the fellowship with persecutors in their dens of Lions, and mountaines of Leopards? But comming to the Helme (as he speaks of the Papists) how, both by preaching, writing, Printing, practice, doe they themselves (I hope in their persons Lambes) unnaturally and partially expresse toward others, the cruell nature of such Lions and Leopards? O that the God of Heaven might please to tell them how abo∣minable in his eyes are a waight and a waight,A false bal∣ance in Gods matters abo∣minable to God. a stone and a stone in the bag of waights! one waight for themselves when they are un∣der Hatches, and another for others when they come to Helme. Nor shall their confidence of their being in the truth (which they judge the Papists and others are not in) no nor the Truth it selfe priviledge them to persecute others, and to exempt themselves from persecution, because (as formerly.) First,Sheep cannot hnt, no not the wolves. it is against the nature of true Sheep to persecute or hunt the Beasts of the Forrest, no not the same Wolves who formerly have persecuted themselves. Secondly, if it be a duty and charge upon all Magistrates in all parts of the World to judge and persecute in and for spirituall cau∣ses, then either they are no Magistrates who are not able to judge in such cases, or else they must judge according to their Consciences, whether Pagan, Turkish or Antichristian. Lastly,Pills to purge out the spiit of persecution. notwithstanding their confidence of the truth of their owne way, yet the experience of our Fathers errours, our owne mistakes and ignorance, the sense of our own weaknesses and blindnesse in the depths of the prophesies & mysteries of the Kingdom of Christ, and the great professed expectation of light to come which we are not now able to comprehend, may abate the edge, yea sheath up the
sword of persecution toward any, especially such as differ not from them in doctrines of repentance, or faith, or holinesse of heart and life, and hope of glorious and eternall union to come, but only in the way and manner of the administrations of Iesus Christ. CHAP. LXXV. Peace. TO close this head of the testimony of Writers, it pleaseth the Answerer to produce a contrary testimony of Au∣stin, Optatus, &c. Truth. I readily acknowledge (as formerly I did concerning the testimony of Princes) that Antichrist is too hard for Christ at votes and numbers:Superstition & persecution have had ma∣ny votes from Gods owne people. yea and beleeve that in many points (wherein the servants of God these many hundred yeares have beene fast a∣sleep) superstition and persecution have had more suffrages and votes from Gods owne people then hath either been honourable to the Lord, or peaceable to their owne or the soules of others: Therefore (not to derogate from the pretious memory of any of them) let us briefly consider what they have in this point affirmed. To begin with Austin: They murther (saith he) soules, and themselves are afflicted in body, and they put men to everlasting death, and yet they complaine when themselves are put to tem∣porall death. I answer,Austins saying for persecution examined. This Rhetoricall perswasion of humane wisdome seems ve∣ry reasonable in the eye of flesh and blood, but one Scripture more prevailes with faithfull and obedient soules then thousands of plau∣sile and eloquent speeches: in particular, First, the Scripture useth soule-killingSoul-killing. in a large sense, not only for the teaching of false prophets and seducers, but even for the offensive walking of Christians, in which respect 1 Cor. 8.) a true Christian may be guilty of destroying a soule for whom Christ died, and therefore by this rule ought to be hanged, burned, &c. Secondly, That plausible similitude will not prove that every false teaching or false practice actually kills the soule, as the body is slaine, and slaine but once, for soules infected or bewitched may againe recover, 1 Cor. 5. Gal. 5. 2 Tim. 2. &c. Thirdly, for soule-killings, yea also for soule-woundings and grie∣vings, Christ Iesus hath appointed remedies sufficient in his Church. There comes forth a two edged sword out of his mouth (Rev. 1. and
Rev. 2) able to cut downe Heresie (as is confest) yea and to kill the Hereticke,Punishments provided by Christ Jesus against Soule-killers and Soule-woun∣ders. yea and to punish his soule everlastingly, which no sword of steele can reach unto in any punishment comparable or imagin∣able; and therefore in this case we may say of this spirituall soule-killing by the sword of Christs mouth, as Paul concerning the in∣cestuous person, 2 Cor. 2. Sufficient is this punishment, &c. Fourthly, Although no Soule-killers, nor Soule-grievers may be suffred in the Spirituall State or Kingdome of Christ, the Church; yet he hath commanded that such should be suffered and permitted to be and live in the World, as I have proved on Matth. 13. other∣wise thousands and millions of soules and bodies both, must be mur∣thered and cut off by civill combustions and bloody warres about Religion. Fifthly, I argue thus: The Soules of all men in the World are either naturally dead in Sin, or alive in Christ. If dead in sinne, no man can kill them,Men dead in Sin, cannot be Soule kill'd. A Nationall enforced Re∣ligion or a Ci∣vill War for Religion the two great preventers of soule conver∣sion and life. no more then he can kill a dead man: Nor is it a false Teacher or false Religion that can so much prevent the means of Spirituall life, as one of these two; Either the force of a material sword, imprisoning the Soules of men in a State or Nationall Religi∣on, Ministery or Worship; Or secondly, Civill warres and combustions for Religion sake, whereby men are immediately cut off without any longer meanes of Repentance. Now againe, for the Soules that are alive in Christ, he hath gra∣ciously appointed Ordinances powerfully sufficient to maintaine and cherish that life, Armour of proofe able to defend them against men and devils. Secondly, the Soule once alive in Christ, is like Christ himselfe, (Revel. 1.) alive for ever, (Rom. 6.) and cannot die a spirituall death. Lastly, Grant a man to be a false Teacher, an Heretick, a Balaam, a Spirituall Witch, a Wolfe, a Persecuter, breathing out blasphemies against Christ,Soule killers prove (by the grace of Christ) Soule savers. and slaughters against his followers, as Paul did, Act. 9. I say, these who appeare Soule-killers to day, by the grace of Christ may prove (as Paul) Soule-savers to morrow: and saith Paul to Timothy (1 Tim. 4.) thou shalt save thy selfe and them that heare thee: which all must necessarily be prevented, if all that comes within the sense of these Soule-killers, must (as guilty of blood) be corporally kill'd and put to death.
CHAP. LXVI. Peace. DEare Truth, your Answers are so satisfactorie to Austins speech, that if Austin himselfe were now living, me thinkes he should be of your mind. I pray descend to Optatus,Optatus exa∣mined. who (saith the Answerer) justifies Macharius for putting some Here∣ticks to death, affirming that he had done no more herein then what Moses, Phineas and Elias had done before him. Truth. Thse are shafts usually drawne from the Quiver of the Ceremoniall and typicall state of the Nationall Church of the Iewes,Persecuters leave Christ, & flie to Mo∣ses for their practice. whose shadowish and figurative state vanished at the appearing of the Body and substance, the Sun of Righteousnesse, who set up another Kingdome or Church (Heb. 12.) Ministrie and Worship: in which we finde no such Ordinance, precept or president of killing men by Materiall Swords for Religion sake. More particularly concerning Moses, I quaerie what commande∣ment or practice of Moses either Optatus or the Answerer here in∣tend? Probably that passage of Deut. 13. wherein Moses appointed a slaughter either of a person or a city that should depart from the God of Israel, with whom that Nationall Church was in Covenant. And if so, I shall particularly reply to that place in my Answer to the Reasons hereunder mentioned. Concerning Phineas his zealous Act: First, his slaying of the Israelitish man, and woman of Midian,Phineas his act discussed. was not for spirituall, but corporall filthines. Secondly, no man will produce his fact as presidentiall to any Minister of the Gospel so to act in any Civill state or Commonweale; although I believe in the Church of God it is presidentiall for either Minister or people to kill and slay with the two-edged sword of the Spirit of God any such bold and open presumptuous sinners as these were. Lastly, concerning Eliah: There were two famous acts of Eliah of a killing nature: First, that of slaying 850 of Baals Prophets. 1 Kings 18. Secondly of the two Captaines and their Fifties, by fire, &c. For the first of these,Elias slaugh∣ters examined. it cannot figure or type out any materiall slaughter of the many thousands of false Prophets in the World by any materiall sword of Iron or Steele: for as that passage was mi∣raculous,
so finde we not any such commission given by the Lord Iesus to the Ministers of the Gospel. And lastly, such a slaughter must not only extend to all the false prophets in the World, but (accor∣ding to the Answerers grounds) to the many thousands of thou∣sands of Idolaters and false worshippers in the Kingdomes and Nations of the World. For the second Act of Eliah,Eliahs consu∣ming the 2 Captanes and their compa∣nies by ie, discussed. as it was also of a miraculous na∣ture: So secondly, when the followers of the Lord Iesus (Luc. 9.) proposed such a practice to the Lord Iesus, for injury offered to his owne person, he disclaimed it with a milde checke to their angry spirits, telling them plainly they knew not what spirits they were of; and addeth that gentle and mercifull conclusion, That he came not to destroy the bodies of men, as contrarily Antichrist doth, al∣ledging these instances from the Old Testament, as also Peters kil∣ling Anania, Acts 5. and Peters vision and voice, Arise Peter, kill and eat, Acts. 10. CHAP. LXXVII. Peace. YOu have so satisfied these instances brought by Optatus, that me thinks Optatus and the Answerer himself might rest satisfied. I will not trouble you with Bernards argument from Rom. 13. which you have already on that Scripture so largely answered. But what thinke you (lastly) of Calvin, Beza, and Aretius? Truth Ans. Since matters of fact and opinion are barely related by the Answerer without their grounds, whose grounds notwith∣standing in this Discourse are answered. I answer, if Paul himself were joyned with them, yea or an Angel from Heaven bringing any other rule then what the Lord Jesus hath once delivered, we have Pauls conclusion and resolution, peremptory and dreadfull, Gal. 1. 8. Peace. This passage finished, let me finish the whole by propo∣sing one conclusion of the Author of the arguments, viz. It is no prejudice to the Commonwealth if Liberty of Conscience were suffered to such as feare God indeed: Abraham abode a long time amongst the Cananites, yet contrary to them in Reli∣gion, Gen. 13. 7. & 16. 13. Againe, he sjourned in Gerar, and King Abimelch gave him leave to abide in his Land, Gen. 20. 21. 23. 24.
Isaack also dwelt in the same Land, yet contrary in Religion, Gen. 26. Iacob lived 20 yeares in one house with his Unkle Laban, yet differed in Religion, Gen. 31. The people of Israel were about 430 yeares in that infamous land of Egypt, and afterwards 70 yeares in Babylon: all which times they differed in Religion from the States, Exod. 12. & 2 Chron. 36. Come to the time of Christ, where Israel was under the Ro∣manes, where lived divers Sects of Religion, as Herodians, Scribes and Pharises, Saduces and Libertines, Theudaeans and Samaritanes, beside the Common Religion of the Jews, & Christ and his Apostles. All which differed from the Common Religi∣on of the State, which was like the Worship of Diana, which almost the whole World then worshipped, Acts 19. 20. All these lived under the Government of Caesar, being nothing hurtfull unto the Commonwealth, giving unto Caesar that which was his. And for their Religion and Consciences towards God, he left them to themselves, as having no dominion over their Soules and Consciences: And when the Enemies of the Truth raised up any tumults, the wisedome of the Magistrate most wisely appeased them, Acts 18 14. & 19. 35. Unto this the Answerer returnes thus much: It is true, that without prejudice to the Common-wealth, Li∣bertie of Conscience may be suffered to such as feare God indeed, as knowing they will not persist in Heresie or turbulent Schisme, when they are convinced in Conscience of the sinfulnes there∣of. But the question is, whether an Heretick after once or twice Admonition, (and so after Conviction) and any other scanda∣lous and heynous offender, may be tolerated either in the Church without Excommunication, or in the Common-weale without such punishment as may preserve others from dangerous and damnable infection. CHAP. LXXIX. Truth. I Here observe the Answerers partiality, that none but such as truly feare God should enjoy Libertie of Consci∣ence, whence the Inhabitants of the World must either come into
the estate of men fearing God, or else dissemble a Religion in hypo∣crisie, or else be driven out of the World: One must follow. The first is only the gift of God, the second and third are too commonly practised upon this ground. Againe, since there is so much controversie in the World, where the name of Christ is taken up, concerning the true Church, the Ministrie and Worship, and who are those that truly feare God; I aske who shall judge in this case, who be they that feare God? It must needs be granted, that such as have the power of suffring or not suffring,Dangerous consequences flowing from the Civill Magistrates judging in Spirituall cau∣ses. such Consciences, must judge: and then must it fol∣low (as before I intimated) that the Civill State must judge of the truth of the Spirituall; and then Magistrates fearing or not fearing God, must judge of the feare of God: also that their judgement or sentence must be according to their conscience, of what Religion so∣ever: Or that there is no lawfull Magistrate, who is not able to judge in such cases. And lastly, that since the Soveraigne power of all Civill Authority is founded in the consent of the People, that every Common-weale hath radically and fundamentally in it a power of true discerning the true feare of God,The World turned upside down. which they transfer to their Magistrates and Officers: Or else that there are no lawfull King∣domes, Cities, or Townes in the World, in which a man may live, and unto whose Civill Government he may submit: and then (as I said before) there must be no World, nor is it lawfull to live in it, be∣cause it hath not a true discerning Spirit to judge them that feare or not feare God. Lastly, although this worthy Answerer so readily grants, that Libertie of Conscience should be suffred to them that feare God in∣deed:The wonder∣full answer of the Ministers of the Church of New Eng∣land to the Ministers of the Church of Old England. yet we know what the Ministers of the Churches of New-England wrote in answer to the 3 Question sent to them by some Ministers of Old England, viz. that although they confest them to be such persons whom they approved of far above themselves, yea who were in their hearts to live and die together; yet if they and other godly people with them, comming over to them, should dif∣fer in Church constitution, they then could not approve their Civill cohabitation with them, and consequently could not advise the Ma∣gistrates to suffer them to enjoy a Civill being within their Iuris∣diction. Heare O Heavens, and give eare O Earth, yea let the Heavens be astonished, and the Earth tremble at such an Answer as this from
such excellent men to such whom they esteeme for godlinesse above themselves. CHAP. LXXIX. Peace. YEa, but they say, they doubt not if they were there but they should agree; for, say they, either you will come to us, or you may shew us light to come to you, for we are but weak men, and dreame not of perfection in this life. Truth. Alas,Lmentable differences even amongst them that ear God. who knowes not what lamentable differences have beene betweene the same Ministers of the Church of England, some conforming, others leaving their livings, friends, country, life, rather then conforme; when others againe (of whose personall godlinesse it is not questioned) have succeeded by conformity into such forsa∣ken (so called) Livings?Betweene the Presbyterians and Indepen∣dants, Cove∣nanters and Noncovenan∣ters, of both which many are truly god∣ly in their persons. How great the present differences even a∣mongst them that feare God, concerning Faith, Iustification, and the evidence of it? concerning Repentance and godly sorrow, as also and mainly concerning the Church, the Matter, Forme, Administration and Government of it? Let none now thinke that the passage to New England by Sea, or the nature of the Countrey can doe what onely the Key of David can doe, to wit, open and shut the Consciences of men. Beside, how can this bee a faithfull and upright acknowledge∣ment of their weaknesse and imperfection, when they preach, print, and practise such violence to the soules and bodies of others, and by their Rules and Grounds ought to proceed even to the killing of those whom they judge so deare unto them, and in respect of godli∣nesse far above themselves? CHAP. LXXX. Peace. YEa but (say they) the godly will not persist in Heresie or turbulent Schisme, when they are convinced in Consci∣ence,The doctrine of persecution necssrly and most com∣monly falls  vist upon he ost god∣ly persons. &c. Truth. Sweet Truth, if the Civill Court and Magistracy must judge (as before I have writen) and those Civill Courts are as lawfull, consisting of naturall men as of godly persons, then what con∣sequences necessarily will ollow, I have before mentioned. And I adde, according to this conclusion it must follow, that, if the most
godly persons yeeld not to once or twice Admonition (as is main∣tained by the Answerer) they must necessarily be esteemed obseinate persons, for if they were godly (saith he) they would yeeld. Must it not then be said (as it was by one, passing sentence of Banishment upon some, whose godlinesse was acknowledged) that he that com∣manded the Iudge not to respect the poore in the cause of judgement, commands him not to respect the holy or the godly person? Hence I could name the place and time when a godly man,The doctrine of persecution drives the most godly persons out of the world. a most desirable person for his trade, &c. (yet something different in conscience) propounded his willingnesse and desire to come to dwell in a certaine Towne in New England; it was answered by the Chiefe of the place, This man differs from us, and wee desire not to be troubled. So that in conclusion (for no other reason in the world) the poore man, though godly, usefull and peaceable, could not be admitted to a Civill Being and Habitation on the Common Earth in that Wildernesse amongst them. The latter part of the Answer concerning the Hereticke or obsti∣nate person to be excommunicated, and the scandalous offender to be punished in the Commonweale, which neither of both come neere our Question: I have spoken I feare too largely already. Peace. Mr. Cotton concludes with a confident perswasion of ha∣ving removed the grounds of that great errour, viz. that persons are not to be persecuted for cause of conscience. Truth. And I beleeve (deare Peace) it shall appear to them that (with feare and trembling at the word of the Lord) examine these passages, that the charge of errour reboundeth backe even such an errour, as may well bee called the bloody tenent,The bloody Tenent. so directly contradi∣cting the spirit and minde and practice of the Prince of Peace; so deep∣ly guilty of the blood of soules compelled and forced to ypocrisie in a spirituall and soule rape; so deeply guilty of the blood of the Soules under the Altar, persecuted in all ages for the cause of Conscience, and so destructive to the civill peace and welfare of all Kingdomes, Countries, and Commonwealths. CHAP. LXXXI. Peace. TO this Conclusion (deare Truth) I heartily subscribe, and know the God, the Spirit, the Prince, the Angels, and all the true awaked Sons of Peace will call thee blessed.
Truth. How sweet and precious are these contemplations, but oh how sweet the actions and fruitions? Peace. Thy lips drop as the Honey-combe, Honey and Milke are under thy Tongue; oh that these drops, these streames might flow without a stop or interruption! Truth. The glorious white Troopers (Rev. 19.) shall in time be mounted, and he that is the most High Prince of Princes, and Lord Generall of Generalls mounted upon the Word of Truth and Meek∣nesse (Psal 45.) shall triumph gloriously, and renew our meetings. But harke, what noise is this? Peace. These are the dolefull drums, and shrill sounding trumpets,Warres for Conscience. the roaring murthering Canons, the shouts of Conquerours, the grones of wounded, dying, slaughtered, righteous with the wicked. Deare Truth how long? how long these dreadfull sounds and direfull sights? how long before my glad returne and restitution? Truth. Sweet Peace, who will beleeve my true report? yet true it is, if I were once beleev'd, blest Truth and Peace should not so soone be parted. Peace. Deare Truth, what welcome hast thou found of late be∣yond thy former times or present expectations? Truth. Alas, my welcome changes as the times, and strongest swords and armes prevaile: were I beleeved in this, that Christ is not delighted with the blood of men (but shed his owne for his bloodiest enemies) that by the word of Christ no man for gainsaying Christ, or joyning with his enemy Antichrist, should bee molested with the civill sword:The blessed Magna Charta Were this foundation laid as the Magna Charta of highest liberties, and good security given on all hands for the pre∣servation of it, how soone should every brow and house be stucke with Olive Branches? Peace. This heavenly invitation makes mee bold once more to crave thy patient eare and holy tongue. Errours impatient and soon tyred, but thou art Light, and like the Father of Lights, unwearied in thy shinings. Loe here what once againe I present to thy im∣partiall censure.
A MODEL of CHURCH and CIVIL Power. Composed by Mr. COTTON and the MINISTERS of NEW-ENGLAND, And sent to the CHURCH at SALEM, as a further Confirmation of the bloody Doctrine of PERSECUTION for cause of CONSCIENCE. Examined and Answered. CHAP. LXXXII. Truth. VVHat hast thou there? Peace. Here is a combination of thine owne Children against thy very life and mine:A strange Mo∣dell of a Church and Common∣weale, after the Mscall and Jewish pattern Hre is a Modell (framed by many able learned and godly hands) of such a Church and Common-weale as wakens Moses from his unknown Grave, and denies Iesus yet to have seene the Earth. Truth. Begin (sweet Peace) read and propound. My hand shall not be tyred with holding the ballances of the Sanctuarie: doe thou put in, and I shall weigh as in the presence of Him whose pure eyes cannot behold iniquitie. Peace. Thus then speakes the Preface or Entrance.Mat. 16. 19. with oh: 20. 23. Rom. 13. 1. Mat. 10. 18. Tit 3. 1. Acts 15. 20. Seeing God hath given a distinct power to Church and Common-weale, the one Spirituall (called the Power of the Keyes) the other Civill called the Power of the Sword) and hath made the mem∣bers of both Societies subject to both Authorities, so that every
soule in the Church is subject to the higher powers in the Com∣monweale, Isa. 49. 2. Gal. 3. 8. and every member of the Commonweale (being a member of the Church) is subject to the Lawes of Christs King∣dome, and in him to the censures of the Church; the Question is, how the Civill State and the Church may dispence their seve∣rall Governments without infringement and impeachment of the power and honour of the One or of the Other, and what bounds and limits the Lord hath set betweene both the Admi∣nistrations. Truth. From that conclusion (deare Peace) that every mem∣ of the Commonweale,Christs power in his Church confest to be above all Ma∣gistrates in  all things. being a member of the Church, is subject to the Lawes of Christs Kingdome, and in Him to the censure of the Church; I observe that they grant the Church of Christ in Spi∣rituall causes to be superiour and over the highest Magistrates in the World, if members of the Church. Hence therefore I infer, may she refuse to receive, and may al∣so cast forth any, yea even the highest (if obstinate in Sin) cut of her Spirituall society. Hence in this Spirituall society, that soule who hath most of Christ, most of His Spirit, is most (spiritually) honourable, according to the Scriptures, quoted Acts 15. 20. Isa. 49. 23. Gal. 3. 28. And if so, how can this stand with their common tenent, that the Civill Magistrate must keep the first Table set up, reforme the Church, and be Iudge and Governour in all Ecclesiasticall as well as Civill causes? Secondly, I observe the lamentable wresting of this one Scrip∣ture, Isa. 49. 23. la∣mentably wre∣sted. Sometimes this Scripture must prove the Power of the Civill Magistrates, Kings and Governours, over the Church in Spirituall causes &c. Yet here this Scripture is produced to prove Kings and Magistrates (in Spirituall causes) to be censured and cor∣rected by the same Church. Tis true in severall respects, he that is a Governour may be a subject but in one and the same spirituall respect to judge and to be judged: to sit on the Bench, and stand at the Bar of Christ Iesus, is as impossible as to reconcile the East and West to∣gether.
CHAP. LXXXII. The first head, That both Iurisdictions may stand together. Peace. VVHereas divers affecting transcending power to themselves over the Church have perswaded the Princes of the World,The first head examined. that the Kingdome of Christ in His Church cannot rise or stand, without the falls of those Common∣weales wherein it is set up,John 18. 36. we do beleeve and professe the con∣trary to this suggestion; the government of the one being of this World,Jr. 29. 7. the other not; the Church helping forward the prosperity of the Commonweale by meanes only Ecclesiasticall and Spirituall; the Commonweale helping forward her owne and the Churches felicity by meanes politicall or temporall;Ezta 7. 23. Rom. 1. 2. 3. & Tim. 2. 2. the falls of Commonweales being knowne to arise from their scat∣tering and diminishing the power of the Church, and the flouri∣shing of Commonweales with the well ordering of the people (even in morall and civill virtues) being observed to arise from the vigilant administration of the holy Discipline of the Church, as Bodin, (a man not partiall to Church Discipline) plainely testifieth. The vices in the free estate of Geneva, quae legibus nus∣quam vindicantur, by meanes of Church Discipline, sine vi & tu∣multu coercentur; the Christian liberty not freeing us from sub∣jection to Authority, but from inthrallment and bondage unto sinne. Truth. Ans. From this confession,The Civill Commonweal and the Spiri∣tuall Com∣monweale the Church, not inconsistent, though inde∣pendent the one on the o∣ther. that the Church or Kingdome of Christ may be set up without prejudice of the Commonweale, accor∣ding to Iohn 18. 36. My Kingdome is not of this World, &c. I observe that although the Kingdome of Christ, the Church and the Civill Kingdome or Government be not inconsistent, but that both may stand together; yet that they are independent according to that Scripture, and that therefore there may be (as formerly I have proved) flou∣rishing Commonweales and Societies of men where no Church of Christ abideth; and secondly, the Commonweale may be in perfect peace and quiet, notwithstanding the Church, the Commonweale of Christ be in distractions and spirituall oppositions both against their Religions, and sometimes amongst themselves, as the Church of
Christ in Corinth troubled with divisions, contentions, &c. Secondly, I observe it is true the Church helpeth forward the prosperity of the Commonweale by spirituall meanes Ier. 29. 7. The prayers of Gods people procure the peace of the City, where they abide, yet that Christs Ordinances and administrations of Worship are appointed and given by Christ to any Civill State, Towne or City as is implied by the instance of Geneva, that I confidently deny. The Ordinances and Discipline of Christ Iesus,Christs Ordi∣nances put up∣on a whole City or Nati∣on, may more civilize and moralize, but ever Christianize them. though wrong∣fully and prophanely applied to naturall and unregenerate men may cast a blush of civillity and morality upon them as in Geneva and other places (for the shining brightnesse of the very shadow of Christs Ordinances casts a shame upon barbarisme and incivillity yet withall I affirme that the misapplication of Ordinances to unrege∣nerate and unrepentant persons hardens up their soules in a dread∣full sleep and dreame of their owne blessed estate, and sends millions of soules to hell in a secure expectation of a false salvation. CHAP. LXXXIV. The second head, concerning Superiority of each Power. Peace. BEcause contention may arise in future times whichThe second head concer∣ning superiori∣ty of each po∣wer. of these Powers under Christ is the greatest as it hath been under Antichrist, we conceive first, That the power of the Civill Magistrates is superiour to the Church policie in place, honours, dignity, earthly power in the World;Rom. 13. 1. 5. 6 Isa. 49. 23. Isa. 49. 23. and the Church supe∣riour to him (being a member of the Church) Ecclesiastically, that is, in a Church way ruling and ordering him by Spirituall Ordi∣nances according to God for his soules health, as any other mem∣ber, so that all the power the Magistrate hath over the Church is temporall not spirituall,Luc. 12. 14. Joh. 8. 11. And that judi∣cium of the church in law suits, 1 Cor. 62 is only arbitra∣rium not coasti∣m. and all the power the Church hath over the Magistrate is spirituall not temporall: And as the Church hath no temporall power over the Magistrate, in ordine ad bonum spiritu∣ale: So the Magistrate hath no Spirituall power over the Church in ordine ad bonum temporale. Secondly, the delinquencie of either party calleth for the ex∣ercise of the power of terrour from the other part; for no Rulers ordained of God are a terrour to good works, but to evill, Rom.
13. 3. So that if the Church offend, the offence of the Church clleth upon the Civill Magistrate, either to seeke the healing thereof as a nursing father by his owne grave advice, and the ad∣vice of other Churches; or else if he cannot so prevaile to put forth and exercise the superiority of his power in redressing what is amisse according to the quality of the offence by the course of civill Justice. On the other side, if the Magistrate being a member of the Church shall offend, the offence calleth upon the Church either to seek the healing thereof in a brotherly way by conviction of his sinne; or else if they cannot prevaile, then to exercise the supe∣riority of their power in removing of the offence and recover∣ing of the offendour by Church censures. If the end of Spirituall or Church power is bonum spirituale, a spi∣rituall good;Ans. Truth. and the end of Civill or State power is bonum tempo∣rale, a temporall good: And secondly, if the Magistrate have no spirituall power to attaine to his temporall end, no more then a Church hath any temporall power to attaine to her Spirituall end,A contradicti∣on to make the Magistrate supreme judge in spirituall causes, and yet to have no spi∣rituall power. as is confest: I demand if this be not a contradiction against their owne disputes, tenents, and practices touching that question of per∣secution for cause of conscience: For if the Magistrate be supreme Iudge (and so consequently give supreme judgement, sentence and de∣termination) in matters of the first Table, and of the Church, and be custos utrius{que}, Tabule, keepers of both Tables (as they speake) and yet have no Spirituall power as is affirmed, how can he determine what the true Church and Ordinances are, and then set them up with the power of the Sword? How can he give judgement of a false Church, a false Ministery, a false Doctrine, false Ordinances, and with a Civil Sword pull them down, if he have no Spiritual power, au∣thority or commission from Christ Iesus for these ends and purposes? Further I argue thus: If the civill officers of State must determine, judge and punish in Spiritual causes, his power, authority and com∣mission must be either Spirituall or Civill, or else he hath none at all, and so acts without a commission and warrant from the Lord Iesus,The Civill Magistrate confest to have no Civill po∣wer over the soules of men. and so consequently stands guilty at the Bar of Christ Iesus to an∣swer for such his practice as a transcendent Delinquent. Now for civill power, these worthy Authors confesse that the Government of the civill Magistrate extendeth no further then over the bodies and goods of the Subject, and therefore hath no civill
power over the Soule, and therefore (say I) not in Soule-causes. Secondly, It is here confest in this passage, that to attaine his Civill end or Bonum temporale, he hath no Spirituall power,Nor spirituall. and therefore of necessitie out of their own mouths must they be judg∣ed for provoking the Magistrate, without either Civill or Spirituall power, to judge, punish and persecute in Spirituall causes; and to feare and tremble, lest they come neere those frogs which proceed out of the mouth of the Dragon and Beast and false Prophet, who by the same Arguments which the Authours here use stirre up the Kings of the Earth to make warre against the Lambe Christ Iesus, and his Followers, Revel. 17. CHAP. LXXXV. IN the next place I observe upon the point of Delinquencie, such a confusion, as Heaven and Earth may stand amazed at: If the Church offend (say they) after advice refused, in conclusion the Magistrate must redresse, that is, punish the Church (that is, in Church offences and cases) by a course of Civill justice. On the other side, if the Civill Magistrate offend after Admoni∣tion used, and not prevailing, in conclusion the Church proceeds to censure, that is, to Excommunication, as is afterward more largely proved by them. Now I demand, if the Church be a Delinquent, who shall judge? It is answered, the Magistrate. Againe, if the Magistrate be a Delinquent,The Magi∣strate and the Church, by the Authors grounds, at one and the same time, in one and the same cause, made the Judges on the Bh, and Dquents th. Bre. I aske who shall judge? It is answered, the Church. Whence I observe, (which is monstrous in all cases in the World) that one person, to wit, the Church or Magistrate, shall be at one time the Delinquent at the Bar, and the Iudge upon the Bench. This is cleere thus: The Church must judge when the Magistrate offends; and yet the Magistrate must judge when the Church of∣fends; and so consequently in this case must judge whether she contemne Civill Authority in the Second Table, for thus dealing with him: Or whether she have broken the rules of the first Table, of which (say they) God hath made him Keeper and Conserver. And therefore, though the Church make him a Delinquent at the Bar, yet by their confession God hath made him a Iudge on the Bench. What blood, what tumults hath been, and must be spilt upon these grounds?
Peace. Deare Truth, No question but the Church may punish the Magistrate spiritually in spirituall cases; and the Magistrate may punish the Church, civilly, in civill cases: But that for one and the same cause the Church must punish the Magistrate, and the Magistrate the Church, this seemes monstrous, and needs expli∣cation. Truth. Sweet Peace, I illustrate with this Instance: A true Church of Christ (of which, according to the Authors supposition, the Magistrate is a member) chooseth and calls one of her members to office:An illustrati∣on demonstra∣tng th the Cvill Mag∣stat cnnot hve power over the Church  spi∣ritull or Church causes. The Magistrate opposeth: The Church perswaded that the Magistrates exceptions are insufficient (according to her pri∣viledge, which these Authours maintaine against the Magistrates prohibition) proceeds to Ordaine her officer: The Magistrate chargeth the Church to have made an unfit and unworthy choice, and therefore according to his place and power, and according to his conscience and judgement he suppresseth such an officer, and makes void the Churches choice: Upon this the Church complaines against the Magistrates violation of her priviledges given her by Christ Iesus, and cries out that the Magistrate is turned Persecuter and not prevailing with admonition, she proceeds to Excommunicati∣on against him: The Magistrate according to his conscience, endures not such profanation of Ordinances as he conceives; and therefore, if no advice and admonition prevaile, he proceeds against such ob∣stinate abusers of Christs holy Ordinances, (as the Authors grant he may) in Civill Court of justice, yea and (I adde according to the patterne of Israel) cuts them off by the sword, as obstinate usurpers and prophaners of the holy things of Christ. I demand what helpe hath any poore Church of Christ in this case,The punish∣ments Civill which the Magistrate in∣sticts upon the Church for Civill crimes, lawfull and necessary. by maintaining this power of the Magistrate to punish the Church of Christ, I meane in spirituall and Soule-cases, for otherwise I question not but he may put all the members of the Church to death justly, if they commit crimes worthy thereof, as Paul spake, Acts 23. Shall the Church here slie to the Popes Sanctuarie against Em∣perours and Princes excommunicate, to wit, give away their crowns, kingdomes or dominions, and invite forraigne Princes to make War upon them and their Territories? The Authors surely will disclaime this; and yet I shall prove their Tenents tend directly unto such a practise.
Or secondly, shall she say the Magistrate is not a true Magistrate' because not able to judge and determine in such cases? This, their confession will not give them leave to say, because they cannot deny unbelievers to be lawfull Magistrates: and yet it shall appeare (not withstanding their conession to the contrary) their Tenents imply, that none but a Magistrate after their own conscience, is a lawfull Magistrate. Therefore, thirdly, they must ingenuously and honestly confesse, that if it be the duty of the Magistrate to punish the Church in spiri∣tuall cases, he must then judge according to his conscience and per∣swasion, whatever his conscience be: and then let all men judge into what a wofull state they bring both the civill Magistrate and Church of Christ, by such a Church-destroying and State-destroying Doctrine. Peace. Some will here say, in such a case either the Magistrate on the Church must judge; either the Spirituall or Civill State must be supreme. I answer, if the Magistrate be of another Religion, First,The true way of the God of Peace in diffe∣renes bet∣ween the Church & the Magistrate. What hath the Church to judge him being without? 1 Cor. 5. Secondly, If he be a member of the Church doubtles the Church hath power to judge (in spirituall and Soule-cases) with spirituall and Church censures all that are within, 1 Cor. 5. Thirdly, If the Church offend against the civill peace of the State, by wronging the bodies or goods of any, the Magistrate bears not the sword in vaine, Rom. 13. to correct any or all the members of the Church. And this I conceive to be the onely way of the God of Peace. CHAP. LXXXVI. The third head concerns the End of both these Powers. FIrst the common and last end of both is Gods glory, and Mans eternall felicitie. Secondly, the proper ends: First of Commonwealth, is the procuring, preserving, increa∣sing of externall and temporall peace and felicitie of the State in all Godlines and Honestie, 1 Tim. 2. 1, 2.
Secondly, of the Church, a begetting, preserving, increasing of internall and spirituall peace and felicity of the Church, in all godlinesse and honesty, Esay 2. 3, 4. and 9. 7. So that Magistrates have power given them from Christ in matters of Religion, be∣cause they are bound to see that ouward peace be preserved, not in all ungodlinesse and dishonesty (For such peace is Satanicall) but in all godlinesse and honesty, for such peace God aymes at. And hence the Magistrate is custos of both the Tables of godli∣nesse, in the first of Honesty, in the second for Peace sake. Hee must see that honesty be preserved within his jurisdiction, or else the subject will not be bonus Cives.Chmer. de Ec. ls. p. 376. Park. part. po∣lit. lib. 1. cap. 1 Hee must see that godlinesse as well as honesty be preserved, else the subject will not be bonus vir, who is the best bonus cives. Hee must see that godlinesse and honesty be preserved, or else himselfe will not bee bonus Magi∣stratus. Truth. In this passage here are divers particulars affirmed mar∣vellous destructive both to godlinesse and honesty, though under a faire make and colour of both. First, it will appeare that in spirituall things they make the Gar∣den and the Wildernesse (as often I have intimated) I say the Garden and the Wildernesse, the Church and the World are all one:The Grden of the Church and the Wil∣dernesse of the World mae all one. for thus, If the Powers of the World or Civill State, are bound to propose externall Peace in all godlinesse for their end, and the end of the Church be to preserve internall Peace in all godlinesse, I demand if their end (godlinesse bee the same, is not their power and state the same also, unlesse they make the Church subordinate to the Common∣wealths and, or the Commonweale subordinate to the Churches end, which (being the governour and setter up of it, and so consequent∣ly the Iudges of it) it cannot be? Now i godlinesse bee the worshipping and walking with God in Christ,The Com∣monweale more charged by these Au∣thors with the Wshp and Ordinances, then the Church. is not the Magistrate and Commonweale charged more by this tenent with the worship and Ordinances of God, then the Church, for the Magistrate they charge with the externall peace in godli∣nesse, and the Church but with the internall. I aske further, what is this internall peace in all godlinesse? whe∣ther intend they internall within the Soule, which onely the eye of God can see, opposed to externall or visible, which man also can discerne? or else whether they meane internall, that is spirituall soule matters, maters of Gods Worship, and then I say that peace (to
wit, of godlinesse or Gods worship) they had before granted to the ci∣vill State? Peace. The Truth is, (as I now perceive) the best and most godly of that judgement declare themselves never to have seene a true dif∣ference betweene the Church and the World,The authors of these Posi∣tion never yet sw a true dfference be∣tweene he Church of Cht nd the world, in pot of wor∣shp. and the Spirituall and Civill State; and howoever these worthy Authours seeme to make a kinde of separation from the World, and professe that the Church must consist of spirituall and living Stones, Saints, Regenerate persons, and so make some peculiar inclosed Ordinances, as the Supper of the Lord, (which none, say they, but godly persons must taste of) yet by compelling all within their Iurisdiction to an outward conformity of the Church worship, of the Word and Prayer, and maintenance of the Ministry thereof, they evidently declare that they still lodge and dwell in the confused mixtures of the uncleane and cleane, of the flock of Christ, and Herds of the World together, I meane in spirituall and religious worship. Truth. For a more ful and clear discussion of this Scripture, 1 Tim. 2. 1. 2. (on which is weakly built such a mighty building) I shall propose and resolve these foure Quaeries. CHAP. LXXXVII. First,1 Tim 2. 1. discussd. what is meant by godlinesse and honesty in this place. Secondly, what may the scope of the holy Spirit of God be in this place. Thirdly, whether the civill Magistrate was then custos utrisque Tabulae, keeper of both Tables, &c. Fourthly, whether a Church or Congregation of Christians may not live in godlinesse and honesty, although the civill Magistrate be of another conscience and worship, and the whole State and Country with him. To the first, What is here meant by godlinesse and honesty? Answ.The word ho∣nesty in this place of Ti∣mothy cannot signifie here the honesty or righteousnesse of the second Table. I finde not that the Spirit of God here intendeth the first and second Table. For, how ever the word  signifie godlinesse, or the worship of God, yet the second word  I finde not that it signifies such an honesty as compriseth the duties of the second Table, but such an honesty as signifies solemnity, gravity, and so it is turned by the Trans∣latours, Tit. 2. 7. , that is, in
doctrine, incorruptnesse, gravity: which doctrine cannot there bee ta∣ken for the doctrine of the civill state, or second Table, but the gra∣vity, majesty, and solemnity of the spirituall doctrine of Christianity. So that according to the Translatours owne rendring of that word in Titus, this place of Timothy should be thus rendred (In all godli∣nesse (or worshipping of God) and gravity) that is, a solemne or grave profession of the worship of God; and yet this mistaken and mis∣interpreted Scripture is that great Castle and strong Hold which so many lye unto concerning the Magistrates charge over the two Tables. Secondly, what is the scope of the Spirit of God in this place? I answer first negatively,The scope of Gods Spirit in this place of Timothy. the scope is not to speake of the duties of the first and second Table: Nor secondly is the scope to charge the Magistrate with forcing the people (who have chose him) to godlinesse or Gods worship, ac∣cording to his conscience, (the Magistrate keeping the peace of ex∣ternall godlinesse, and the Church of internall, as is affirmed:) but Secondly, positively, I say the Spirit of God by Paul in this place provokes Timothy and the Church at Ephesus, and so consequently all the Ministers of Christs Churches and Christians, to pray for two things. First,Gods people must pray for and endeavour the peace of the State they live in. for the peaceable and quiet state of the Countries and pla∣ces of their abode, that is implyed in their praying (as Paul directs them) for a quiet and peaceable condition, and suits sweetly with the command of the Lord to his people, even in Babel, Ier. 29. 7. Pray for the peace of the City, and seeke the good of it, for in the Peace thereof it shall goe well with you. Which Ruie will hold in any Pagan or Popish city,Although Pa∣gan or Popsh and therefore consequently are Gods people to pray against Warres, Famines, Pestilences, and especially to bee far from kindling coales of War, and endeavour the bringing in and advancing their conscience by the sword. Secondly, they are here commanded to pray for the salvation of all men, that all men, and especially Kings and Magistrates might be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth, implying that the grave or solemne and shining profession of godlinesse or Gods wor∣ship according to Christ Iesus, is a blessed meanes to cause all sorts of men to be affected with the Christian profession, and to come to the same knowledge of that one God and one Mediatour Christ Iesus. All which tends directly against what it is brought for, to wit, the
Magistrates forcing all men to godlinesse or the worshipping of God,Forcing of men to godli∣nesse or Gods worship, the greatest cause of breach of Civill peace which in truth causeth the greatest breach of peace, and the greatest distractions in the World, and the setting up that for godlinesse or, worship which is no more then Nebuchadnezzars golden Image, a State worship, and in some places the worship of the Beast, and his Image, Dan 3. Rev. 13. CHAP. LXXXVIII. THirdly, I quaerie whether the Civill Magistrate (which was then the Roman Emperour) was keeper or guardian of both Tables (as is affirmed.) Scripture and all History tell us,The Roman Caesars descri∣bed. that those Caesars were not only ignorant, without God, without Christ, &c. but professed worship∣pers or maintainers of the Roman gods or divells; as also notorious for all sorts of wickednesse, and lastly, cruell and bloudy Lions, and Tygers toward the Christians for many hundred yeares. Hence I argue from the wisdome, love and faithfulnesse of the Lord Iesus in his house,Not appointed by Christ Jesus keepers and guardians of his Church. it was impossible that he should appoint such ignorant, such Idolatrous, such wicked and such cruell persons to be his chiefe Officers and Deputy Lieutenants under himselfe to keep the worship of God, to guard his Church, his Wife: No wise and loving father was ever knowne to put his childe, no not his beasts, dogs or swine, but unto fitting keepers. Men judge it matter of high complaint, that the Records of Par∣liament, the Kings children, the Tower of London, the Great Seale should be committed to unworthy keepers! And can it be without high blasphemie conceived that the Lord Iesus should commit his Sheep, his Children, yea his Spouse, his thousand shields and buck∣lers in the Tower of his Church and lastly, his Great and Glorious Broad Seales of Baptisme and his Supper, to be preserved pure in their adminstrations, I say that the Lord Iesus who is wisdome, and faithfulnesse it selfe, should deliver these to such keepers. Peace. Some will say, it is one thing what persons are in act and practice: another what they ought to be by right and office. Truth. In such cases as I have mentioned, no man doth in the common eye of reason deliver such matters of charge and trust to such as declare themselves and sinnes (like Sodome) at the very time of this great charge and trust to be committed to them.
Peace. It will further be said, that many of the Kings of Iudah who had the charge of establishing, reforming (and so consequently of keeping the first Table) the Church, Gods worship, &c. were no∣toriously wicked, Idolatrous, &c. Truth. I must then say, the case is not alike, for when the Lord appointed the Government of Israel after the rejection of Saul to e∣stablish a Covenant of succession in the type unto Christ, let it bee minded what patterne and president it pleased the Lord to set for the after Kings of Israel and Iudah, in David the man after His owne Heart. But now the Lord Iesus being come Himselfe, and having ful∣filled the former types, and dissolved the Nationall State of the Church, and established a more Spirituall way of worship all the World over,It pleased not the Lord Jesus in the first in∣stitution of his Church to fur∣nish himselfe with any such Civill Gover∣nours, as unto whom hee might com∣mit the care of his worship. and appointed a Spirituall government and governours, it is well knowne what the Roman Caesars were, under whom both Christ Iesus Himselfe and his Servants after him lived and suffered; so that if the Lord Iesus had appointed any such Deputies (as we finde not a tittle to that purpose, nor have a shadow of true reason so to thinke) he must I say in the very first institution, have pitched upon such persons for these Custodes utri{que} Tabulae, kepers of both Tables, as no man wie, or faithfull or loving, would have choen in any of the former Instances or cases of a more inferiour nature. Beside to that great pretence of Israel, I have largely spoken to Secondly, I aske how could the Roman Caesars or any Civill Ma∣gistrates be custdes, keepers of the Church and worship of God, when as the Authours of these positions acknowledge, that their Civill po∣wer extends but to bodies and goods. And for Spirituall power they say they have none, ad bonum tem∣porale (to a temporall good) which is their proper end, and then having neither Civill nor Spirituall power from the Lord Iesus to this purpose, how come they to be such Keepers as is pretended? Thirdly, If the Roman Emperours were Keepers,The true Kee∣pers which Christ Jesus appointed, of his Odinan∣ces and Wor∣ship. what Keepers were the Apostles, unto whom the Lord Iesus gave the care and charge of the Churches, and by whom the Lord Iesus charged Ti∣mothy, 1 Tim. 6. to keep those commands of the Lord Iesus without spot untill his comming. These Keepers were called the foundation of the Church, Ephes. 2. 20. and made up the Crowne of 12 Stars about the head of the
Woman, Rev. 12. whose names were also written in the 12 founda∣tions of New Ierusalem, Rev. 21. Yea what Keepers then are the ordinary Officers of the Church appointed to be the Shepherds or Keepers of the Flocke of Christ, appointed to be the Porters or Dore-keepers and to watch in the absence of Christ, Mark 13. 34. Acts 20., Yea what charge hath the whole Church it selfe, which is the pillar and ground of Truth, 2 Tim. 2. in the midst of which Christ is present with his Power, 1 Cor. 5. to keep out or cast out the im∣penitent and obstinate, even Kings and Emperours themselves from their Spirituall society, 1 Cor. 5. Iam. 3. 1. Gal. 3. 28. 4. I aske whether in the time of the Kings of Israel and Iudah (whom I confesse in the typicall and Nationall state to be charged with both Tables) I aske whether the Kings of the Assyrians,The Kings of the Assyrians &c. not char∣ged with Gods worship as the Kings of Ju∣dah in that Nationall and typicall church the Kings of the Ammonites, Moabites, Philistims, were also constitu∣ted and ordained Keepers of the worship of God as the Kings of Iu∣dah were (for they were also lawfull Magistrates in their Domini∣ons?) or whether the Roman Emperours were custodes, or keepers more then they? or more then the King of Babylon Nebuchadnez∣zar, under whose Civill government Gods people lived, and in his owne Land and City, er. 29. CHAP. LXXXIX. Peace. YOu remember (deare Truth) that Constantin, Theodosus,Constantine, Theodosius. &c. misformed. and others were made to beleeve that they were the Antitypes of the Kings of Iudah, the Church of God; and Henry the 8. was told that that Title Defensor Fidei, Defendour of the Faith (though sent him by the Pope for writing against Luther) was his owne Diadem due unto him from Heaven. So likewise since, the Kings and Qeens of England have been instructed. Truth. But it was not so from the beginning, as that very diffe∣rence between that Nationall state of the Church of God then, and other Kings and Magistrates of the World (not so charged) doth clearly evince and leadeth us to the Spirituall King of the Church, Christ Iesus the King of Israel, and his Spirituall Govern∣ment and Governours therein. Fifthly, I aske whether had the Roman Caesars more charge to see all their Subjects observe and submit to the worship of God in
their dominion of the World, then a master,Masters of fa∣milies under the Gospel not charged to force all under him from their owne consci∣ences to his. father or husband now under the Gospel in his Familie? Families are the foundations of government, for what is a Com∣monweale, but a Commonweale of Families agreeing to live together for common good? Now in families, suppose a beleeving Christian Husband hath an unbeleeving Antichristian wife, what other charge in this respect is given to an husband, 1 Cor. 7. but to dwell with her as an husband if she be pleased to dwell with him: but, to bee so farre from for∣cing her from her conscience unto his, as that if for his conscience sake she would depart, he was not to force her to tarry with him, 1 Cor. 7. Consequently the Father or Husband of the State differing from the Commonweale in Religion, ought not to force the Common∣weale, nor to be forced by it: yet is he to continue a civill husbands care, if the Commonweale will live with him, and abide in civill co∣venant. Now as a husband by his love to the truth and holy conversation in it, and seasonable exhortations, ought to indeavour to save his wife, yet abhorring to use corporall compulsion (yea, in this case to childe or servant) so ought the Father, Husband, Governor of the Commonweale endeavour to win and save whom possibly he may, yet farre from the appearance of civill violence. Sixthly,If the charge of Gods wor∣ship was left with the Ro∣mane Empe∣rour, then was he bound to turne the whole world into the Gar∣den, Flock, and Spouse of Christ. Millions put to death. if the Romane Emperours were charged by Christ with his Worship in their dominion, and their dominion was over the world (as was the dominion of the Grecian, Persian, and Babylonian Mo∣narchy before them) who sees not if the whole world bee forced to turne Christian (as afterward and since it hath pretended to doe) who sees not then that the world (for whom Christ Jesus would not pray) and the God of it, are reconciled to Iesus Christ, and the whole field of the world become his inclosed garden? Seventhly, if the Romane Emperors ought to have been by Christs appointment Keepers of both Tables, Antitypes of Israel and Iudahs Kings, how many millions of Idolaters and Blasphemers against Christ Iesus and his worship ought they to have put to death according to Israels patterne? Lastly, I aske (if the Lord Iesus had delivered his Sheepe and Chil∣dren to these Wolves, his Wife and Spouse to such Adulterers, his pre∣cious Iewels to such great Theeves and Robbers of the world as the Romane Emperours were, what is the reason that he was never plea∣sed
to send any of his servants to their gates to crave their helpe & assistance in this his worke,Christ never sent any of his Ministers or Servants to the Civil Ma∣gistrate for help in spiri∣tuall matters. to put them in minde of their office, to chalenge and claime such a service from them according to their office, as it pleased God alwayes to send to the Kings of Israel and Judah in the like case? Peace. Some will here object Pauls appealing to Caesar. Truth. And I must refer them to what I formerly answered to that Objection. Paul never appealed to Caesar as a Judge appoin∣ted by Christ Jesus to give definitive sentence in any spirituall or Church controversie, but against that civill violence and murther which the Iewes intended against him, Paul justly appealed: For otherwise if in a spirituall cause he should have appealed, he should have overthrowne his owne Apostleship and Power given him by Christ Iesus in spirituall things, above the highest Kings or Emperors of the world beside. CHAP. XC. Peace. BLessed Truth, I shall now remember you of the fourth Quaerie upon this place of Timothy, to wit, whether a Church of Christ Iesus may not live in Gods worship and comelinesse, notwithstanding that the civill Magistrate professe not the same but a contrary Religion and Worship in his owne person and the Country with him. Truth. I answer the Churches of Christ under the Roman Empe∣rours did live in all godlinesse and christian gravity,Christ Jesus hath left po∣wer in his Church to preserve her selfe pure, though in an idolatrous Countrey. as appeares by all their holy and glorious practices, which the Scripture abundantly testifies. Secondly, this lowes from an institution or appointment of such a power and authority, left by the Lord Iesus to his Apostles and Chur∣ches, that no ungodlinesse or dishonesty in the first appearance of it was to be suffered, but supprest and cast out from the Churches of Christ, even the little Leaven of doctrine or practice, 1 Corinth. 5. Gal. 5. Lastly, I adde, that although sometimes it pleaseth the Lord to vouchsafe his servants peace and quietnesse, and to command them here in Timothy to pray for it, for those good ends and purposes for which God hath appointed civill Magistracy in the world, to keepe the world in peace and quietnesse. Yet Gods people have used most to
abound with godlinesse and honesty,Gods people have used to shine in brigh∣test godlinesse when they have enjoyed least quietnes. when they have enjoyed least peace and quietnesse. Then like those spices, Cant. 4. Myrrhe, Frank∣incense, Saffron, Calamus, &c. they have yeelded the sweetest favour to God and man, when they were pounded and burnt in cruell per∣secution of the Romane Censors: then are they (as Gods Venison) most sweet when most hunted: Gods Stars shining brightest in the dar∣kest night: more heavenly in conversation, more mortified: more a∣bounding in love each to other, more longing to be with God: when the inhospitable and salvage World hath used them like strangers, and forced them to hasten home to another Country which they pro∣fesse to seeke. CHAP. XCI. Peace. DEare Truth, it seemes not to be unseasonable to close up this passage with a short descant upon that Assertion, viz. A subject without godlinesse will not be bonus vir, a good man, nor a Magistrate except he see godlinesse preserved, will not be bonus Magistratus. Truth. I confesse that without godlinesse or a true wrshipping of God with an upright heart according to Gods Ordinances, neither Subjects nor Magistrates can please God in Christ Iesus, and so be spi∣ritually or christianly good,Few Mgi∣strates, few men spiritual∣ly and christi∣anly good. which few Magistrates and few men ei∣ther come to, or are ordained unto: God having chosen a little lock out of the world, and those generally poore and meane, 1 Cor. 1. Iam. 2. Yet this I must remember you of, that when the most High God created all things of nothing, he saw and acknowledged divers sorts of goodnesse,Yet divers sorts of good∣nesse nturall, artificiall, civill, &c. which must still be acknowledged in their distinct kindes: a good Ayre, a good Ground, a good Tree, a good Sheepe, &c. I say the same in Artificialls, a good Garment, a good House, a good Sword, a good Ship. I also adde a good City, a good Company or Corporation, a good Husband, Father, Master. Hence also we say, a good Physitian, a good Lawyer, a good Sea-man, a good Merchant, a good Pilot, for such or such  shoare or Harbour, that is, Morally, Civilly good in their severall Civill respects and imployments. Hence (Psal. 133.) the Church or Citie of God is compared to
a Citie compact within it selfe; which compactnes may be found in many Townes and Cities of the World, where yet hath not shined any spirituall or supernaturall goodnesse. Hence the Lord Iesus (Matth. 12.) describes an ill state of an house or kingdome, viz. to be divided against it selfe, which cannot stand. These I observe to prove, that a Subject, a Magistrate,The Civill Goodnes of Cine, King∣domes, Sub∣jcts, Mgi∣strates, must be owned, al∣though Spiri∣tuall goodnes (proper to the Christian State or Church) be wanting. may be a good Subject, a good Magistrate, in respect of civill or morall goodnes, which thousands want, and where it is, it is commendable and beautifull, though Godlines which is infinitely more beautifull, be wanting, and which is onely proper to the Christian state, the Commonweale of Israel, the true Church, the holy Nation, Ephes. 2. 1 Pet. 2. Lastly, however the Authors deny that there can be Bonus Magistratus, a good Magistrate, except the see all Godlines preser∣ved; yet themselves confesse that civill honesty is sufficient to make a good Subject, in these words, viz. He must see that Honestie be preserved within his jurisdiction, else the Subject will not be Bonus civs, a good citizen: and doubtlesse (if the Law of Relations hold true) that civill honestie which makes a good citizen, must also (together with qualifications sit for a Commander) make also a good Magistrate. CHAP. XCII. Peace. THe 4. head is, The proper meanes of both these Powers to attaine their ends. First, the proper meanes whereby the Civill Power may and should attaine its end, are onely Politicall, and principally these Five. First the erecting and establishing what forme of Civill Go∣vernment may seeme in wisedome most meet, according to ge∣nerall rules of the Word, and state of the people. Secondly, the making, publishing, and establishing of whole∣some Civill Lawes, not only such as concerne Civill Justice, but also the free passage of true Religion: for, outward Civill Peace ariseth and is maintained from them both, from the latter as well as from the former: Civill peace cannot stand intire, where Religion is corrupted, 2 Chron. 15. 3. 5. 6. Iudg. 8. And yet such Lawes, though conver∣sant
about Religion, may still be counted Civill Lawes, as on the contrary, an Oath doth still remaine Religious, though conver∣sant about Civill matters. Thirdly, Election and appointment of Civill officers, to see execution of those Lawes. Fourthly, Civill Punishments and Rewards, of Transgressors and Observers of these Lawes. Fifthly, taking up Armes against the Enemies of Civill Peace. Secondly, the meanes whereby the Church may and should attaine her ends, are only ecclesiasticall, which are chiefly five. First, setting up that forme of Church Government only, of which Christ hath given them a pattern in his Word. Secondly, acknowledging and admitting of no Lawgiver in the Church, but Christ, and the publishing of his Lawes. Thirdly, Electing and ordaining of such officers onely, as Christ hath appointed in his Word. Fourthly, to receive into their fellowship them that are ap∣proved, and inlicting Spirituall censures against them that offend. Fifthly, Prayer and patience in suffering any evill from them that be without, who disturbe their peace. So that Magistrates, as Magistrates, have no power of setting up the Forme of Church Government, electing Church officers, punishing with Church censures, but to see that the Church doth her duty herein. And on the other side, the Churches as Churches, have no power (though as members of the Common∣weale they may have power) of erecting or altering formes of Civill Government, electing of Civill officers, inflicting Civill punishments (no not on persons excommunicate) as by deposing Magistrates from their Civill Authoritie, or withdrawing the hearts of the people against them, to their Lawes, no more then to discharge wives, or children, or servants, from due obedience to their husbands, parents, or masters: or by taking up armes against their Magistrates, though he persecute them for Consci∣ence: for though members of Churches who are publique offi∣cers also of the Civill State, may suppresse by force the violence of Usurpers, as Iehoiada did Athaliah, yet this they doe not as members of the Church, but as officers of the Civill State.
Truth. Here are divers considerable passages which I shall brief∣ly examine, so far as concernes or controversie. First, whereas they say, that the Civill PowerCivill power originally and fundamentally in the people. may erect and e∣stablish what forme of civill Government may seeme in wisedome most meet, I acknowledge the proposition to be most true, both in it self, and also considered with the end of it, that a civill Government is an Ordinance of God, to conserve the civill peace of people, so farre as concernes their Bodies and Goods, as formerly hath beene said. But from this Grant I infer, (as before hath been touched) that the Soveraigne, originall, and foundation of civill power lies in the peo∣ple, (whom they must needs meane by the civill power distinct from the Government set up.) And if so, that a People may erect and e∣stablish what forme of Government seemes to them most meete for their civill condition: It is evident that such Governments as are by them erected and established, have no more power, nor for no lon∣ger time, then the civill power or people consenting and agreeing shall betrust them with. This is cleere not only in Reason, but in the experience of all common-weales, where the people are not de∣prived of their naturall freedome by the power of Tyrants. And if so, that the Magistrates receive their power of governing the Church,Mr. Cotton and the New-English Mini∣sters give the Government of Christs Church or Spouse into the hands of the people or Common∣weale. from the People; undeniably it followes, that a people, as a people, naturally considered (of what Nature or Nation soever in Europe, Asia, Africa or America) have fundamentally and ori∣ginally, as men, a power to governe the Church, to see her doe her duty, to correct her, to redresse, reforme, establish, &c. And if this be not to pull God and Christ, and Spirit out of Heaven, and subject them unto naturall, sinfull, inconstant men, and so consequently to Sathan himselfe, by whom all peoples naturally are guided, let Heaven and Earth judge. Peace. It cannot by their owne Grant be denied, but that the wildest Indians in America ought (and in their kind and severall de∣grees doe) to agree upon some formes of Government,The very In∣dian Ameri∣cans made Governours of the Church by the Authors of these Positi∣ons. some more civill, compact in Townes, &c. some lesse. As also that their civill and earthly Governments be as lawfull and true as any Governments in the World, and therefore consequently their Governors are Kee∣pers of the Church or both Tables, (if any Church of Christ should arise or be amongst them:) and therefore lastly, (if Christ have be∣trusted and charged the civill Power with his Church) they must
judge according to their Indian or American consciences, for other consciences it cannot be supposed they should have. CHAP. XCIII. Truth. AGaine, whereas they say that outward Civill peace cannot stand where Religion is corrupted; and quote for it, 2 Chron. 15. 3. 5. 6 & Iudges 8. I answer with aamration how such excellent spirits (as these Authors are furnished with, not only in heavenly but earthly affaires) should so forget, and be so fast asleep in things so palpably evident, as to say that outward civill peace cannot stand, where Religion is corrupt. When so many stately Kingdomes and Govern∣ments in the world have long and long enjoyed civill peace and quiet,Many Civill States in flou¦rishing peace and quiet, where he Lord Jesus is not ounded. notwithstanding their Religion is so corrupt, as that there is not the very Name of Iesus Christ amongst them: And this every Historian, Merchant, Traveller, in Europe Asia, Africa, America, can testifie: for so spake the Lord Iesus himselfe, Ioh. 16. The world shall sing and rejoyce. Secondly, for that Scripture 2 Chron. 15. 3 &c relating the mise∣ries of Israel and Iudah, and Gods plaes upon the people for corruption of their Religion, it must still have referece  pe∣culiar state unto which God called the seed of one man, Abraham, in a figure, dealing so with them as he dealt not with any Nation in the World, Psal. 1. 6 Rom. 9. The Antitype to this State I have proved to be the Christian Church, which consequently hath been and is fflictd  spiri∣tuall plagues, desolations and captivitis, for corupting of that Reli∣gion which hath been revealed unto them. This appeares by the 7 Churches, and the people of God, now so many udre yeares in wofull bondage and slaverte to the mysticall Babel, untill the time of their joyfull deliverance. Peace. Yea but they say that such Lawes as are conversant about Religion, may still be accountd Civill Lawes, as on the contrary an Oath doth still remaine Religious, though conversant about Ci∣vill matters. Truth. Lawes respecting Religion are two-fold:Lawes concer∣ning Religion, either Religi∣ous, First, such as concerne the acts of Worship and the Worship it self, the Ministers of it, their fitnes or unfitnes, to be suppressed or esta∣blished:
and for such Lawes we find no footing in the New Te∣stament of Jesus Christ. Secondly, Lawes respecting Religion may be such as meerly con∣cerne the Civill State,o Civill. Bodies and Goods of such and such persons, professing these and these Religions, viz that such and such per∣sons, notorious for Mutinies, Treasons Rebellions, Massacres, be dis∣armed:The very In∣dians abhor to disturbe any Conscience at Worship. Againe, that no persons Papists, Iewes, Turkes, or Indians be disturbed at their worship, (a thing which the very Indians abhor to practice toward any.) Also that imanitie and freedome from Tax and Toll may be granted unto the people of such or such a Religion, as the Magistrate pleaseth, Ezra 7. These and such as are of this nature, concerning only the bodies and goods of such and such Religious persons, I confesse are meerely Ciill. But now on the other hand, that Lawes restraining persons from such and such a Worship, because the Civill state judgeth it to be false: That Laws constraining to such & such a worship, because the Ci∣vill State judgeth this to be the only rue way of worshipping God: That such and such a Reformation of Worship be submitted unto by all Subjects in such a Iurisdiction:Canons and Constitutions petended Civill, but in∣deed Ecclesi∣asticall. That such and such Churches, Ministers, Ministries be pull downe, and such and such Churches, Ministries, and Ministrations set up: That such Lawes properly concerning Religion God, the Soules of men, should be Civill Lawes and Constitutions; is as far from Reason, as that the Commandements of Paul, which he gave the Churches concerning Christs worship (1 Cor. 11. & 1 Cor. 14.) were Civill and Earthly constitutions: Or that the Canon and Constitutions of either oecumnicall or Nationall synods concerning Religion, should be Civill and State-conclusions and agreements. To that instance of an Oath remaining relgious though conver∣sant about civill things; I answer and acknowledge, an Oath may be spirituall,Laws meerely concerning spirituall things, must needs be spi∣rituall. though taken about earthly businesse, and accordingly it will prove, and onely prove what before I have said, that a Law may be civill though it concerne persons of this and of that religion, that is as the persons professing it are concerned in civill respects of bdies or goods, as I have opened; whereas if it concerne the soules and religions of men simply so considered in reference to God, it
must of necessity put on the nature of a religious or spirituall ordinance or constitution. Besides, it is a most improper and fallacious instance for an oath, being an invocation of a true or false God to judge in a case, is an action of a spirituall and religious nature, what ever the subject mat∣ter be about which it is taken, whether civill or religious: but a law or constitution may be civill or religious, as the subject about which it is conversant is, either civill (meerly concerning bodies or goods) or religious concerning soule and worship. CHAP. XCIV. Peace. THeir fifth Head is concerning the Magistrates power in making of Lawes. First, they have power to publish and apply such Civill Lawes in a State as either are exprest in the Word of God in Moses Ju∣dicialls (to wit, so far as they are of generall and morall equity, and so binding all Nations in all Ages) to bee deducted by way of generall consequence and proportion from the word of God. For in a free State no Magistrate hath power over the bodies, goods, lands, liberties of a free people, but by their free consents. And because free men are not free Lords of their owne estates, but are onely stewards under God, therefore they may not give their free consents to any Magistrate to dispose of their bodies, goods, lands, liberties at large as themselves please, but as God (the soveraigne Lord of all) alone. And because the Word is a perfect rule as wel of righteousnes as of holines, it will be therefore neces∣sary that neither the people give consent, nor that the Magistrate take power to dispose of the bodies, goods, lands, liberties of the people, but according to the Lawes and Rules of the Word of God. Secondly, in making Lawes about civill and indifferent things about the Commonweale. First, he hath no power given him of God to make what laws he please, either in restraining from, or constraining to the use of indifferent things, because that which is indifferent in its nature, ma sometimes bee inexpedient in its use, and consequently un∣lawfull, 1 Cor. 2. 5. it having been long since defended upon good ground, Quicquid non expeait, quatenus non expedit, non licet.
Secondly, he hath no power to make any such Lawes about in∣different things, wherein nothing good or evill is shewne to the people, but onely or principally the meere authority or wil of the imposer for the observance of them, Colos. 2. 21, 22. 1 Cor. 7. 23, compared with Ephes. 6. 6. It is a prerogative proper to God to require obedience of the sonnes of men, because of his authority and will. The will of no man is Regula recti, unlesse first it bee Regula recta. It is an evill speech of some, that in some things the will of the Law, not the ratio of it, must be the Rule of Conscience to walke by; and that Princes may forbid men to seeke any other reason but their authority, yea when they command frivola & dura. And therefore it is the duty of the Magistrate in all lawes about indif∣ferent things, to shew the Reasons, not onely the Will, to shew the expediency, as well as the indifferency of things of that na∣ture. For we conceive in Lawes of this nature, it is not the will of the Lawgiver onely, but the Reason of the Law which bindes. Ratio est Rex Legis, & Lex est Rex Regis. Thirdly, because the judgement of expedient and inexpedient things is often difficult and diverse, it is meet that such Lawes should not proceed without due consideration of the Rules of Expediency set downe in the Word, which are these three: First, the rule of Piety, that they may make for the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Secondly, the rule of Charity, that no scandall come hereby to any weake brother, 1 Cor. 8. 13. Thirdly, the Rule of Charity, that no man be forced to submit against his conscience, Rom. 14. 14. 23. nor be judged of contempt of lawfull Authority, because he is not suddenly perswaded of the expediency of indifferent things; for if the people be bound by God to receive such Lawes about such things, without any triall or sa∣tisfaction to the conscience, but must judge them expedient because the Magistrate thinkes them so, then the one cannot be punish∣ed in following the other, in case he shall sinne in clling Inexpe∣dient Expedient; but Christ saith the contrary, If the blinde lead the blinde, they shall both fall.
Truth. In this passage these worthy Men lay downe such a ground, as the gates of Hell are not able to shake concerning the Magistrates walking in indifferent things:The Authors large confessi∣on of the liber∣ty of consci∣ence from the Laws of Ci∣vill authority in spirituall cases. And upon which ground that Towre of Lebanon may be raised whereon there hang a thousand shields and bucklars, Cant 4. to wit, that invincible Truth, That no man is to be persecuted for cause of conscience: The ground is this: The Magistate hath not power to make what Lawes he please, either in restraining or constraining to the use of indifferent things: And further he confesseth that the reason of the Law, not the will of it must be the rule of conscience. And they adde this impregnable reason: viz. If the people be bound to receive such Lawes without satisfaction to conscience, then one can∣not be punished for following the other, in case he shall sinne contrary to Christ Jesus, who saith, If the blinde lead the blinde, they shall both fall. Hence I argue, If the Civill Magistrate have no power to re∣straine or constraine their subjects in things in their owne nature in∣different,Civill Magi∣strates confes∣sed not to have power to urg the conscience in indifferent things. as in eating of meats, wearing this or that garment, u∣sing this or that gesture, but that they are bound to try and examine his commands, and satisfie their owne reason, conscience and judge∣ment before the Lord, and that they shall sinne, if they follow the Magistrates command, not being perswaded in their owne soule and conscience that his commands are according to God! It will be much more unlawfull and heynous in the Magistrate to com∣pell the subjects unto that which (according to their consciences per∣swasion) is simply unlawfull as unto a falsely constituted Church, Ministry, Worship, Administration, and they shall not escape the Dch, by being led blindefold by the Magistrate, but though hee fall in first, yet they shall in after him, and upon him, to his greater and more dreadfull judgement. In particular thus, If the Magistrate may restraine me from that gesture in the Supper of the Lord, which I am perswaded I ought to practice, he may also restraine me by his commands from that Supper of the Lord it selfe in such or such a Church according to my conscience. If he cannot (as they grant) constraine me to such or such a gar∣ment in the worship of God, can he constraine me to worship God by such a Ministry, and with such worship, which my soule and conscience cannot be perswaded is of God?
If he cannot command me in that circumstance of time to wor∣ship God this or that day, can he command mee to the worship it selfe? Peace. Me thinkes I discerne a threefold guilt to lye upon such Civill powers as impose upon and inforce the conscience,A threefold guiltlyng up∣on Civil po∣wers comman∣ding the sub∣jects  worship. though not unto the ministration and participation of the Seales, yet either to depart from that worship which it is perswaded of, or to any ex∣ercise or worship which it hath not faith in. First, of an appearance of that Arminian Popish doctrine of freewill, as if it lay in their owne power and ability to beleeve upon the Magistrates command since it is confessed that what is submitted to by any without faith it is sinne, be it never so true and holy Rom. 14. Secondly, since God only openeth the heart and worketh the will, Phil. 2. it seemes to be an high presumption to suppose that together with a command restraining from, or constraining to worship, that God is also to be forced or commanded to give faith to open the heart to incline the will, &c. Thirdly, A guilt of the hypocrisie of their subjects and people in forcing them to act and practice in matters of Religion and Wor∣ship against the doubts and checks of their consciences,Persons may  sin  to many whom ty  not ,  to worship where they cannot beleeve. causing their bodies to worship, when their soules are far off, to draw near with their lips, their hearts being far off, &c. With lesse sinne ten thousand fold may a naturall ather force his , or the Father of the Commonweale force all the may∣dens in a Country to the marriage beds of such and such men whom they cannot love, then the soules of these and other subjects to such worship or Ministry, which is either a true or false, because Cant. 1. 16. Truth. Sweet Peace, your conclusions are undeniable, and O that they might sinke deep into those Noble and Honourable Bo∣somes it so deeply concernes! but proceed. CHAP. XCV. Peace. IN that fifth head they further say thus: Thirdly, in matters Ecclesiasticall we beleeve, first, That Civill Magistrates have no power to make or constitute Lawes about Church affaires which the Lord Jesus hath not or∣dained
in his Word for the well ordering of the Church; for the Apostle solemnely chargeth Timothy, and in him all Goverours of the Church, before God and the Lord Jesus Christ (who is the only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords) that the Commandement given by him for the ordering of the Church be kept without spot unrebukeable to the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Tim. 6. 14. 15. And this Commandement given in the Word, the Apostle faith is able to make the man of God perfect in all Righteousnesse, 2 Tim. 3. 17. And indeed the adminstration of all Christs affaires doth im∣mediately aime at spirituall and divine ends (as the worship of God and the salvation of mens soules:) and therefore no Law nor meanes can be devised by the wisdome or wit of man that can be fit or able to reach such ends, but use must be made of such onely as the divine Wisdome and holy Will of God hath or∣dained. Secondly, We beleeve the Magistrates power in making Lawes about Church affaires, is not only thus limited and restrai∣ned by Christ to matters which concerne the substance of Gods worship and of Church government, but also such as concerne outward order, as in Rites and Ceremonies for uniformities sake: For we finde not in the Gospell that Christ hath any where pro∣vided for the uniformity of Churches, but onely for their unity. Paul in matters of Christian libertie commendeth the unity of their Faith in the holy Spirit, giving order that wee should not judge nor condemne one another in difference of judgement and practice of such things where men live to God on both sides, e∣ven though there were some errour on one side, Rom. 14. to the 6. How much lesse in things indifferent, where there may be no et∣rour on either side. When the Apostle directeth the Church of Corinth that all things be done decently and in order, he meant not to give po∣wer to Church Officers, or to Civill Magistrates to order what ever they should thinke meet for decencie and order; but only to provide that all the Ordinances of God be administred in the Church decently without unnaturall or uncivill uncomelinesse (as that of long haire, or womens propheying, of the like) and orderly without confusion or disturbance of edification, as the speaking of many at once in the Church.
Thirdly, we doe neverthelesse willingly grant that Magi∣strates upon due and diligent search what is the counsell and will of God in his Word concerning the right ordering of the Church, may and ought to publish and declare, establish and ratifie such Lawes and Ordinances as Christ hath appointed in his Word for the well ordering of Church affaires, both for the gathering of the Church, and the right administration of all the Ordinances of God amongst them in such a manner as the Lord hath appointed to edification. The Law of Artaxerxes, Ezra 7. 23. was not usurpation over the Churches liberty, but a Royall and just con∣firmation of them: Whatsoever is commanded by the God of Heaven: For why should there be wrath against the King and his Sonnes? Truth. Deare Peace. me thinkes I see before mine eyes a wall daubed up (of which Ezekiel speakes) with untempered morter: Here they restraine the Magistrate from making Lawes either con∣cerning the substance or ceremony of Religion, but such only as Christ hath commanded, and those, say they, must publish and de∣clare after the example of Artaxerxes. I shall herein performe two things: First, examine this Magi∣strates duty to publish, declare, &c. such Laws and Ordinances as Christ hath appointed. Secondly, I shall examine that proofe from Artaxerxes, Ezra 7. 23. In the first,Gods Israel desos of Saularme of flesh. me thinks I heare the voice of the people of Israel, 1 Sam. 8. 5. Make us a King that may rule over us after the manner of the Nations, rejecting the Lord ruling over them by his holy Word in the mouth of his Prophets, and sheltring themselves under an Arme of Flesh; which Arme of Flesh God gave them in His An∣ger, and cut off againe in His Wrath, after he had persecuted Da∣vid the figure of Christ Iesus who hath given his people the Scepter and Sword of his Word and Spirit, and refused a temporall Crowne or Weapons in the dispensation of his Kingdome. Where did the Lord Jesus or his Messengers charge the Civill Magistrate, or direct Christians to petition him, to publish, declare or establish by his Arme of Flesh and Earthly weapons the Reli∣gion and worship of Christ Jesus? I finde the Beast and false Prophet (whose rise and doctrine is not from Heaven, but from the Sea and Earth) dreadfull and ter∣rible
by a Civill Sword and dignitie, Rev, 13. 2. I find the Beast hath gotten the power and might of the Kings of the Earth,The 7 headed Beast, and the Lambe differ in their wea∣pons. Revel. 17. 13. But the Lambes weapons are Spiritually mighty, 2 Cor. 10. &c. his Sword is two-edged comming out of his mouth, Revel. 1. His preparations for War are white Horses and white Harnesse, which are contest by all to be of a spirituall nature, Revel. 19. When that whore Iesabel stabbed Naboth with her Pen,Naboths case typicall. in stirring up the people to stone him as a Blasphemer of God and the King, what a glorious maske or vaile of Holines put she on? Proclaime a Fast, set a day apart for humiliation; and for confirmation, let all be ratified with the Kings Authoritie, Name, and Seale, 1 1 Kings, 21. 8. Was not this recorded for all Gods Naboths, standing for their Spirituall interests in heavenly things (typed out by the typicall earth and ground of Canaans land) that they through patience and Comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, Rom. 15 4.? Againe, I demand who shall here sit Judge, whether the Ma∣gistrate command any other Substance or Ceremonie but what is Christs? By their former Conclusions, every Soule must judge what the Magistrate commandeth, and is not bound, even in indifferent things, to the Magistrates Law, further then his own Soule, Con∣science and judgement ascends to the Reason of it: Here the Ma∣gistrate must make Lawes for that Substance and Ceremony which Christ appointed: But yet he must not doe this with his eyes open, but blindfold and hoodwinkt; for if he judge that to be the Religi∣on of Christ, and such to be the order there in which their Consci∣ences judge otherwise, and assent not to, they professe they must submit only to Christs lawes, and therefore they are not bound to obey him. O what is this but to make use of the Civill Powers and Gover∣nours of the World,Civill Powers abused as a Guard about the Bed of Spirituall whoredomes. as a Guard about the Spirituall Bed of Soule∣whoredomes, in which the Kings of the Earth commit Spirituall fornication with the great Whore, Rev. 17. 2? as a Guard while the Inhabitants of the Earth are drinking themselves drunke with the wine of her fornication. But oh what terrifying, what allurings are in Iereinies Curse and Blessing 1 Ier. 17. Cursed is the man that trusteth in man, that ma∣keth
Flesh his Arme (too too common in spirituall matters) and whose heart departeth from Jehovah: He shall be as an Heath in the Wildernes (even in the spirituall and mysticall wildernes) and shall not see when comfort comes, but shall abide in drouth in the wildernesse in a barrenland, &c. CHAP. XCVI. Peace. O What mysteries are these to Flesh and Blood! how hard for flesh to forsake the Arme thereof! But passe on (deare Trutly) to their proofe propounded, Ezra 7. 23. Wherein Artaxerxes confirmed by Law what ever was commanded by the God of Heaven. Truth. zra 7. 23. discussed. In this Scripture I mind first the people of God capti∣vated under the dominion and government of the Kings of Babel and Persia. Secondly, Artaxerxes his favour to these Captives, 1. Of freedome to their Consciences. 2. Or bountie towards them. 3. Of exempting of some of them from common charges. Thirdly, Punishments on offenders. Fourthly, the ground that aries him on to all this. Fifthly, Ezra praising of God for putting this into the heart of the King. Concerning the people of God the Iewes, they were as Lambes and Sheep in the jawes of the Lyon,Gods people not subject to he Kings of Babell or Per∣ in Spiritu∣als. the dearely beloved of his Soule under the devouring Tyrants of the World, both the Babylonian and the Persian, farre from their owne Nation, and the Government of their own anointed Kings, the figures of the true King of the Iewes the Lord Iesus Christ. In this respect it is cleere, that the Iewes were no more subject to the Kings of Babylon and Persia in Spirituall things, then the Vessels of the Sanctuary were subject to the King of Babels use, Dan. 5. Concerning this King I consider, first his person, a Gentile Ido∣later, an oppressing Tyrant, one of those devouring Beasts, Da. 7. & 8. An hand of bloody Conquest set the Crown upon the lead of these Monarchs; and although in Civill things they might chal∣lenge subjection, yet why should they now sit down in the throne
of Israel, and governe the people and Church of God in Spirituall things? Secondly,Tyrants hearts sometimes wonderfully moified to∣wards Gods people. consider his acts of Favour, and they will not amount to a positive Command, that any of the Iewes should goe up to build the Temple, nor that any of them should practice his own wor∣ship, which he kept and judged the best for his owne Soule and People. 'Tis true, he freely permits them, and exerciseth a bounteous assistance to them: All which argues no more, but that sometimes it pleaseth God to open the hearts of Tyrants greatly to favour and further his people. Such favour found Nehemiah, and Daniel, and others of Gods people have and shall finde, so often as it pleaseth Him to honour them that honour Him, before the Sonnes of Men. Peace. Who sees not how little this Scripture contributes to their Tenent? but why (say some) should this King confirme all with such severe punishments? and why for all this should Ezra give thankes to God, if it were not imitable for after∣times? Truth. The Law of God which he confirmed, he knew not, and therefore neither was, nor could he be a Judge in the Case. And for his Ground, what was it but the common terrours and convictions of an affighted Conscience? In such sits and pangs, what have not Pharaohs, Sauls, Ahabs, Herods,Nabuchad∣nezzar, Drius, and Ata erxes thir decrees exa∣mined. Agrippa's spoken? and what wonderfull decrees have Nabuchadnizzar, Cyrus, Darius, Artaxerxes put forth concerning the God of Israel, Dan. 3. & 6. & Ezra 1 & 7 &c. and yet as farre from being charged with (as they were from being affected to) the Spirituall Crown of Governing the Worship of God, and the Con∣science of his people. Tis true, Ezra most piously and justly gave thankes to God for putting such a thing into the heart of the King: But what makes this pattern for the Laws of Civil Governours now under the Go∣spell?Ezra's thanks¦giving for the Kings decree examined. It suited well with that Nationall state of Gods Church, that the Gentile King should release them, permit them to returne to their own Land, assist them with other favours, and enable them to execute punishments upon offenders according to their Nationall State.
But did God put such a thing as this into the heart of the King, viz. to restraine upon paine of Death all the millions of men under his Dominion from the Idolatties of their severall and respective Countries? to constraine them all upon the like penaltie to con∣forme to the Worship of the God of Israel, to build him a Temple, erect an Altar, ordaine Priests, offer sacrifice, observe the Fasts and Feasts of Israel? yea did God put it into the Kings heart to send Levites into all the parts of his Dominion, compelling them to heare; which is but a naturall thing (as some unsoundly speake) unto which all are bound to submit? Well however, Ezra gives thankes to God for the Kings, and so should all that feate God in all Countries,The duty of all Civill States toward the Conscien∣ces of their Subjects. if he would please to put it into the hearts of the Kings, States and Parliaments, to take off the yoakes of Violence, and permit (at least) the Consciences of their Subjects, and especially such as in truth make Conscience of their Worships to the God of Israel: and yet no cause for Ezra then, or Gods Ezra's and Israelites now, to acknowledge the care and charge of Gods worship, Church and Ordinances, to lie up∣on the shoulders of Artaxerxes, or any other Civill Prince or Ruler. Lastly for the Confirmation or Ratification which they suppose Magistrates are bound to give to the Lawes of Christ,Christ needs no humane confirmations. I answer, Gods cause, Christs Truth, and the two-edged sword of his Word, never stood in need of a temporall Sword, or an humane Witnes to confirme and ratifie them. If we receive the witnesse of an honest man, the witnesse of the most holy God is greater, 1. Iohn 5. The result and summe of the whole matter is this: 1. It may please God sometimes to stir up the Rulers of the Earth to permit and tolerate, to favour and countenance Gods people in their wor∣ships,The sum of the Examples of Gentile Kings decree∣ing for Gods Worship in Scripture though only out of some strong conviction of conscience or feare of wrath, &c. and yet themselves neither understand Gods worship, nor leave their owne state, Idolatry or Country worship. For this Gods people ought to give thankes unto God; yea and all men from this example may learne not to charge upon the Ma∣gistrates conscience (besides the care of the Civill peace, the bodies and goods of men) the Spirituall peace in the worship of God and soules of men: but hence are Magistrates instructed favourably to permit their subjects in their worships, although themselves bee
not perswaded to submit to them, as Nebuchadnezzar, Cyrus, Da∣rius and Artaxerxes did. CHAP. XCVII. Peace. THe sixt question is this: How far the Church is subject to their Lawes? All those (say they) who are members of the Commonweale are bound to be subject to all the just and righteous Laws there∣of, and therefore (membership in Churches not cutting men off from the membership in commonweales) they are bound to be sub∣ject, even every soule, Rom. 13. 1. as Christ himselfe and the A∣postles were in their places wherein they lived, and therefore to exempt the Clergy (as the Papists do) from Civill subjection, and to say that generatio Clerici, is corruptio subditi, is both sinfull and scandalous to the Gospel of God; and though all are equally subject, yet Church members are more especially bound to yeeld subjection, and the most eminent most especially bound, not on∣ly because conscience doth more strongly binde, but also because their ill examples are more infectious to others, pernicious to the State, and provoke Gods wrath to bring vengeance on the State. Hence if the whole Church or officers of the Church shall sin against the State or any person by sedition, contempt of Au∣thority, heresie, blasphemy, oppression, slander, or shall with∣draw any of their members from the service of the State with∣out the consent thereof, their persons and estates are liable to Civill punishments of Magistrates according to their righteous and wholsome Lawes, Exod. 22. 20. Levit. 24. 16. Deut. 13. 5. & 18. 10. Truth. What concernes this head in civill things, I gladly sub∣scribe unto: what concernes heresie, blasphemy, &c. I have plenti∣fully before spoken to, and shall here only say 2 things: First, those Scriptures produced concerne only the people of God in a Church estate, and must have reference onely to the Church of Christ Jesus, which (as Mr. Cotton confesseth) is not Nationall but Congregationall of so many as may meet in one place, 1 Cor. 14 & therefore no Civll State can be the antitype and parallell; to which purpose upon the 11 Question I shall at large
shew the difference betweene that Nationall Church and State of Israel,The Law of putting to death blasphe∣ of Christ cuts off. I hopes from the Jewes of part kig in his blou. and all other States and Nations in the World. Secondly, If the Rulers of the Earth are bound to put to death all that worship other gods then the true God, or that blaspheme (that is speake evill of in a lesser or higher degree) that one true God; it must unavoidably follow that (the beloved for the Fa∣thers sake) the Jewes whose very Religion blasphemeth Christ in the highest degree, I say they are actually sonnes of death, and all to be immediately executed according to those quoted Scrip∣tures: And Secondly, the Townes, Cities, Nations and Kingdomes of the World must generally be put to the sword, if they speedily renounce not their Gods and Worships, and so cease to blas∣pheme the true God by their Idolatries: This bloody consequence cannot be avoided by any Scripture rule, for if that rule be of force Deut. 13. & 18. not to spare,The dirfull effects of sigh∣ting for con∣science. or shew mercy upon person or City falling to Idolatry, that bars out all favour or partiality; and then what heapes upon heapes in the slaughter houses and shambles of Civill Warres must the world come to, as I have formerly noted, and that unnecessarily, it being not required by the Lord Jesus for his sake, and the Magistrates power and weapons being essentially Civill, and so not reaching to the impiety or ungodlinesse, but the incivility and unrighteousnesse of tongue or hand? CHAP. XCVIII. Peace. DEare Truth, these are the poysoned daggers stabbing at my tender heart! Oh when shall the Prince of peace appeare and reconcile the bloudy sons of men? but let me now propose their 7 head: viz. In what order may the Magistrate execute punishment on a Church or Church-member that offendeth his Lawes. First, grosse and publicke notorious sinnes which are against the light of conscience as Heresie, &c. there the Magistrate kee∣ping him under safe ward should send the offendour first to the Church to heale his conscience, still provided that the Church be both able and willing thereunto: By which meanes the Ma∣gistrate shall convince such an ones conscience that he seeketh his healing, rather then his hurt.
The censure also against him shall proceed with more power and blessing, and none shall have cause to say that the Magi∣strate persecutes men for their consciences, but that he justly punisheth such an one for sinning rather against his conscience, Tit. 3. 0. Secondly, in private offences how the Magistrate may proceed, see Chap. 12. It is not materiall whether the Church or Magi∣strates take it first in hand. Only with this caution, that if the State take it first in hand, they are not to proceed to death or banish∣ment, untill the Church hath taken their course with him, to bring him to Repentance, provided that the Church be willing and ready thereunto. Secondly, in such sinnes wherein men plead Conscience, as Heresie, &c. Truth. Here I have many just exceptions and considerations to present. First, they propose a distinction of some sinnes: some are against the light of conscience, &c. and they instance in Heresie. Ans. I have before discust this point of an Heretick sinning a∣gainst light of conscience: And I shall adde that howsoever they lay this down as an infallible conclusion that all Heresie is against light of Conscience; yet (to passe by the discussion of the nature of Heresie, in which respect it may so be that even themselves may be found hereticall,Elour is con∣fident as well as Truth. yea and that in fundamentalls) how doe all I∣dolaters after light presented, and exhortations powerfully pressed, either Turkes or Pagans, Jewes or Antichristians, strongly even to the death hold fast (or rather are held fast by) their delusions. Yea Gods people themselves, being deluded and captivated are strongly confident even against some fundamentalls,Gods people as well as o∣thers will be found obsti∣nate in funda∣mentall errors in which suffe∣rings and per∣secution doth harden. especially of worship, and yet not against the light, but according to the light or eye of a deceived conscience. Now all these consciences walke on confidently and constant∣ly even to the suffering of death and torments, and are more strong∣ly confirmed in their beleefe and conscience, because uch bloudy and cruell courses of persecution are used toward them. Secondly, speakes not the Scripture expresly of the Jew, Isa. 6. Mat. 13. Acts 28. that God hath given them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, &c all which must be spoken of the very conscience, which he that hath the golden key of David can
only shut and open, and all the Picklocks or Swords in all the Smiths shops in the World can neither by force or fraud prevent his time. Is it not said of Antichristians,Strong delusi∣ons. 2 Thessal. 2. that God hath sent them strong delusions, so strong and efficacious, that they beleeve a Lie and that so Confidently, and some so Conscientiously, that Death it selfe cannot part betweene the Delusion and their Con∣science. Againe, the Magistrate (say they) keeping him in safe ward: that is, the Heretick, the Blasphemer, Idolater, &c. Peace. I here aske all men that love even the Civill Peace, where the Lord Jesus hath spoken a tittle of a Prison or safe ward to this purpose. Truth. We find indeed a prison threatned by God to his irre∣conciled enemies, neglecting to account with him, Matth. 5. We finde a prison into which persecuters cast the Saints: So Iohn,Spirituall prisons. so Paul, and the Apostles, Matth. 14. 10. &c. were cast, and the great Commander of, and caster into prison, is the Devill, Revel. 2. Wee finde a Spirituall prison indeed, a prison for Spirits, 1 P. . 3. 19. the Spirits formerly rebellious against Christ Jesus speaking by Noah unto them, now kept in safe ward against the judgement of the great day. In Excommunication, a Soule obstinate in sinne is delivered to Sathan his Jaylour, and he keeps him in safe ward, untill it pleaseth God to release him. There is a prison for the Devill himselfe a thousand yeares, Rev. 20.Christ Jesus appointed no materiall pri∣sons for Blas∣phemers of him, &c. And a Lake of eternall fire and brimstone, into which the Beast and False Prophet, and all not written in the Lambes booke, and the Devill that deceived them, shall eternally be there secured and tormented. But neither amongst these, nor in any other passage of the New Testament, doe we finde a prison appointed by Christ Jesus for the Heretick, Blasphemer, Idolater, &c. being not otherwise guilty against the Civill State. 'Tis true, Antichrist (by the helpe of Civill Powers) hath his prisons, to keep Christ Iesus and his members fast: such prisons may well be called the Bishops prisons,The Bishops prisons. the Popes, the Devils pri∣sons: These inquisition houses have ever been more terrible then the Magistrates.
At first, persecuting Bishops borrowed prisons of the Civill Ma∣gistrate (as now their successors doe still in the world) but after∣ward they wrng the keyes out of the Magistrates hands, and hung them at their own Girdles, and would have prisons of their owne, as doubtlesse will that Generation still doe, if God prevent them not. CHAP. XCIX. Peace. AGaine (say they) the Magistrate should send him first to the Church to heale his Conscience. Truth. Is not this as the Prophet speakes, Like mother, like daugh∣ter?Like mother like daughter. So the mother of whoredomes the Church of Rome teacheth and practiseth with all her Hereticks: First let the holy Church con∣vince them, and then deliver them to the Secular power to receive the punishment of Hereticks. Peace. Me thinks also they approach neere that Popish Tenent, Ex opere operato: for their Exhortations and Admonitions must necessarily be so operative and prevalent, that if the Heretick re∣pent not,Conscience not so easily healed and cared. he now sins against his Conscience: not remembring that Peradventure, 2 Tim. 2. If peradventure, God will give them repen∣tance: and how strong delusions are, and believing of lies, and how hard it is to be undeceived, especially in Spirituals? Truth. And as it may so prove, when an Heretick indeed is brought to this Colledge of Physitians to have his conscience healed, and one Heretick is to cure another: So also when any of Christs Witnesses (supposed Hereticks) are brought before them, how doth the Lord Iesus suffer whippings and stabs, when his Name, and Truths, and Witnesses, and Ordinances are all prophaned and blas∣phemed? Besides, suppose a Man to be an Heretick, and yet suppose him brought as the Magistrates Prisoner, though to a true Church, to heale his Conscience:Wounding in¦stead of hea∣ling of Con∣sciences. What promise of Presence and Blessing hath the Lord Iesus made to his Church and Spouse in such a way? and how common is it for Hereticks either to be desperately hardned by such cruell courses (yet pretending Soule-healing) or else through feare and terrour to practice grosse hypocrisie even against their con∣sciences? So that these Chirrgions and Physitians pretending to heale Consciences, by such a course wound them deeper, and declare
themselves Chirrgions and Physitians of no value. Peace. But what thinke you of the Proviso added to their Proposition, viz. Provided, the Church bee able and wil∣ling? Truth. Doubtles this proviso derogates not a little from the na∣ture of the Spouse of Christ. For she, like that gracious woman, Prov. 31. 26.Christs Spouse able and wil∣ling to be e wounded con∣snces. openeth her mouth with wisedome, and in her tongue is the Law of Grace: she is the pillar and ground of Truth, 2. Tim. 2. The golden candlestick from whence true light shineth: the An∣gels or Ministers thereof able to try false Apostles (Rev. 2.) and convince the Gainsayers, Tit. 1. Againe (according to their principles of suppressing persons and Churches falsely worshipping) how can they permit such a blind and dead Church not able and willing to heale a wounded Conscience? Peace. What should be the reason of this their expression? Truth. Doubtles their Consciences tell them how few of those Churches (which they yet acknowledge Churches) are able and willing to hold forth Christ Iesus the Sun of Righteousnes, healing with his wings the doubting and afflicted conscience. Lastly, their conscience tells them, that a Servant of Christ Iesus may possibly be sent as an Heretick to be healed by a false Church, which Church will never be willing to deale with him, or never be able to convince him. Peace. Yea, but they say, by such a course the Magistrate shall convince such an ones conscience; that hee seekes his good, &c. Truth. If a man thus bound be sent to a Church to be healed in his conscience, either he is an Heretick, or he is not. Admit he be: yet he disputes in feare, as the poor theefe: the Mouse disputes with a terrible persecuting Cat:A persecuting Church dis∣putes with an Heretick as a Cat with the Mouse; and with a true Witnes as a Lyon with a Limbe in his paw. who while she seemes to play and gently tosse, yet the conclusion is a proud in∣sulting and devouring crueltie. If no Heretick but an innocent and faithfull witnes of any Truth of Jesus; disputes he not as a Lambe in the Lyons paw, being sure in the end to be torne in pieces? Peace. They adde: The censure this way proceeds with more power and blessing. Truth. All power and blessing is from that blessed Son of God,
unto whom all power is given from the Father, in Heaven and Earth. He hath promised his presence with his Messengers, preaching and baptizing to the worlds end, ratifying in Heaven what they blinde or loose on Earth. But let any man shew me such a commission, instruction and pro∣mise given by the Son of God to Civill powers in these spirituall af∣faires of his Christian Kingdome and Worship? Peace. Lastly they conclude, This course of first sending the Heretick to be healed by the Church, takes away all excuse; for none can say that he is persecuted for his Conscience, but for sinning against his Conscience. Truth. Iesabel placing poore Naboth before the Elders as a blasphemer of God and the King, and sanctifying the plotted and intended murther with a day of humiliation,Persecutours endure not so to be called. may seeme to take a∣way all excuse, and to conclude the Blasphemer worthy to be sto∣ned: But Iehovah the God of Recompences (er. 51.) when he makes Inquisition for blood, will find both Iesabel and Ahab guilty, and make the Dogs a feast with the flesh of Iesabel, and leave not to Ahab a man to pisse against the wall; for (as Paul in his owne plea) there was nothing committed worthy of death: and against thee, O King, saith Daniel, I have not sinned (Dan. 6.) in any Civill fact against the State. CHAP. C. Peace. THeir eighth question is this: viz. What power Magi∣strates have about the gathering of Churches? First, the Magistrate hath power, and it is his duty to incou∣rage and countenance such persons, as voluntarily joyn them∣selves in holy Covenant, both by his presence (if it may be) and promise of protection, they accepting the right hand of fel∣lowship from other neighbour Churches. Secondly, he hath power o forbid all Idolatrous and corrupt Assemblies, who offer to put themselves under their patronage, and shall attempt to joyne themselves into a Church-estate, and if they shall not hearken, to force them therefrom by the power of the Sword, Psal. 101. 8. For our tolerating many Religions in a State in severall Churches, beside the provoking of God, may in time not only corrupt, leaven, divide, and so destroy the peace
of the Churches, but also dissolve the continuity of the State, es∣pecially ours whose wals are made of the stones of the Churches: it being also contrary to the end of our planting in this part of the World, which was not only to enjoy the pure Ordinances, but to enjoy them all in purity. Thirdly, He hath power to compell all men within his grant, to heare the Word, for hearing the Word of God is a duty which the light of Nature leadeth even Heathens to: The Ninivites heard Ionah, though a stranger, and unknowne unto them, to be an extraordinary Prophet, Ionah 3. And Eglon the King of Moab hearing that Ehud had a message from God, he rose out of his seat for more reverent attention, Iudg. 3. 20. Yet he hath no power to compell all men to become members of Churches, because he hath not power to make them fit mem∣bers for the Church, which is not wrought by the power of the Sword, but by the power of the Word: Nor may he force the Churches to accept of any for members, but those whom the Churches themselves can freely approve of. Truth. To the first branch of this head, I answer, That the Ma∣gistrate should encourage and countenance the Church, yea and protect the persons of the Church from violence, disturbance, &c. It being truly noble and glorious, by how much the Spouse and Queene of the Lord Iesus transcends the Ladies, Queens, and Em∣presses of the World, in glory, beauty, chastity and innocency. 'Tis true, all Magistrates in the world do this: viz. Incourage and protect that Church or Assembly of worshippers, which they judge to be true and approve of; but not permitting other consciences then their owne: It hath come to passe in all ages, and yet doubt∣lesse will, that the Lord Iesus and His Queene are driven and per∣secuted out of the World. To the second, That the Magistrate ought to suppresse all Chur∣ches which he judgeth false, he quoteth Psal. 101. 8. Betimes I will cut off the wicked of the Land, that I may cut off all evill doers from the City of Jehovah: unto which, he addeth foure Reasons. Peace. Deare Truth, first, a word to that Scripture, so often quoted, and so much boasted of. Truth. Concerning that holy Land of Canaan, concerning the City of Iehovah, Ierusalem, out of which King David here resolves
to cut off all the wicked and evill doers.Psal. 101. 8. concerning the cutting off the wicked, exa∣mined. I shall speake more large∣ly on the 11 Head or Question in the differences between that and all other Lands. At present I answer, There is no holy Land or City of the Lord, no King of Sion, &c. but the Church of Iesus Christ, and the King thereof, according to 1 Pet. 2. 9. Ye are a holy Nation, and Ierusa∣lem is the holy people of God in the true profession of Christianity, Heb. 12. Gal. 4. & Rev. 21. Out of which the Lord Iesus by his holy Or∣dinances,No Land of Canaan, nor holy City now in such a government, and by such governours as he hath appointed, he cuts off every wicked person and evill doer. If Christ Iesus had intended any difference of plate, Cities or Countries, doubtlesse Ierusalem and Samaria had been thought of, or the Cities of Asia, wherein the Christian Religion was so gloriously planted. But the Lord Iesus disclaimes Ierusalem and Samaria forth having any respect of holinesse more then other Cities, Iohn 4. And the Spirit of God evidently testineth that the Churches were in the Cities and Countries,No difference of Lands and Cities since the comming as was before the comming of the Lord Jesus. not that the whole Cities or Countries were Gods holy Land, and Cities out of which all false worshippers and wicked persons were to be cut, Rev. 2. & 3. The Divells throne was in the City of Pergamus, in respect of the state and persecution of it, and yet there was also the Throne of the Lord Iesus set up in His Church of worshippers in Pergamus, out of which the Balaamites, and Nicholaitans and every false worshipper was to be cast, though not out of the City of Pergamus, for then Pergamus must have beene throwne out of Pergamus, and the World out of the World. CHAP. CI. Peace. OH that my head were a fountaine, and mine eyes River of teares to lament my children, the children of peace and light, thus darkning that, and other lightsome Scriptures with such darke and direfull clouds of bloud. Truth. Sweet Peace, thy teares are seasonable and precious, and botled up in the Heavens: but let me adde a second consideration from that Scripture: If that Scripture may now literally be applied to Nations and Cities in a parallel to Canaan and Ierusalem since
the Gospel, and this Psal. 101. be literally to be applied to Cities, Townes,The bloudy interpretation of Psal. 101. and Countries in Europe and America, not only such as as∣say to joyne themselves (as they here speake) in a corrupt Church estate, but such as know no Church estate, nor God, nor Christ, yea every wicked person and evill doer, must be hanged or stoned, &c. as it was in Israel, and if so, how many thousands and millions of men and women in the severall Kingdomes and governments of the World must be cut off from their Lands, and destroyed from their Cities, as this Scripture speakes? Thirdly, since those persons in the New English plantations ac∣counted unfit for Church estate, yet remaine all members of the Church of England, from which New England dares not separate, no not in their Sacraments, (as some of the Independents have publi∣shed) what riddle or mysterie, or rather fallacie of Sathan is this? Peace. The New En∣glsh seperate in America, but not in Eu∣rope. It will not be offence to charity to make conjecture: First, herein New England Churches secretly call their Mother whore, not daring in America to joyne with their owne Mothers children, though unexcommunicate, no nor permit them to worship God after their consciences, and as their Mother hath taught them this secretly and silently, they have a minde to doe, which publick∣ly they would seem to disclaime, and professe against. Secondly,The New En∣gish permit not their bre∣thren of Old England to en∣joy their con∣sciences left thir owne numbers might exceed their owne, or at least the greatnesse of their owne Assemblies & maintenances decrease. If such members of Old England should be suffered to enjoy their consciences in New, (however it is pretended they would profane Ordinances for which they are unfit (as true it is in that naturall persons are not fit for Spirituall worship) yet this appears not to be the bottome, for in Old England the New English joyne with Old in the ministrations of the Word, Prayer, singing, contribu∣tion, maintenance of the Ministrie, &c.) if I say, they should set up Churches after their conscience, the greatnesse and multitudes of their owne Assemblies would decay, and with all the contributions and maintenance of their Ministers, unto which all or most have beene forced. Truth. Deare Peace, These are more then conjectures, thou∣sands now espie, and all that love the purity of the worship of the living God should lament such halting: I shall adde this, not only doe they partially neglect to cut off the wicked of the Land, but such as themselves esteemed beloved and goldy have they driven forth, and keep out others which would come unto them, eminent∣ly godly by their owne confession, because differing in conscience
and worship from them, and consequently not to be suffered in their holy Land of Canaan. But having examined that Scripture alledged, let us now weigh their Reasons. First (say they) the not cutting off by the sword, but tolerating many Religions in a State would provoke God: unto which I answer,Christ Jesus never appoin¦ted all Religi∣ons but his owne to be cut off by the Civill Sword. first (and here being no Scripture produced to these Reasons, shall the sooner answer) that no proofe can be made from the Institutions of the Lord Iesus that all Religions but one are to be cut off by the Civill Sword; that Nationall Church in that typicall Land of Canaan being abolished, and the Christian Commonweale or Church instituted. Secondly, I affirme that the cutting off by the Sword other Consciences and Religions is (contrarily) most provoking unto God,A bloudy mo∣ther. expressely against his will concerning the Tares Matth. 13. as I have before proved; as also the bloudy mother of all those mon∣strous mischiefes (where such cutting off is used) both to the soules and bodies of men. Thirdly, let conscience and experience speake how in the not cut∣ting off their many Religions, it hath pleased God not only not to be provoked, but to prosper the state of the united Provinces our next neighbours, and that to admiration. Peace. The second reason is, such tolerating would leaven, di∣vide and destroy the peace of the Churches. Truth. Christ Spiri∣tuall power, most power∣full. This must also be denied upon so many former Scriptures & Reasons produced, proving the power of the Lord Iesus, and the suf∣ficiencie of his Spirituall power in his Church, for the purging forth and conquering of the least evill, yea and for the bringing every thought in subjection unto Christ Iesu, 2 Cor. 10. I adde,Christ forbid∣ding his fol∣lowers to per∣mit leaven in the Church, doth not forbid to permit leaven in the World. they have not produced one Scripture, nor can, to prove that the permitting to leaven of false doctrine in the World or Civill State, will leaven the Churches: only we finde that the permission of leaven in persons, doctrines or practices in the Church, that indeed will corrupt and spread, 1. Cor. 5. & Gal. 5. but this Reason should never have been alledged, were not the particular Churches in New England, but as so many implicite Parish Churches in one implicite National Church. Peace. Their third Reason is, it will dissolve the continuity of the State, especially theirs, where the walls are made of the stones of the Churches.
Truth. I answer briefly to this bare affirmation thus, that the true Church is a wall spirituall and mysticall, Cant. 8. 9. Then consequently a false Church or Company is a false or pre∣tended wall, and none of Christs. The civill State, Power and Government is a civill wall, &c. and Lastly, the walls of Earth or stone about a City are the naturall or artificiall wall or defence of it. Now in consideration of these foure wals I desire it may be pro∣ved from the Scripture of Truth,The Wall, Cant. 8. 9. dis∣cussed. how the false spirituall wall or company of false worshippers suffred in a City can be able to destroy the true Christian wall or company of beleevers. Againe,A spirituall wall cannot properly im∣paire the civil. how this false spirituall wall or false Church permitted, can destroy the civill wall, the State and Government of the City and Citizens, any more then it can destroy the naturall or artificiall wall of earth or stone. Spirituall may destroy spirituall, if a stronger and victorious, but spirituall cannot reach to artificiall or civill. Peace. Yea but they feare the false spirituall wall may destroy their civill, because it is made of the stones of Churches. Truth. If this have reference to that practice amongst them, viz. that none but members of Churches enjoy civill freedome amongst them (ordinarily) in imitation of that Nationall Church and State of the Iewes, then I answer, they that follow Moses Church consti∣tution) which the New English by such a practice implicitely doe) must cease to pretend to the Lord Iesus Christ and his institutions. Secondly,Many flourish∣ing Civill States where true Churches are not found. we shall finde lawfull civill State both before and since Christ Iesus, in which we finde not any tidings of the true God our Christ. Lastly, their civill New English State framed out of their Churches may yet stand, subsist and flourish, although they did (as by the word of the Lord they ought) permit either Iewes or Turkes or An∣tichristians to live amongst them subject unto their Civill Govern∣ment. CHAP. CII. Peace. ONe branch more, viz. the third remaines of this Head, and it concerns the hearing of the Word, unto which (say they) all men are to be compelled, because hearing of the
word is a duty which even Nature leadeth Heathens to: for this they quote the practice of the Ninevites heaing Ionah, and Eglo (King of Moab) his rising up to Ehuds pretended message from God, Iudg 3. Truth. Hearing dis∣cussed. I must deny that position: for light of Nature leadeth men to heare that onely which Nature conceiveth to be good for it,Every Religi∣on prefers its owne Priests and Ministers before all other. and therefore not to heare a Messenger, Minister or Preacher, whom conscience perswades is a false messenger or deceiver, and comes to deceive my soule, as Millions of men and women in their seve∣rall respective religions and consciences are so perswaded, conceiving their owne to be true. Secondly,Jonahs prea∣ching to the Ninevites, and their hearing of his message examined. as concerning the instances, Ionah did not compell the Ninevites to heare that message which he brought unto them. Besides the matter of compulsion to a constant worship of the world in Church estate (which is the Question) comes not neare Ionahs case. Nor did Christ Iesus or any of his Embassadours so practice: but if persons refused to heare the command of the Lord Iesus to his Messengers was onely to depart from them, shaking off the dust of their feet with a denunciation of Gods wrath against them, Math. 10. Act. 14. Concerning Eglon his rising up: First, Ehd compelled not that King either to heare or reverence,Eglon his ri∣sing up to E∣huds message, examined. and all that can bee imitable in Eglon, is a voluntary and willing reverence which persons ought to expresse to what they are perswaded comes from God. But how doe both these instances mightily convince and con∣demne themselves, who not onely professe to turne away from, but also persecute or hunt all such as shall dare to professe a Ministry or Church estate differing from their owne, though for personall godli∣nesse and excellency of gifts reverenced by themselves. Thirdly, to the point of compulsion: It hath pleased the Lord Iesus to appoint a two fold Ministry of his Word. First,A two fold Ministry of Christ, con∣verting and feeding. for unbeleevers and their conversion, according to Math. 28. 19. Marc. 16 15, 16. and the constant practice of the Apostles in the first preaching of the Gospel. Secondly, a Ministry of feeding and nourishing up such as are con∣verted and brought into Church estate, according to Ephes. 4. &c. Now to neither of these doe we finde any compulsion appointed by the Lord Iesus, or practised by any of his.
The compulsion preached and practised in New England, is not to the hearing of that Ministry sent forth to convert unbeleevers, and to constitute Churches: for such a Ministry they practise not: but to the hearing of the word of edification, exhortation, consolation, dis∣penced onely in the Churches of worshippers: I apply, When Paul came first to Corinth to preach Christ Iesus, by their Rule the Magistrates of Corinth ought by the Sword to have com∣pelled all the people of Corinth to heare Paul. Secondly,Paul never u∣sed any civill compulsion. after a Church of Christ was gathered (by their rule) the Magistrates of Corinth ought to have compelled the people still (even those who had refused his Doctrine, for the few onely of the Church embraced it) to have heard the Word still, and to have kept one day in seven to the Christians God, and to have come to the Christians Church all their dayes. And what is this but a setled formality of Religion and Worship, unto which a people are brought by the power of the sword? And however they affirme that persons are not to be compelled to be members of Churches,The New English for∣cing their sub∣jects to church all their daies, and yet for∣cing them not to any Religi∣on (as they say) they force the people then to be of no religion all their dayes, nor the Church compelled to receive any: Yet if persons be compelled to forsake their Religion which their hearts cleave to, and to come to Church, to the worship of the Word, Prayers, Psalmes, and Contributions, and this all their dayes: I aske whether this be not this peoples Religion, unto which sub∣mitting, they shall be quiet all their dayes, without the inforcing them to the practice of any other Religion? And if this bee not so, then I aske, Will it not inevitably follow, that they (not onely per∣mit, but) enforce people to bee of no Religion at all, all their dayes? This toleration of Religion, or rather irreligious compulsion, is a∣bove all tolerations monstrous, to wit, to compell men to bee of no Religion all their dayes. I desire all men and these worthy Authors of this Modell, to lay their hands upon their heart, and to consider whether this compulsion of men to heare the Word, (as they say) whether it carries men, to wit, to be of no Religion all their dayes, worse then the very Indians, who dare not live without Religion ac∣cording as they are perswaded. Lastly, I adde, from the Ordinance of the Lord Iesus, and practice of the Apostles (Acts 2. 42.) where the Word and Prayer is joyned with the exercise of their fellowship, and breaking of Bread; in which Exercises the Church continued constantly: that it is appa∣rent
that a Civill State may as lawfully compell men by the civill sword to the breaking of bread,The Civill State can no more lawfully compell the Consciences of men to Church to heare the Word, then to receive the Sacraments. or Lords Supper, as to the Word or Prayer, or Fellowship. For first, they are all of the same nature, Ordinances in the Church (I speake of the feeding Ministrie in the Church, unto which per∣sons are compell'd) and Church Worship. Secondly, every conscience in the World is fearfull, at least shie of the Priests and Ministers of other Gods and Worships, and of holding Spirituall fellowship in any of their Services. Which is the case of many a Soule, viz. to question the Ministers themselves, as well as the Supper it selfe. CHAP. CIII. Peace. DEare Truth, This pressing of men to the Spirituall Bat∣tels of Christ Jesus, is the cause why (as it is commonly with prest Souldiers) that so many thousands flie in the day of Bat∣tell. But I present you with the 9. Question, viz. What power the Magistrate hath in providing of Church-Officers? First (say they) the Election of Church officers being the pro∣per Act of the Church, therefore the Magistrate hath no power (either as Prince or Patron) to assume such power unto himselfe. When Christ sends to preach by his supreme power, the Ma∣gistrate may send forth by his power subordinate, to gather Churches, and may force people to heare them, but not invest them with office amongst them. Secondly, the Maintenance of Church-officers being to arise from all those who are ordinarily taught thereby (Gal. 6. 6.) hence it is the dutie of the Civill Magistrate to contend with the peo∣ple, as Nehemiah did, chap. 13. ver. 10. 11. who doe neglect and forsake the due maintenance of the Church of God, and to com∣mand them to give such portions for the maintenance of Church officers, as the Gospell commandeth to be offered to them freely and bountifully, 2. Cor. 9. 5, 6, 7. According as Hezekiah comman∣ded the people to give to the Priests and Levites the portions appointed by the Law, that they might be incouraged in the Law of the Lord, 2 Chron. 31. 4. Thirdly, the furnishing the Church with set officers, depen∣ding much upon erecting and maintenance of Schooles, and
good education of youth; and it lying chiefly in the hand of the Magistrate to provide for the furthering thereof, they may there∣fore and should so farre provide for the Churches, as to erect Schooles, take care for fit Governours and Tutours, and com∣mend it to all the Churches, if they see it meet, that in all the Churches within the Jurisdiction once in a yeare, and if it may be, the Sabbath before the Generall Court of Election, there be a Free-will offering of all people for the maintenance of such Schooles: And the monies of every Towne so given, to be brought on the day of Election to the Treasurie of the Colledge, and the monies to be disposed by such who are so chosen for the disposing thereof. Truth. In the choice of officers, it is very obscure what they mean by this supreme power of Christ Jesus sending to preach. We know the Commission of the Lord Jesus to his first Messen∣gers to goe into all Nations to preach and gather Churches, and they were immediately sent forth by him: but Mr. Cotton elswhere boldeth, that there is now extant no immediate Ministry from Christ, but mediate, that is, from the Church. Let us first see how they agree with themselves, and secondly how they agree with the Magistrate in this busines. First,In the first patterne there is a conver∣ting Ministrie, to gather the Church or Flok of Christ. if they hold a sending forth to preach by Christs supreme power, according to Math. 28. Mark 16. Rom. 10. they must ne∣cessarily grant a time, when the Church is not, but is to be constitu∣ted out of the Nations and Peoples now converted by this preaching: whence according to the course of Scripture, the nature of the Worke, and their own Grant in this place, it is apparent that there is a Ministery before the Church, gathering and espousing the Church to Christ: and therefore their other Tenent must needs be too light, viz. that there is no Ministry but that which is mediate from the Church. Peace. Blessed Truth, this doctrine of a Ministry before the Church, is harsh and deep, yet most true, most sweet. Yet you know their Ground, that two or three Godly persons may joyne them∣selves together, become a Church, make officers, send them forth to preach, to convert, baptize, and gather New Churches. Truth. I answer, first we find not in the first institution and pas∣terne, that ever any such two, or three, or more, did gather and constitute themselves a Church of Christ, without a Ministrie sent
from God to invite and call them by the Word, and to receive them unto fellowship with God upon the receiving of that Word and Mes∣sage:No president of any people in the Gospell converting & gathering themselves, without some Messenger sent from the Lord to effect those ends. And therefore it may very well be quaeried how without such a Ministry two or three become a Church? and how the power of Christ is conveyed unto them; Who espoused this people unto Iesus Christ, as the Church at Corinth was espoused by Paul, 2 Cor. 11.? If it be said themselves, or if it be said the Scriptures, let one instance be produced in the first patternes and practices of such a Practice. It hath been generally confest, that there is no comming to the Mariage feast without a Messenger inviting, sent from God to the Soules of men, Matth. 22. Luc. 14. Rom. 10. We finde when the Thessalonians turned to God from their Idolls to serve the living and true God, 1 Thessal. 1. 9. it pleased God to bring a Word of Power unto them by the mouth of Paul in the same place. Peace. You know (deare Truth) it is a common plea, that Gods people now are converted already, and therefore may congregate themselves, &c. Truth. Two things must here be cleered: First,Professed pub∣lique conversi∣on is not onely from sinnes a∣gainst the se∣cond Table in personall Repentance, but from false worship also. doth their conversion amount to externall turning from I∣dolls, I Thess. 1. 9. beside their internall Repentance, Faith, Love, &c. Secondly, who wrought this conversion, who begot these Chil∣dren? (for though the Corinthians might have ten thousand Tea∣chers, yet Paul had begotten them by the Word. 'Tis true (as Mr. Cotton himselfe elsewhere acknowledgeth) God sendeth many Preachers in the way of his providence (even in Babel mysticall) though not according to his Ordinance and Insti∣tution: So even in the wildernesse (Rev. 12.) God provideth for the sustentation of the woman, Rev. 12. by which provision even in the most Popish times and places, yea and by most false and Popish callings (now in this lightsome Age confest so to be) God hath done great things to the personall conversion,A true Mini∣stery necessary before con∣version, and therefore be∣fore the Church in the first patterne. consolation, and salvation of his people. But as there seems yet to be desired such constitution of the Chri∣stian Church, as the first institution and patterne calls for: So also such a calling and converting of Gods people from Antichristian Idols to the Christian Worship: And therefore such a Ministry (accor∣ding to the first patterne) sent from Christ Iesus to renew and re∣store
the Worship and Ordinances of God in Christ. Lastly, if it should be granted that without a Ministry sent from Christ to gather Churches, that Gods, people in this Country may be called, converted from Antichristian Idolls, to the true worship of God in the true Church estate and Ordinances, will it not follow that in all other Countries of the World Gods Elect must or may be so converted from their severall respective false worships and Idola∣tries,The true way of the Msty sent with that commission Mah. 28. dis∣cussed. and brought into the true Christian Church estate without such a Ministry sent unto them? Or are there two wayes appointed by the Lord Iesus, one for this Country, and another for the rest of the World? Or lastly, if two or three more (without a Ministry) shall arise up, become a Church, make Ministers, &c. I ask whether those two or three, or more must not be accounted immediately and extraordinarily stirred up by God, and whether this be that su∣preme power of Christ Iesus (which they speake of) sending forth two or three private persons to make a Church and Ministers, with∣out a true Ministry of Christ Iesus first sent unto themselves? Is this that commission (which all Ministers pretend unto) Mat. 28. 19. &c. first, in the hands of two or three private persons becom∣ming a Church, without a mediat call from which Church (say they) there can be no true Ministry, and yet also confesse that Christ sendeth forth to preach by his supreme power; and the Ma∣gistrate by his power subordinate to gather Churches? CHAP. CIV. Peace. YOu have taken great paines to shew the irreconciliable∣nesse of those their two assertions, viz. First, there is now no Ministry (as they say) but what is mediat from the Church, and yet secondly, Christ Jesus sends Preachers forth by his supreme power to gather the Church: I now wait to heare, how, as they say, the Magistrate may send forth by his power subordinate to gather Churches, enforcing the people to heare, &c. Truth. If there be a Ministry sent forth by Christs supreme po∣wer;The Civill Magistrate not betrusted with gathering of Churches. and a Ministry sent forth by the Magistrates subordinate po∣wer to gather Churches; I aske what is the difference between these two? Is there any gathering of Churches but by that com∣mission, Mat. 28. Teach and baptize? And is the civill Magistrate
intrusted with a power from Christ as his Deputy to give this com∣mission, and so to send out Ministers to preach and baptize? As there is nothing in the Testament of Christ concerning such a delegation or assignment of such power of Christ to the civill Magi∣strate:If the Magi∣strate, then much more the people of the world, from whom the Ma∣gistrates re∣ceive their po∣wer. So I also ask, since in every free State civill Magistrates have no more power but what the peoples of those States, Lands and Countries betrust them with, whether or no (by this meanes) it must not follow that Christ Iesus hath left with the Peoples and Nati∣ons of the World, his Spirituall Kingly power to grant commissi∣ons and send out Ministers to themselves, to preach, convert and baptize themselves? How inevitably this followes upon their con∣clusion of power in Magistrates to send, &c. and what unchristian and unreasonable consequences must flow from hence, let all con∣sider in the feare of God. Iehosaphats sending forth the Levites to teach in Iudah,Iehosaphat (2 Chron. 17.) a figure of Christ Jesus in his Church not of the Ci∣vill Magistrate in the State. &c. as they alledge it not; so elsewhere it shall more fully appeare to be a type and figure of Christ Iesus the only King of his Church provi∣ding for the feeding of his Church and People by his true Christian Priests and Levites, viz. The Ministry which in the Gospel he hath appointed. CHAP. CV. Peace. VVE have examined the Ministry, be pleased (deare Truth) to speake to the second branch of this head, viz. the maintenance of it: They affirme that the Magistrate may force out the Ministers maintenance from all that are taught by them, and that after the patterne of Israel, and the argument from 1 Cor. 9. Gal. 6. 6. Truth. This theame, viz. concerning the maintenance of the Priests and Ministers of worship, is indeed the Apple of the Eye, the Dianah of the Dianah, &c. yet all that love Christ Jesus in sincerity, and soules in and from him will readily professe to abhorre filthy lucre (Tit. 1.) and the wages of Balaam (both more common and frequent then easily is discernable.) To that Scripture Gal. 6. 6.Gal. 6. 6. Let him that is taught in the Word make him that teacheth partaker of all his goods: I answer,Concerning the mainte∣nance of the Ministry exa∣mined. That teaching was of persons converted, beleevers entred into the Schoole and Family of Christ the Church, which Church being
rightly gathered, is also rightly invested with the power of the Lord Iesus, to force every soule therein by spirituall weapons and penalties to doe its duty. But this forcing of the Magistrate is intended and practised to all sorts of persons without as well as within the Church, unconver∣ted, naturall and dead in sinne, as well as those that live, and feeding enjoy the benefit of spirituall food. Now for those sorts of persons to whom Christ Iesus sends his Word out of Church estate,Christ Jesus never appoin∣ted a mainte∣nance of his Ministers from the un∣converted and unbeleeving. Iewes or Gentiles, (according to the Pa∣rable of Math. 13. high-way hearers, stony ground and thorny ground hearers) wee never finde title of any maintenance to bee expected, least of all to bee forced and exacted from them. By civill power they cannot be forced, for it is no civill payment or businesse, no mat∣ter of Caesar, but concerning God: nor by spirituall power, which hath nothing to doe with those which are without, 1. Cor. 5. It is reasonable to expect and demand of such as live within the state a civill maintenance of their civill officers, and to force it where it is denyed. It is reasonable for a Schoole-master to demand his re∣compence for his labour in his Schoole: but it is not reasonable to expect or force it from stranges, enemies, rebels to that City, from such as come not within, or else would not bee received into the Schoole. What is the Church of Christ Iesus, but the City, the School, and Family of Christ? the Officers of this City, Schoole, Family, may reasonably expect maintenance from such they minister unto, but not from strangers, enemies, &c. Peace. They that compell men to heare, com∣pell men also to pay for their hearing and conver∣sion. It is most true that sinne goes in a linke, for that tenent that all the men of the world may bee compelled to heare Christ preach (and enjoy the labours of the Teacher as well as the Church it selfe) forceth on another also as evill, viz. that they should also be compelled to pay, as being most equall and reasonable to pay for their conversion. Truth. Some use to urge that Text of Luc. 14. Compell them to come in. Compell them to Masse (say the Papists:) compell them to Church and Common prayer, say the Protestants: Compell them to the Meeting, say the New English. In all these compulsions they disagree amongst themselves: but in this, viz. Compell them to pay, in this they all agree. There is a double violence which both Errour and Falshood use to the soules of men.Two sorts of compulsion.
First, morall andMorall and perswasive, such was the perswasion first used to Ioseph by his Mistris: such was the perswasions of Tamar from Ammon: such was the compelling of the young man by the Harlot; Prov. 7. shee caught him by her much faire speech and kisses. And thus is the whole world compelled to the worship of the Golden Image, Dan. 3. The second Compulsion is civill,Civill Com∣pulsion. such as Iosephs Mistris began to practise upon Ioseph to attaine her whorish desires. Such as Ammon practised on Tamar to satisfie his brutish lust. And such was Nabuchadnezzars second compulsion, his fiery Furnace, Dan. 3. and mysticall Nabuchadnezzars killing all that re∣ceive not his marke, Rev. 13. The first sort of these violences,The Ministers of Christ Je∣sus compell with no other sword then that of Christs mouth, the sword of the Spirit with two edges. to wit, by powerfull argument and perswasion, the Ministers of the Gospel also use. Hence all those powerfull perswasions of Wisedomes Maidens, Pro. 9. Hence (saith Paul) knowing the terrour of the Lord, we perswade men, 2 Cor. 5. and pull some out of the fire, saith Iud: such must that compul∣sion be, Luc. 14. viz. the powerfull perswasions of the word, being that two-edged sword comming out of the mouth of Christ Iesus in his true Ministers sent forth to invite poore sinners to partake of the Feast of the Lambe of God. The civill Ministers of the Com∣monweale cannot be sent upon this businesse with their civill wea∣pons and compulsions, but the spirituall Minister of the Gospel with his spirituall sword of Christs mouth, a sword with two edges. But more particularly the contributions of Christs Kingdome are all holy and spirituall,The mainte∣nance of the Ministry spi∣rituall. though consisting of materiall earthly substance, (as is Water in Baptisme, Bread and Wine in the Supper) and joyned with prayer and the Lords Supper, Act. 2. 42. Hence as Prayer is called Gods sacrifice,Naturall men can neither truly worship nor maintain it. so are the contributions and mutuall supplyes of the Saints, sacrifices, Phil. 4. Hence also as it is impossible for naturall men to bee capable of Gods worship, and to feed, be nourished and edified by any spirituall ordinance, no more then a dead childe can sucke the breast, or a dead man feast: So also is it as impossible for a dead man yet lodged in the grave of Nature to contribute spiritually (I meane according to Scriptures rule) as for a dead man to pay a reckoning. I question not but naturall men may for the outward act preach, pray, contribute, &c. but neither are they worshippers suitable to him
who is a Spirit (Iohn 4.) nor can they (least of all) bee forced to worship or the maintenance of it, without a guilt of their hypo∣crisie. Peace. They will say, what is to be done for their soules? Truth. The Apostles (whom wee professe to imitate) preached the Word of the Lord to unbeleevers, without mingling in worship with them, and such Preachers and preaching such as pretend to be the true Ministry of Christ, ought to be and practise: Not forcing them all their dayes to come to Church and pay their duties, either so confessing that this is their Religion unto which they are forced: or else that (as before) they are forced to be of no Religion all their dayes. The way to subdue Rebels is not by correspondence and communion with them,Rebels not subdued by compliance, but resistance. by forcing them to keepe the City Watches, and pay sesse∣ments, &c. which all may be practised (upon compulsion) treache∣rously, the first work with such is powerfully to subdue their judg∣ments and wills, to lay downe their weapons, and yeeld willing subjection: then come they orderly into the City, and so to Citie priviledges. CHAP. CVI. Peace. PLease you now (deare Truth) to discusse the Scriptures from the Old Testament, Nehem 13. and 2 Chron. 31. Truth. The nationall Church of the Jewes might well be forced to a settled maintenance of their priests but not so the Christian Church. God gave unto that Nationall Church of the Jewes that excellent Land of Canaan, and therein Houses furnished, Orchards, Gardens Vineyards, Olive yards, Fields, Wells, &c. they might well in this settled abundance, and the promised continuation and increase of it afford a large temporall supply to their Priests and Levites, even to the Tenth of all they did possesse. Gods people are now in the Gospel brought into a spirituall land of Canaan, flowing with spirituall milk and honey, and they abound with spirituall and heavenly comforts, though in a poore and perse∣cuted condition, therefore an inforced setled maintenance is not su∣table to the Gospel, as it was to the Ministry of Priests and Levites in the Law. Secondly, in the change of the Church estate, there was also a change of the Priesthood and of the Law, Heb. 7. Nor did the Lord Iesus appoint that in his Church, and for the maintenance of his
Ministrie, the Civill sword of the Magistrate, but that the Spirituall Sword of the Ministrie should alone compell. 3. Therefore the compulsion used under Hezekiah and Nehemiah, was by the civill and corporall Sword,The Civill Sword of the Nationall Church of the Jewes could not type out a Civill, but a Spirituall Sword of the Christian Church. a type (in that typicall State) not of another materiall and corporall, but of an heavenly and spiri∣tuall, even the sword of the Spirit, with which Christ fighteth, Revel. 3. which is exceeding sharpe, entring in between the soule and spirit, Heb. 4. and bringing every thought into captivitie to the obedience of Christ Iesus: He that submits not at the shaking of this sword, is cut off by it; and he that despiseth this sword, all the power in the World cannot make him a true worshipper, or by his purse a mainteiner of Gods worship. Lastly, If any man professing to be a Minister of Christ Iesus,No man should be bound to wor∣ship, nor main¦taine a Wor∣ship against his own con∣sent. shall bring men before the Magistrate (as the practice hath been, both in Old and New England) for not paying him his wages or his due: I aske (if the voluntarie consent of the party hath not obli∣ged him) how can either the officers of the Parish, Church, or of the Civill State compell this or that man to pay so much (more or lesse) to maintaine such a Worship or Ministrie? I ask further, if the determining what is each mans due to pay, why may they not de∣termine the tenth and more, as some desired (others opposing) in New England, and force men not only to maintenance, but to a Iewish maintenance. Peace. Yea but (say they) is not the Labourer worthy of his hire? Truth. Yes, from them that hire him, from the Church, to whom he laboureth or ministreth,Christs labou∣rers worthy of their hire, but from them that hire them not from the Civill State: no more then the Minister of the Civill State is worthy of his hire from the Church, but from the Civill State, (in which I grant the persons in the Church ought to be assistant in their Civill respects.) Peace. What maintenance (say they) shall the Ministrie of the Gospell have? Truth. We finde two wayes of maintenance for the Ministrie of the Gospell,What mainte∣nance Christ hath appoin∣ted his Mini∣sters in the Gospell. proposed for our direction in the New Testa∣ment. First, the free and willing contribution of the Saints, according to 1 Cor. 16. Luc. 8. 3. &c. upon which both the Lord Jesus, and his Ministers lived. Secondly, the diligent worke and labour of their owne hands,
as Paul tells the Thessalonians, and that in two cases: 1. Either in the inabilities and necessities of the Church. 2. Or for the greater advantage of Christs truth; as when Paul saw it would more advantage the name of Christ, he denies him∣selfe, and falls to worke amongst the Corinthians and Thessalo∣nians. Let none call these cases extraordinary: for if persecution be the portion of Christs sheep, and the busines or worke of Christ must be dearer to us then our right eyes or lives, such as will follow Paul, and follow the Lord Iesus, must not thinke much at, but re∣joyce in poverties, necessities, hunger, cold, nakednesse, &c. The Stew∣ards of Christ Iesus must be like their Lord, and abhorre to steale as the evill Steward, pretending that the shamed to beg, but peremp∣torily, dig he could not. CHAP. CVII. Peace. ONe and the last branch (deare Truth) remaines concer∣ning Schooles. The Churches (say they) much depend upon the Schooles, and the Schooles upon the Magistrates. Truth. I honour Schooles for Tongues and Arts: but the institu∣tion of Europes Universities,Universities of Europe a cause of universall sins & plagues, yet Schooles honourable for Tongues and Arts. devoting persons (as is said) for Scho∣lars, in a Monasticall way, forbidding Mariage and Labour to, I hold as far from the mind of Iesus Christ, as it is from propagating his Name and Worship. We count the Universities the Fountaines, the Seminaries or Seed-plots of all Pietie: but have not those Fountaines ever sent what streames the Times have liked? and ever changed their taste and colour to the Princes eye and Palate? For any depending of the Church of Christ upon such Schooles, I finde not a little in the Testament of Christ Iesus. I finde the Church of Christ frequently compared to a Schoole:Christs church his Schoole, and all Belie∣vers Scholars. All Beleevers are his Disciples or Scholars, yea women also, Acts 9. 36. There was a certaine Disciple or Scholar called Dorcas. Have not the Universities sacrilegiously stole this blessed name of Christs Scholars from his people? Is not the very Scripture lan∣guage it selfe become absurd, to wit, to call Gods people, especially Women (as Dorcas) Scholars?
Peace. Some will object, how shall the Scriptures be brought to ight from out of Popish darknesse, except these Schooles of Prophets convey them to us? Truth. I know no Schooles of Prophets in the New Testament, but the particular Congregation of Christ Iesus, 1 Cor. 14. And I que∣stion whether any thing but Sinne stopt and dried up the current of the Spirit in those rare gifts of tongues to Gods sons & daughters, ser∣ving so admirably both for the understanding of the Originall Scrip∣tures, and also for the propagating of the name of Christ. Who knowes but that it may please the Lord againe to cloath his people with a spirit of zeale and courage for the name of Christ,Who knowes but God may againe powre forth the gifts of Tongues? yea and powre forth those fiery streames againe of Tongues and Prophecie in the restauration of Zion? If it be not his holy pleasure so to doe, but that his people with daily study and labour must dig to come at the Originall Fountaines,Tongues at∣tainable out of Oxford or Cambridge. Gods people have many wayes (besides the Universitie, lazie and Monkish) to attaine to an excellent measure of the knowledge of those tongues. That most despised (while living) and now much honoured Mr. Ainsworth,Mr. Ainsworth had scarce his Peere amongst a thousand Acade∣mians for the Scripture Originalls, and yet he scarce set foot within a Colledge walls. CHAP. CVIII. Peace. I Shall now present you with their 10. Head, viz. concer∣ning the Magistrates power in matters of Doctrine. That which is unjustly ascribed to the Pope, is as unjustly a∣scribed to the Magistrates, viz. to have power of making new Articles of Faith, or Rules of Life, or of pressing upon the Chur∣ches to give such publike honour to the Apocrypha writings, or Homilies of men, as to read them to the people in the roome of the Oracles of God. Truth. This Position simply considered I acknowledge a most holy truth of God, both against the Pope, and the Civill Magistrates challenge, both pretending to be the Vicars of Christ Iesus upon the Earth. Yet two things here I shall propose to consideration. First, since the Parliament of England thrust the Pope out of his chaire in England, and set downe King Henry the 8. and his Succes∣sours
in the Popes roome,King Henry the 8. set down the Popes chaire in Eng∣land. establishing them supreme Governours of the Church of England, since such an absolute government is given by all men to them to be Guardians of the first Table and worship of God; to set up the true worship, to suppresse all false, and that by the power of the Sword, and therefore consequently they must judge and determine what the true is, and what the false. And since the Magistrate is bound (by these Authours princi∣ples) to see the Church,If the Mgi∣strate must pu∣nish in Spiri∣tuall , he must  be judge  Spirituall cau∣ses also. the Church officers and members doe thair duty, he must therefore judge what is the Churches duty, and when she performes or not performes it, or when she exceeds, so like wise when the Ministers performe their duty, or when they exceed it. And if the Magistrate must judge, then certainly by his owne eye, and not by the eyes of others, though assembled in a Nationall or Generall Councell. Then also upon his judgement must the people rest, as upon the minde and judgement of Christ, or else it must be confest that he hath no such power left him by Christ to compell the soules of men in matters of Gods worship. Secondly,Apocripha, Common-Prayer and Homilies, pre∣tious to our forefahers. concerning the Apocrypha writings and Homilies to be urged by the Magistrate to be read unto the people as the Oracles of God: I aske if the Homilies of England contain not in them much pretious and heavenly matter  Secondly, if they were not (at least many of them) by excellent men for learning, holinesse, and witnesse of Christs Truth incomparable. Thirdly, were they not authorised by that most rare and pious Prince Ed. 6. then head of the Church of England? With what great solemnity and rejoycing were they received of thousands? Yet now behold their children after them sharply censure them for Apocrypha writings and Homilies trust into the roome of the Word of God, and so falling into the consideration of a false and coun∣terfeit Scripture. I demand of these worthy men whether a servant of God might then lawfully have refused to read or heare such a false Scripture?A case. Secondly, if so, whether King Edward might have lawfully com∣pelled such a man to yeeld and submit, or else have persecuted him, yea (according to the Authors principles) whether he ought to have spared him, because after the admonitions of such pious and learned men, this man shall now prove an Hereticke, and as an obstinate person sinning against the light of his owne conscience?
In this case what shall the conscience of the subject doe, awed by the dread of the most High? What shall the conscience of the Magi∣strate do, zealous for his glorious Reformation, being constantly per∣swaded by his Clergy of his Lieutenantship received from Christ? Again,Reformations are fallible. what priviledge have those worthy servants of God either in Old or New England, to be exempted from the mistakes, into which those gloious Worthies in K. Edwards time did fall?Bloudy con∣clusions. and if so, what bloudy conclusions are presented to the World, perswading men to plucke up by the Roots from the Land of the living, all such as seem in their eyes hereticall or obstinate? CHAP. CIX. Peace. DEare Truth, What darke and dismall bloudy paths doe we walke in? How is thy name and mine in all ages cried up, yet as an English Flag in a Spanish bottome, not in truth but dangerous treachery and abuse both of Truth and Peace? We are now come to the 11 Head11 Head. which concernes the Ma∣gistrates power in worship. First, they have power (say they) to reforme things in the worship of God in a Church corrupted, and to establish the pure worship of God, defending the same by the power of the sword against all those who shall attempt to corrupt it. For first, the reigning of Idolatry and corruption in Religion is imputed to the want of a King, Iudges 17. 5, 6. Secondly, Remissenes in Reforming Religion, is a fault impu∣ted to them who suffered the High Places in Israel and in Gallio, who cared not for such things, Acts 18. Thirdly, Forwardnesse this way is a duty not only for Kings in the Old Testament, but for Princes under the New, 1 Tim 2. 2. Rom. 13. 4. Esay 49. 23. Neither did the Kings of Israel reforme things amisse as types of Christ, but as Civill Magistrates, and so exemplary to all Christians. And here Reformation in Religion is commendable in a Persian King, Ezra 7. 23. And it is well knowne that remissenes in Princes of Christendome in matters of Religion and Worship (divolving the care thereof only to the Clergy, and so setting the Hornes thereof upon the Churches head) hath been the cause of Antichristian inventions, usurpati∣ons and corruptions in the Worship and Temple of God.
Secondly, they have not power to presse upon the Churches, stinted Prayers, o set Liturgies, whether New or Old, Popish, or others under colour of uniformity of Worship, or morall good∣nesse of them both for matter and forme, conceiving our argu∣ments sent to our Brethren in England concerning this Question to evince this Truth. Thirdly, they have no power to presse upon the Churches, nei∣ther by Law (as hath been said before) nor by Proclamation and command, any sacred significant ceremonies, whether more or lesse, Popish or Jewish rite, or any other device of man, be it ne∣ver so little in the worship of God, under what colour soever of indifferencie, civility, using them without opinion of snctity, publicke peace or obedience to righteous Authority, as Surplice, Crosse, kneeling at Sacrament; Salt and Spitle in Baptisme, Ho∣ly dayes: They having beene so accursed of God, so abused by man, the imposing of some ever making way for the urging of more, the receiving of some making the conscience bow to the burthen of all. Fourthly, they have not power to governe and rule the acts of worship in the Church of God. It is with a Magistrate in a State, in respect of the acts of those who worship in a Church, as it is with a Prince in a Ship, where∣in, though he be governour of their persons (else he should not be their Prince) yet is not governour of the actions of the Mai∣ners (then he should be Pilot:) Indeed if the Pilot shall mani∣festly erre in his action, he may reprove him, and so any other passenger may: Or if he offend against the life and goods of any, he may in due time and place civilly punish him, which no other passenger can doe: For, it is proper to Christ, the Head of the Church, as to prescribe, so to rule the actions of his own worship in the wayes of his servants, Esay 96, 7. The government of the Church is upon his shoulder, which no Civill officer ought to at∣tempt: And therefore Magistrates have no power to limit a Mi∣nister either to what he shall preach or pray, or in what manner they shall worship God, lest hereby they shall advance themselves above Christ, and limit his Spirit. Truth. In this generall Head are proposed two things. First, what the Magistrate ought to doe positively concerning the worship of God.
Secondly, what he may doe in the worship of God. What he ought to doe is comprised in these particulars. First, he ought to reforme the worship of God when it is cor∣rupted. Secondly, he ought to establish a pure worship of God. Thirdly, he ought to defend it by the sword: he ought to restrain Idolatry by the sword, and to cut off offendours, as former passages have opened. For the proofe of this positive part of his duty are propounded three sorts of Scriptures. First, from the practice of the Kings of Israel and Iudah. Secondly, some from the New Testament. Thirdly, from the practice of Kings of other Nations. Unto which I answer. First,The argument from the Ba∣bylonian and Persian kings re-minded. concerning this latter, the Babylonian and Persian Kings, Nebuchadnezzar, Cyrus, Darius, Artaxerxes: I conceive I have suf∣ficiently before proved, that these Idolatrous Princes making such Acts concerning the God of Israel, whom they did not worship nor know, nor meant so to doe, did onely permit and tolerate, and coun∣tenance the Iewish worship, and out of strong convictions that this God of Israel was able to doe them good (as well as their owne gods) to bring wrath upon them and their Kingdomes, as they beleeved their owne also did, in which respect all the Kings of the world may be easily brought to the like: but are no president or patternes for all Princes and Civill Magistrates in the World, to chalenge or the power of ruling or governing the Church of Christ, and of wearing the spirituall Crowne of the Lord, which he alone weareth in a spi∣rituall way by his Officers and Governours after his owne holy ap∣pointment. Secondly, for those of the New Testament I have (as I beleeve) fully and sufficiently answered. So also that prophesie of Isa. 49. Lastly,The president of the Kings and Gover∣nos of Israel and Iudah examined. however I have often touched those Scriptures produced from the practice of the Kings of Israel and Judah. yet because so great a waeight of this controversie lyes upon this president of the Old Testament, from the duties of this nature enjoyned to those Kings and Governours, and their practices, obeying or disobeying, accor∣dingly commended or reproved. I shall (with the helpe of Christ Ie∣sus, the true King of Israel) declare and demonstrate how weake
and brittle this supposed Pillar of Marble is, to beare up and sustain such a mighty burthen and waight of so many high concernments as are laid upon it.The state of Israel relating to spirituall matters pro∣ved typicall. In which I shall evidently prove that the state of Israel as a Nationall State made up of Spirituall and Civill power, so farre as it attended upon the spirituall, was meerly figurative and typing out the Christian Churches consisting of both Iewes and Gen∣tiles, enjoying the true power of the Lord Iesus, establishing, refor∣ming, correcting, defending in all cases concerning his Kingdome and Government. CHAP. CX. Peace. BLessed be the God of Truth, the God of Peace, who hath so long preserved us in this our retired conference without in∣terruptions: His mercy still shields us while you expresse and I listen to that so much imitated, yet most unimitable State of Israel. Yet before you descend to particulars (deare Truth) let me cast The Persian Kings make evidently a∣gainst such as produce them for mainte∣nance of the doctrine of persecution. one Mite into your great Treasury concerning that Instance (just now mentioned) of the Persian Kings. Me thinkes those presidents of Cyrus, Darius and Artaxerxes are strong against New Englands Tenent and practice. Those Princes professedly gave free permission and bountifull incouragement to the Consciences of the Iewes, to use and practise their Religion, which Religion was most eminently contrary to their owne Religion and their Countries worship. Truth. I shall (sweet Peace) with more delight passe on these rough wayes, from your kinde acceptance and unwearied patience in attention. In this discovery of that vast and mighty difference betweene that State of Israel and all other States (onely to bee matched and parallel'd by the Christian Church or Israel) I shall select some maine and principall considerations concerning that State where∣in the irreconciliable differences and disproportion may appeare. First,The Land of Canaan cho∣sen by God to be the seat of the Church, but under the New Testa∣ment all Na∣tions alike. I shall consider the very Land and Country of Canaan it selfe, and present some considerations proving it to be a None such. First, this Land was espyed out and chosen by the Lord out of all the Countries of the World to be the seat of his Church and people, Ezek. 206. But now there is no respect of Earth, of Places or Countries with the Lord: So testified the Lord Iesus Christ himselfe to the
woman of Samaria (Iohn 4.) professing that neither at that Moun∣taine nor at Ierusalem should men worship the Father. While that Nationall State of the Church of the Iewes remained, the Tribes were bound to goe up to Ierusalem to worship, Psal. 122. But now, in every Nation (not the whole Land or Country as it was with Canaan) he that feareth God and worketh righteousnesse is accepted with him, Act. 10. 35. This then appeared in that large Commission of the Lord Jesus to his first Ministers: Goe into all Nations, and not onely into Canaan, to carry tidings of Mercy, &c. Secondly, the former Inhabitants thereof, seven great and migh∣tie Nations (Deuter. 7.) were all devoted to destruction by the Lords owne mouth, which was to bee performed by the impartiall hand of the Children of Israel, without any sparing or shewing Mercy. But so now it hath not pleased the Lord to devote any people to present Destruction,The inhabi∣tants of Ca∣naans Land every soule to be put to death that the Israe∣lites might en∣joy their pos∣sessions: not so now. commanding his people to kill and slay without Covenant or Compassion, Deuteronomy 7. 2. Where have Emperours, Kings, or Generals an immediate call from God to destroy whole Cities, City after City, Men, women, Children, Old and Young, as Ioshua practised? Ioshua 6. and 10. Chapters, &c. This did Israel to these seven Nations, that they themselves might succeed them in their Cities, Habitations, and Possessi∣ons. This onely is true in a spirituall Antitype, when Gods peo∣ple by the Sword (the two-edged Sword of Gods Spirit slay the ungodly and become Heires, yea fellow Heires with Christ Iesus, Romanes 8. Gods meeke people inherit the earth, (Matthew 5.) They mystically like Noah (Hebrewes 11) condemne the whole unbeleeving World, both by present and future sentence, 2 Co∣rinth. 6. 2. CHAP. CXI. THirdly the very materials, the Gold and Silver of the Idols of this Land were odios and abominable, and dangerous to the people of Israel, that they might not desire it, nor take it to them∣selves,
Deut. 7. 25. 26. lest themselves also become a curse,The very  & silver of Cara∣aes Images  to be abhorred. and like unto those cursed abominable things. Whereas we finde not any such accursed nature in the materials of Idols or Images now, but that (the Idolatrous formes being changed) the silver and gold may be cast and coyned, and other materialls lawfully employed and used. Yet this we finde in the Antitype, that gold, silver, yea house, land, yea wives, children, yea life it selfe, as they allure and draw us from God in Christ, are to be abominated and hated by us, without which hatred and indignation against the most plausible and pleasing enticings from CHRIST IESVS, it is im∣possible for any man to bee a true Christian, Luke 14. 26. Fourthly,The Land of Canaan cere∣monially holy. this Land, this Earth was an Holy land, Zch. 2. 12. Ceremonially and typically holy, Fields, Gardens, Orchards, Houses, &c. which Holines the World knowes not now in one Land, or Country, House, Field, Garden, &c. one above another. Yet in the Spirituall Land of Canaan the Christian Church,Greater holy∣nesse in the Antitype un∣der the Gos∣pel, then in the types under the Law. all things are made holy and pure (in all Lands) to the pure, Tit. 1. meats and drinkes are sanctified, that is, dedicated to the holy use of the thankfull Believers, 1 Tim. 4. vea and the unbelieving Husband, Wife, and their Children are sanctified and made holy to Believers, insomuch that that golden inscription (peculiar to the forehead of the High Priest) Holines to Iehovah, shall be written upon the very Bridles of the Horses, as all are dedicated to the service of Christ Iesus in the Gospels peace and holines. Fifthly,The Land of Canaan Jeho∣rahs Land. the Lord expresly calls it his own Land, Levit. 25 23. Hos. 9. 3 Iehovah his Land, a terme proper unto Spirituall Canaan, the Church of God, which must needs be in respect of his choice of that Land to be the Seate and Residence of his Church and Ordi∣nances. Bu now the partition wall is broken down, and in respect of the Lords speciall proprieie to one Country more then another, what dfference between Asia and Africa, between Europe and Ame∣rica. between England and Turkie, London and Constantinople? This Land (among many other glorious Titles given to it) was called Emanuels land,Emanuels Land so no Land or coun∣try more then another. that is, God with us, Christ his land, or Chri∣stian land, Isa 8. 8. But now: Ierusalem from above is not materiall and Earthly,
but Spirituall, Gal. 4. Heb. 12. Materiall Ierusalem is no more the Lords citie then Iericho, Ninivie, or Babell (in respect of place or Countrey) for even at Babell literall was a Church of Iesus Christ, 1 Pet. 5. It is true that Antichrist hath christned all those Countries where∣on the Whore sitteth,The Blasphe mus titles of the Christned and Christian World. Revel 17. with the Title of Christs land, or Christian land. And Hundius, in his Map of the Christian World, makes this land to extend to all Asia, a great part of Africa, all Europe, and a vast part of America, even so farre as his unchristian Christenings hath gone. But as every false Christ hath false Teachers, false Christians, false Faith, Hope, Love, &c. and in the end false Salvation, so doth he also counterfeit the false Name of Christ, Christians, Christian land or Countrey. Sixthly, this Land was to keepe her Sabbaths unto God: Sixe yeares they were to sow their Fields, and prune their Vines, but in the 7.The materiall Land of Ca∣an was to keep her Sab∣boths, so no materiall land or Country now. God feedeth his sometimes immediately. yeare they were not to sow their Fields, nor prune their Vineyards, but to eat that which grew of it selfe or own accord. But such Observations doth not God now lay upon any Fields, Vineyards, &c. under the Gospell. Yet in the Spirituall land of Canaan, the true Church, there is a Spirituall Soule-rest or Sabbath, a quiet depending upon God, a li∣ving by Faith in him, a making him our portion, and casting all care upon him who careth for us: yea sometimes he feedeth his by im∣mediate gracious workes of Providence, when comforts arise out of the Earth, without secondary meanes or causes, as here, or as else∣where Manna descended from Heaven. Seventhly, such portions and possessions of Lands, Fields, Houses, Vineyards, were sold with caution or proviso of returning againe in the yeare of Iubilee to the right owners, Levit. 25. 23. Such cautions, such provisos are not now injoyned by God in the sale of lands, fields, inheritances, nor no such Iubilee or Redemption to be expected. Yet this also finds a fulfilling in the spirituall Canaan,The Jbilee of Canaan a type of resti∣tution and re∣demption in the Gospell. or Church of God, unto which the silver Trumpet of Iubilee, the Gospel, hath ounded a spirituall restitution of all their spirituall rights and inheri∣tances, which either they have lost in the fall of the first man Adam, or in their particular falls, when they are captive and sold unto sin, Rom. 7. Or lastly in the spirituall captivitie of Babele bondage: how
sweet then is the name of a Saviour, in whom is the joyfull sound of Deliverance and Redemption! Eightly, this Land or Country was a figure or type of the king∣dome of Heaven above,Canaans land a type of  Kingdome of God on Earth and in Heaven begun here below in the Church and King∣dome of God, Heb. 4. 8. Heb. 11. 9. 10. Hence was a Birthright so pretious in Canaans Land: Hence Naboth so inexorable and reso∣lute in refusing to part with his Inheritance to King Ahab, coun∣ting all Ahabs seeming reasonable offers most unreasonable,Why Naboth refused to part with a Garden plot to his King upon hazard of his life. as soli∣citing him to part with a Garden plot of Canaans land, though his refusall cost him his very life. What Land, what Country now is Israels Parallel and Antitype, but that holy mysticall Nation the Church of God, peculiar and cal∣led out to him out of every Nation and Country, 1 Pet. 2. 9. In which every true spirituall Naboth hath his spirituall inheritance, which he dares not part with, though it be to his King or Sove∣raigne, and though such his refusall cost him this present life. CHAP. CXII. Peace. DOubtlesse that Canaan Land was not a patterne for all Lands: It was a none-such, unparalleld and unmatchable. Truth. Many other considerations of the same nature I might an∣nex, but I picke here and there a flowre,The difference of the people of Israel and all other Peo∣ples. The people of Israel the seed of one man. and passe on to a second Head concerning the people themselves, wherein the state of the people shall appeare unmatchable, but only by the true Church and Israel of God. First, the people of Israel were all the Seed or Off-spring of one man Abraham, Psal. 105. 6. and so downward the Seed of Isaac and Iacob, hence called the Israel of God, that is, wrastlers and pre∣vailers with God, distinguished into twelve Tribes all sprung out of Israels loynes. But now, few Nations of the World but are a mixed Seed, the people of England especially the Britaines, Picts, Romanes, Saxons, Danes and Normans, by a wonderfull providence of God being be∣come one English people. Only the Spirituall Israel and Seed of God the New-borne are but one:Only made good in the Spirituall seed, the regeneate or new-borne. Christ is the Seed, Gal. 3. and they only that are Christs are only Abrahams Seed and Heires according to the promise. This Spirituall Seed is the only Antitype of the former figurative
and typicall: A Seed which all Christians ought to propagate, yea even the unmarried men and women (who are not capable of natu∣rall off spring) for thus is this called the Seed of Christ (who lived and died unmarried Isa. 59. 21. Secondly, this people was selected and separated to the Lord, his Covenant and Worship from all the people and Nations of the World beside to be his peculiar and onely people, Levit. 20. 26. &c. Therefore such as returned from Babyln  Ierusalem, they sepa∣rated hemselves to eat the Passeover,  6 And in that solemne humiliation and confession before the Lord, Nehem 9.The people of Israel separate from all Nati∣ons in Sp all and in some Civill things. the children of Israel separated themselves from all strangers. This separation of theirs was so famous, that it extended not only to Circumcision, the Passeover, and matters of Gods worship, but even to temporall and civill things: Thus (Ezra 9) they separated or put away their very wives, which they had taken of the strange Nations contrary to the Commandement of the Lord. But where hath the God of Heaven in the Gospel separated whole Nations or Kingdomes (English, Scotch, Irish, French, Dutch,No Nation so sparated to God in the Gospel, but only the new borne Israel that feare God in every Nati∣on. &c.) as a peculiar people and Antitype of the people of Israel? Yea where the least footing in all the Scripture for a Nationall Church after Christs comming? Can any people in the world patterne this samplar but the New∣borne Israel, such as feare God in every Nation (Acts 10. 35.) com∣manded to come forth and separate from all uncleane things or per∣sons, (2 Cor. 6.) and though not bound to put away strange wives as Israel did, because of that peculiar respect upon them in Civill things, yet to be holy or set apart to the Lord in all manner of civill conversation, 1 Pet. 1. Only to marry in the Lord, yea and to marry as if they married not 1 Cor 7. yea to hate wife and children, father, mother, house and land, yea and life it selfe for the Lord Iesus, Luc. 14. Thirdly, this Seed of Abraham thus separate from all people unto the Lord was wonderfully redeemed and brought from Aegypts bonage through the Red Sea, and the Wildernesse unto the Land of Canaan, by many strange signes and wonderfull miracles, wrought by the oustretched hand of the Lord, famous and dread∣full,The whole people of Isra∣el  of Egypt. and to be admired by all succeeding peoples and generations, Deut. 4. 32, 33, 34. Aske now from one side of the Heaven unto the other, whether there hath been such a thing as this, &c?
And we may aske againe from one side of the Heaven unto the other whether the Lord hath now so miraculously redeemed and brought unto Himselfe any Nation or people as he did this people of Israel.Not so any whole Nation now. Peace. The English, Scoth, Dutch &c. are apt to make them∣selves the parallels, as wonderfully come forth of Popey, &c. Truth. 1. But first, whole Nations are no Churches under the Gospel. Secondly, bring the Nations of Europe professing Protestanisme to the ballance of the Sanctuary,Popey not so easily turned from as i con∣ceived. and ponder well whether the body, bulk, the generall or one hundreth part of such peoples be truly turned to God from Popery. Who knowes not how easie it is to turne, and turne, and turn a∣gaine whole Nations from one Religion to another? Who knowes not that within the compasse of one poore span of 12 yeares revolution,Wonderfull turnings in Religion in 12 yeares conpasse in England. all England hath become from halfe Papist, halfe Protestant, to be absolute Protestants; from absolute Prote∣stants, to absolute Papists; from absolute Papists (changing as fa∣shions) to absolute Protestants? I will not say (as some worthy witnesses of Christ have uttered) that all England and Europe must againe submit their faire necks to the Popes yoake: But this, I say, many Scriptures concerning the destruction of the Beast and the Whore looke that way: And I adde,The Pope not unlike to reco∣ver his Monar∣chie over Eu∣rope before his downfall. they that feele the pulse of the people seriously must confesse that a victorious Sword, and a Spanish Inquisition will soone make millions face about as they were in the Fore-Fathers times. CHAP. CXIII. Peace. O That the Steersmen of the Nations might remember this, Bee wise and kisse the Sonne, lest he goe on in this His dreadfull anger, and dash them in peeces here and eter∣nally. Truth. I therefore thirdly adde, That only such as are Abrahams Seed, circumcised in Heart, New-borne, Israel (or wrastlers with God) are the Antitype of the former Israel,Who are now the true Seed of Abraham. these are only the holy Nation (1 Pet. 2.) wonderfully redeemed from the Aegypt of this World (Titus 2. 14.) brought through the Red Sea of Baptisme (1 Cor. 10.) through the wildernesse of afflictions, and of the peoples (Dent. 8.
Ezk. 20.) into the Kingdome of Heaven begun below, even that Christian Land of Promise, where flow the everflowing streames and Rivers of Spirituall milke and honey. Fourthly, All this people universally (in typicall and ceremoni∣all respect) were holy and cleane in this their separation and seque∣stration unto God, Exod. 19. 5. Hence, even in respect of their na∣turall birth in that Land they were an holy Seed,The people of Israel all holy in a typicall  and Ezr makes it the matter of his great complaint, Ezra 9. 12. The holy Seed have mingled themselves. But where is now that Nation or Country upon the face of the Earth, thus cleane and holy unto God, and bound to so many cere∣moniall cleansings and purgings? Are not all the Nations of the Earth alike cleane unto God, or rather alike uncleane, untill it pleaseth the Father of mercies to call some out to the Knowledge and Grace of his Sonne, making them to see their filthinesse and strangenesse from the Commonweale of Israel,All Nations now alike since the comming of the Lord Jesus. and to wash in the bloud of the Lambe of God. This taking away the difference between Nation and Nation, Country and Country, is most fully and admirably declared in that great vision of all sorts of living creatures presented unto Peter, Acts 10. whereby it pleased the Lord to informe Peter of the abo∣lishing of the difference between Iew and Gentile in any holy or un∣holy, cleane or uncleane respect. Fifthly, (not only to speake of all, but to select one or two more) This people of Israel in that Nationall State were a type of all the Children of God in all ages under the profession of the Gospel, who are therefore called the Children of Abraham,The children of Israel a fi∣gure of the Is∣rael or people of God only uder the Gos∣pel. and the Israel of God, Gal. 3.& Gal. 6. A Kingly Priesthood and holy Nation (1 Pet. 2. 9) in a cleare and manifest Antitype to the former Israel, Exod. 19. 6. Hence Christians now are figuratively in this respect called Iewes, Rev. 3. where lies a cleare distinction of the true and false Christian under the consideration of the true and false Iew: Behold I will make them of the Synagogue of Sathan that say they are Jewes and are not, but doe lie, Rev. 3. But such a typicall respect we finde not now upon any People, Nation or Country of the whole World: But out of all Nations, Tongues and Languages is God pleased to call some and redeem them to Himselfe (Rev. 5. 9.) And hath made no difference betweene the Iewes and Gentiles,
Greekes and Scithians, Gal. 3. who by Regeneration or second birth, become the Israel of God, Gal. 6. the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 3. and the true Ierusalem, Heb. 12. Lastly,The people of Israel  rent from all the world in their figura∣tive and cere∣moniall wor∣ships. all this whole Nation or people, as they were of one typi∣call seed of Abraham, & sealed with a shamefull & painfull Ordinance of cutting off the fore-skin, Wch differenced them from all the World beside: So also were they bound to such and such solemnities of figu∣rative worships. Amongst many others I shall end this passage con∣cerning the people with a famous observation out of Numb. 9. 1 3. viz. All that whole Nation was bound to celebrate and keepe the Feast of the Passeover in his season, or else they were to be Put to death. But doth God require a whole Nation, Country or Kingdome now thus to celebrate the spirituall Passeover, the Supper and Feast of the Lambe Christ Iesus, at such a time once a yeare, and that whosoever shall not so doe shall bee put to death? What horrible prophanations,Israel Gods only Church might well re∣new that Na∣tionall Cove∣nant and cere∣moniall wor∣ship which o∣ther Nations cannot imi∣tate. what grosse hypocrisies, yea what wonderfull desolati∣ons (sooner or later) must needs follow upon such a course? Tis true, the people of Israel, brought into covenant with God in Abraham, and so successively borne in Covenant with God, might (in that state of a Nationall Church) solemnly covenant and sweare that whosoever would not seeke Iehovah the God of Israel, should be put to death, 2 Chron. 15. whether small or great, whether man or woman. But may whole Nations or Kingdomes now (according to any one title exprest by Christ Iesus to that purpose) follow that pat∣terne of Israel and put to death all, both men and women, great and small, that according to the rules of the Gospel are not borne a∣gaine, penitent, humble, heavenly, patient? &c. What a world of hypocrisie from hence is practised by thousands, that for feare will stoope to give that God their bodies in a forme, whom yet in truth their hearts affect not? Yea also what a world of prophanation of the holy Name andThe hypocri∣sies, prophana∣tions, and slaughters which such imitation now in the Gospell produce. holy Ordinances of the Lord in prostituting the holy things of God (like the Vessels of the Sanctuary, Dan. 5.) to prophane, impenitent and unregenerate persons? Lastly, what slaughters both of men and women must this neces∣sarily bring into the world, by the Insurrections and Civill Warres about Religion and Conscience? Yea what slaughters of the in∣nocent and faithfull witnesses of Christ Jesus, who choose to bee
slaine all the day long for Christ his sake, and to fight for their Lord and Master Christ, onely with spirituall and Christian weapons? CHAP. CXIV. Peace. IT seemes (deare Truth) a mighty Gulfe betweene that people and Nation, and the Nations of the world then ex∣tant and ever since. Truth. As sure as the blessed substance to all those shadowes, Christ Iesus is come, so unmatchable and never to bee paralleld by any Nationall State was that Israel in the Figure or Shadow And yet the Israel of God now, the Regenerate or Newborne, the circumcised in Heart by Repentance and Mortification, who wil∣lingly submit unto the Lord Iesus as their onely King and Head, may fitly parallell and answer that Israel in the type, without such dan∣ger of hypocrisie, of such horrible prophanations, and of firing the Ci∣vill State in such bloody combustions, as all Ages have brought forth upon this compelling a whole Nation or Kingdome to be the anti∣type of Israel. Peace. Were this Light entertained, some hopes would shine forth for my returne and restauration.The difference of the Kings and Gover∣nours of Israel from al Kings & Governors of the world. First, they were all mem∣bers of the Church. Truth. I have yet to adde a third consideration concerning the Kings and Governours of that Land and people. They were to be (unlesse in their captivities) of their Brethren, members of the true Church of God, as appeares in the History of Moses, the Elders of Israel, and the Iudges and Kings of Israel after∣ward. But first, who can deny but that there may be now many law∣full Governours, Magistrates and Kings in the Nations of the World, where is no true Church of Iesus Christ?Excellent Ta∣lents vouchsa∣fed by God to unregenerate persons. Secondly, we know the many excellent gifts wherewith it hath pleased God to furnish many, inabling them for publike service to their Countries both in Peace and War (as all Ages and Experience testifies) on whose soules hee hath not yet pleased to shine in the face of Iesus Christ: which Gifts and Talents must all lye buried in the Earth, unlesse such persons may lawfully be called and chosen to,A doctrine contrary to all true Piety and Humanity it selfe. and improved in publike service, notwithstanding their different or contrary Conscience and Worship. Thirdly, if none but true Christians, members of Christ Iesus, might be Civill Magistrates, and publikely intrusted with civill affaires,
then none but members of Churches, Christians should be Husbands of Wives, Fathers of Children, Masters of Servants: But against this doctrine the whole creation, the whole World may justly rise up in armes, as not onely contrary to true Piety, but common Humanity it selfe. For if a Commonweale bee lawfull amongst men that have not heard of God nor Christ, certainly their Officers, Ministers, and Governours must be lawfull also. Fourthly, it is notoriously knowne to be the dangerous doctrine profest by some Papists,The Papists doctrine of deposing Ma∣gistrates con∣fessed in effect to be true by the Pce∣stants. that Princes degenerating from their Reli∣gion, and turning Heretickes, are to be deposed, and their Subjects actually discharged from their obedience. Which doctrine all such must necessarily hold (however most loath to owne it) that hold the Magistrate Guardian of both Tables, and consequently such an one as is inabled to judge, yea and to demonstrate to all men the worship of God: yea and being thus Governor and Head of the Church he must necessarily be a part of it himselfe: which when by Heresie he falls from (though it may be by Truth, miscalled Heresie) he falls from his calling of Magistracy, and is utterly disabled from his (pre∣tended) guardianship and government of the Church. Lastly,No civill Ma∣gistrate Chri∣stian in Christs time. we may remember the practice of the Lord Iesus and his followers, commanding and practising obedience to the Higher Powers, though we finde not one Civill Magistate a Christian in all the first Churches. But contrarily the civill Magistrate at that time was the bloody Beast, made up (as Daniel seemes to imply concerning the Romane State, Dan. 7. 7.) of the Lion, the Beare, and the Leopard, Rev. 13. 2. CHAP. CXV. Peace. BY these waights wee may try the waight of that com∣monly received and not questioned opinion, viz.Five demon∣strative argu∣ments proving the unsound∣nesse of that Maxime: The Church and Common∣wealth are like Hypocra∣tes twins. That the civill state and the spirituall, the Church and Commonweale, they are like Hippocrates twinnes, they are borne together, grow up together, laugh together, weepe together, sicken and die together. Truth. A witty, yet a most dangerous Fiction of the Father of ies, who hardned in Rebellion against God, perswades Gods people to drinke downe such deadly poison, though he knowes the truth of these five particulars, which I shall reminde you of. First, many flourishing StatesMany flou∣rishing States without a true Church. in the World have beene and are at this day, which heare not of Iesus Christ, and therefore have not
the presence and concurrence of a Church of Christ with them. Secondly,Many of Gods people  from a true Church state. there have beene many thousands of Gods people, who in their personall estate and life of grace were awake to God, but in respect of Church estate they knew no other then a Church of dead stones, the Parish Church; or though some light be of late come in through some cranny, yet they seeke not after, or least of all are joyned to any true Church of God, consisting of living and belee∣ving stones. So that by these New English Ministers principles, not onely is the doore of calling to Magistracy shut against naturall and unrege∣nerate men (though excellently itted for civill offices) but also a∣gainst the best and ablest servants of God,Yet it for ci∣vill services. except they be entred into Church estate; so that thousands of Gods owne people (excellent∣ly qualified) not knowing, or not entring into such a Church estate, shall not be accounted fit for civill services. Thirdly, admit that a civill Magistrate be neither a member of a true Church of Christ (if any bee in his dominions) nor in his per∣son feare God, yet may he (possibly) give free permission without molestation, yea and sometimes incouragement and assistance to the service and Church of God.Gods people permitted and favoured by Idolaters. Thus wee finde Abraham permitted to build and set up an Altar to his God wheresoever hee came amongst the idolatrous Nations in the Land of Canaan. Thus Cyrus proclaims liberty to all the people of God in his Dominions, freely to goe up and build the Temple of God at Ierusalem, and Artaxerxes after him confirmed it. Thus the Romane Emperours and Governours under him permitted the Church of God the Iewes in the Lord Christs time, their Temple and Worship, although in Civill things they were subject to the Ro∣manes. Fourthly,Christs church gathered and governed with out the helpe of an arme of flesh. the Scriptures of Truth and the Records of Time con∣curre in this, that the first Churches of Christ Iesus, the lights, pat∣ternes and presidents to all succeeding Ages, were gathered and go∣verned without the aid, assistance or countenance of any Civill Authoritie, from which they suffered great persecutions for the name of the Lord Iesus professed amongst them. The Nations, Rulers, and Kings of the Earth tumultuously rage against the Lord and his Anointed, Psal. 2. 1. 2. Yet vers. 6. it hath pleased the Father to set the Lord Iesus King upon his holy Hill of Zion.
Christ Iesus would not be pleased to make use of the Civill Ma∣gistrate to assist him in his Spirituall Kingdome: nor would he yet be daunted or discouraged in his Servants by all their threats and terreurs:Christs true pouse  and faithfull to Christ Jsus in the  or  from the World. for Love is strong as death, and the coales thereof give a most vehement flame, and are not quenched by all the waters and flouds of mightiest opposition, Cant. 8. Christ Church is like a chaste and loving wife, in whose heart is fixed her Husbands love, who hath found the tendernesse of his love towards her, and hath been made fruitfull by him, and therefore seekes she not the smiles, nor feares the frownes of all the Emperours in the World to bring her Christ unto her, or keep him from her. Lastly,The 10 horns, Revel. 13. & 17. we finde in the tyrannicall usurpations of the Romish An∣tichrist, the 10 hornes (which some of good note conceive to be the 10 Kingdomes, into which the Romane Empire was quartred and divided) are expresly said Revel. 17. 13. to have one minde to give their power and strength unto the Beast, yea (ver. 17.) their Kingdome unto the Beast, untill the Words of God shall be fulfilled: whence it followes, that all those Nations that are guilded over with the name of Christ, have under that mask or vizrd (as some Executioners and Tormentors in the Inquisition use to torment) per∣secuted the Lord Iesus Christ, either with a more open, grosse and bloody, or with a more subtle, secret and gentle vio∣lence. Let us cast our eyes about,The great mysterie of Persecution unfolded. turne over the Records, and examine the experience of past and present Generations, and see if all parti∣cular observations amount not to this summe, viz. that the great whore hath committed fornication with the Kings of the Earth, and made drunke thereof Nations with the cup of the wine of her for∣nications: In which drunkennes and whoredome (as whores use to pra∣ctice) she hath robbed the Kings and Nations of their power and strength,Christian Na∣boths slaugh∣tered. and (Iesabel like) having procured the Kings names and seales, she drinks drunk, Revel. 17. with the blood of Naboth, who (because he dares not part with his rightfull inheritance in the land of Canaan, the blessed land of promise and salvation in Christ) as a Traitour to the civill State, and Blasphemer against God, she (under the colour of a day of humiliation in Prayer and Fasting) stones to death.
CHAP. CXVI. Peace. DEare Truth, how art thou hidden from the eyes of men, in these mysteries? how should men weep abundantly with Iohn, that the Lambe may please to open these blessed seale unto them? Truth. O that Men more prized their makers feare  then should they be more acquainted with their Makers councells, for his Secret is with them that feare him, Psal. 25. I passe on to a second Difference.2. Difference. The Kings of Israel and Iudah were all solemnly annointed with oyle,The mysterie of the anoin∣ting the Kings of Israel and Judah. Psal. 39. 20. I have found David my servant, with my holy have I annointed him. Whence the Kings of Israel and Iudah were honoured with that mysticall and glorious Title of the Anointed, Christ of the Lord, Lam. 4. 20. the Breath of our Nostrils, the Anointe of Iehovah was taken in their pits, &c. Which anoynting and title, however the Man of Sinne, together with the Crowne and Diademe of Spirituall Israel, the Church of God, he hath given to some of the Kings of the Earth, that so he may in lieu thereof dispose of their Civill Crownes the easier: yet shall we finde it an incommunicable priviledge and prerogative o of the Saints and people of God. For as the Lord Iesus himselfe in the Antitype was not annointed with materiall but spirituall oyle, Psal. 45. with the oyle of Glad∣nes, and Luke 4. 14. from Isa. 61. 1. with the spirit of God. The spi∣rit of the Lord is upon me, the Lord hath annointed me to preach good tidings,The Name Christian or Anointed. &c. So also all his members are annointed with the holy spirit of God, 2 Cor. 1. 21. & 1 John 2. Hence is it that Christians rejoyce in that name, as carrying the very expresse title of the Anointed of the Lord; which most super∣stitiously and sacrilegiously hath been applied only unto Kings. Peace. O deare Truth, how doth the great Searcher of all Hearts finde out the thefts of the Antichristian World?A Sacrilegious Monopolie of the Name Christian. how are men caried in the darke they know not whither? How is that heavenly charge, Touch not mine Anointed, &c. (Psal. 105.) common to all Chri∣stians (or anointed with) Christ their Head, by way of Monopoly or priviledge appropriated to Kings and Princes? Truth. It will not be here unseasonable to call to minde that ad∣mirable
Prophecie, Ezek. 21. 26, 27. Thus saith Iehovah God, Re∣move the Diadem, take away the Crowne, this shall not be the same, exalt him that is low, and abase him that is high:The Crown of Christs Kingly power. I will overturne, overturne, overturne, untill he come whose right it is, and I will give it him. The matter is a Crown and Diadem to be taken from an Vsurpers head, and set upon the head of the right Owner. Peace. Doubtlesse this mystically intends the spirituall Crowne of the Lord Jesus, for these many hundreth yeares set upon the heads of the Cmpetitours and Corrivals of the Lord Iesus, upon whose glorious head in his Messengers and Churches, the Crown shall be established; The anointing, the title, and the crown and power must returne to the Lord Iesus in his Saints, unto whom alone belongs his power and authoritie in Ecclesiasticall or Spirituall cases. CHAP. CXVII. Truth. I Therefore proceed to a third difference between those Kings and Governours of Israel and Iudah,3. The Kings of Israel and Judah invested with a Spiritu∣all power. and all other Kings and Rulers of the Earth. Looke upon the Administrations of the Kings of Israel and Iudah, and well weigh the Power and Au∣thoritie which those Kings of Israel and Iudah exercised in Ecclesi∣asticall and spirituall causes, and upon a due search we shall not find the same Scepter of Spirituall power in the hand of Civill Authoritie, which was setled in the hands of the Kings of Israel and Iudah. David appointed the Orders of the Priests & Singers, he brought the Arke to Ierusalem, he prepared for the building of the Temple, the patterne whereof he delivered to Salomon: yet David herein could not be a type of the Kings and Rulers of the Earth, but of the King of Heaven, Christ Iesus: for, First, David, as he was a King, so was he also a Prophet, Acts 2. 30. and therefore a type (as Moses also was, of that great Prophet the Son of God. And they that plead for Davids Kingly power, must also by the same rule plead for his Propheticall, by which he swayed the Sceper of Israel in Church affaires. Secondly,David imme∣ately inspired by the Spirit of God, in his ordering of Church ma∣ters. it is expresly said, 1 Cron. 28. 11. 12. 13. verses, that the patterne which David gave to Salomon (concerning the matter of the Temple and Worship of God) he had it by the Spirit, which was no other but a figure of the immediate inspiration of the spirit of God, unto the Lord Iesus the true Spirituall King of Israel, John. 1.
49. Rabbi, thou art the Son of God; Rabbi, thou art the King of Israel. Againe, What Civill Magistrate may now act as Salomon (a type of Christ) doth act, 1 King. 2. 26. 27.?Salomons de∣posing Abia∣thar ( Kings 2. 26. 27) dis∣cussed. Salomon thrust out Abiathar from being Priest unto Iehovah. Peace. Some object that Abiathar was a man of death, ver. 26. worthy to die, as having followed Adonijah; and therefore Salo∣mon executed no more then Civill justice upon him. Truth. Salomon remits the Civill punishment,Salomon his putting Abia∣thar from the Priesthood, examined. and inflicts upon him a spirituall. but by what right, but as he was King of the Church, a figure of Christ? Abiathar his Life is spared with respect to his former good ser∣vice in following after David; but yet he is turned out from the Priesthood. But now put the case: suppose that any of the Officers of the New-England Churches should prove false to the State,A case put up∣on occasion of Abiathars case. and be dis∣covered joyning with a French Monsieur, or Spanish Don, (thirsting after conquest and dominion) to further their invasions of that Coun∣trey; yet for some former faithfull service to the State, he should not be adjudged to Civill punishment: I aske now, might their Gover∣nours or their Generall Court (their Parliament) depose such a man, a Pastour, Teacher, or Elder, from his holy Calling or office in Gods House? Or suppose in a partiall and corrupt State,Another ase. a Member or Officer of a Church should escape with his life upon the commission of mar∣ther, ought not a Church of Christ upon repentance to receive him? I suppose it will not be said that he ought to execute himselfe; or that the Church may use a Civill sword against him. In these cases may such persons (spar'd in civill punishments for some reason of, or by partialitie of State) be punished spiritually by the Civill Ma∣gistrate, as Abiathar was? Let the very Enemies of Zion be Judges. Secondly, If Salomon in thrusting out of Abiathar was a pattern and president unto all Civill Magistrates, why not also in putting Zak in his roome, ver. 35. But against this the Pope, the Bishops, the Presbyterians, and the Independents will all cry out against such a practice in their severall respective claimes and challenges for their Ministries. We find the Libertie of the subjects of Christ in the choice of an
Apostle,The liberties of Christs Churches in the choice of their officers. A civill influ∣ence dange∣rous to the Saints liber∣ties. Act. 1. of a Deacon, Act. 6. of Elders, Act. 14. and guided by the assistance either of the Apostles or Evangelists, 1 Tim. 1. Tit. 1. without the least influence of any civill Magistrate, which shewes the beauty of their liberty. The Parliaments of England have by right free choice of their Speaker, yet some Princes have thus farre beene gratified as to no∣minate, yea and implicitely to commend a Speaker to them. Wise men have seene the evill consequences of those influences (though but in civill things) how much farre greater and stronger are those snares, when the golden Keyes of the Sonne of God are delivered into the hands of civill Authority? Peace. You know the noise raised concerning those famous acts of Asa, Hezekiah, Iehosaphat, Iosiah. What thinke you of the Fast proclaimed by Iehosaphat? 2 Chron. 20. 3. Truth. I finde it to be the duty of Kings and all in authority, to incourage Christs Messengers of Truth proclaiming Repentance, &c. But under the Gospel to enforce all naturall and unregenerate peo∣ple to acts of worship, what president hath Christ Iesus given us? First,Jehosaphats ast examined. tis true Iehosaphat proclaimed a Fast, &c. but was he not in matters spirituall a type of Christ, the true King of Israel? Secondly, Iehosaphat calls the members of the true Church to Church service and worship of God. But consider,If civill po∣wers may in∣jye the time o the Chur∣ches wrship, the may also forbid her times. if civill Powers now may judge of and determine the actions of worship proper to the Saints: I they may appoint the time of the Churches worship, Fasting and Prayer, &c. why may they not as wel forbid those times which a Church of Christ shall make choice of, seeing it is a branch of the same Root to forbid what li∣kth not, as well as to injoyne what pleaseth? And if in those most solemne duties and exercises, why not also in other ordinary meetings and worships? And if so, where is the power of the Lord Jesus bequeathed to his Ministers and Churches, of which the power of those Kings was but a shadow? CHAP. CXVIII. Peace. THe liberty of the Subject sounds most sweet, London and Oxford both professe to fight for it: How much infinitly more sweet is that true soule liberty according to Christ Iesus? I know you would not take from Caesar ought, although it were
to give to God:God will not wrong Caesar, and Caesar should not wrong God. And what is Gods and his peoples I wish that Caesar may not take. Yet for the satisfaction of some, be pleased to glance upon Iosiah his famous Acts in the Church of God concerning the worship of God, the Priests, Levites, and their Services, compelling the people to keepe the Passeover, making himselfe a covenant before the Lord, and compelling all that were found in Ierusalem and Ben∣jamin to stand to it. Truth. To these famous practices of Iosiah I shall parallell the practices of Englands Kings: and first de jure, a word or two of their right: then de facto, discusse what hath been done. First,The famous acts of  examined. de jure: Iosiah was a precious branch of that Royall Root King David, who was immediately designed by God: and when the golden linkes of the Royall chaine broke in the usurpations of the Romane Conquerour, it pleased the most wise God to send a Sonne of David, a Sonne of God, to beginne againe that Royall Line, to sit upon the Throne of his Father David, Luc. 1. 32. Acts 2. 30. It is not so with the Gentile Princes,Mgistracy in generall from God, the par∣ticular formes from the peo∣ple. Rulers and Magistrates, (whether Monarchicall, Aristrocraticall, or Democraticall) who (though government in generall be from God, yet) receive their cal∣lings, power and authority, (both Kings and Parliaments) mediately from the people. Secondly, Iosiah and those Kings were Kings and Governours o∣ver the then true and onely Church of God Nationall, brought into the Covenant of God in Abraham, and so downward: and they might well be forced to stand to that Covenant into which with such im∣mediate signes and miracles they had beene brought. But what Commission from Christ Iesus had Henry the eight.Israel confir∣med in a Na∣tionall Cove∣nant by reve∣lations, signes, and miracles, but so not England. Ed∣ward the 6. or any (Iosiah like) to force the many hundred thou∣sands of English men and women, without such immediate signes and miracles that Israel had to enter into an holy and spirituall Co∣venant with the invisible God, the Father of Spirits, or upon paine of death (as in Iosias time) to stand to that which they never made, nor before Evangelicall Repentance are possibly capable of. Now secondly de facto, let it be well remembred concerning the Kings of England professing Reformation.Henry 8. the first head and governour of the Church of England. The foundation of all was laid in Henry the 8. The Pope chalengeth to be the Vicar of Christ Iesus here upon earth, to have power of reforming the Church, re∣dressing abuses, &c. Henry 8. falls out with the Pope, and chalen∣geth
that very power to himself of which he had despoiled the Pope, as appeares by that Act of Parliament establishing Henry 8 the su∣preme Head and Governour in all cases Ecclesiasticall, &c. It plea∣sed the most High God to plague the Pope by Henry the 8. his means: but neither Pope nor King can ever prove such power from Christ derived to either of them. Secondly,The wonder∣full formings and reform∣ings of Reli∣gion by Eng∣lands Kings. (as before intimated) let us view the Workes and Acts of Englands imitation of Iosiahs practice. Henry the 7. leaves England under the slavish bondage of the Popes yoake. Henry the 8. reformes all England to a new fashion, halfe Papist, halfe Prote∣stant. King Edward the 6. turnes about the Wheele of the State, and workes the whole Land to absolute Protestanisme. Queene Mary succeeding to the Helme, steeres a direct contrary course, breakes in peeces all that Edward wrought, and brings forth an old edition of Englands Reformation all Popish.Kings and States often plant, and of∣ten pluck up Religions. Mary not living out halfe her dayes (as the Prophet speakes of bloudy persons) Elizabeth (like Ioseph) advanced from the Prison to the Palace, and from the irons to the Crowne, she pluckes up all her sister Maries plants, and sounds a Trumpet all Protestant. What sober man stands not amazed at these Revolutions? and yet like Mother like Daughter: and how zealous are we their off-spring for another impression and better edition of a Nationall Canaan (in imitation of Iudah and Iosiah) which if attained, who knowes how soone succeeding Kings or Parliaments will quite pull downe and abrogate? Thirdly,A Nationall Church ever subject to turne and re∣turne, &c. in all these formings and reformings, a Nationall Church of naturall unregenerate men was (like wax) the subject matter of all these formes and changes, whether Popish or Protestant: concer∣ning which Nationall State the time is yet to come when ever the Lord Jesus hath given a word of institution and appointment. CHAP. CXIX. Peace. YOu bring to minde (deare Truth) a plea of some wiser Papists for the Popes supremacy,A woman Pa∣pissa or head of the Church. viz. that it was no such ex∣orbitant or unheard of power and jurisdiction which the Pope chalen∣ged, but the very same which a Woman, Queene Elizabeth her selfe chalenged, stiling her Papissa, or she Pope: withall pleading that in point of Reason it was far more suitable that the Lord Jesus would
delegate his power rather to a Clergie man then a Lay man, as Henry the 8. or a woman, as his daughter Elizabeth. Truth. I beleeve that neither one nor t'other hit the white,The Papists neerer to the Truth concer∣ning the go∣vernment of the Church then most Pro∣testants. yet I beleeve the Papists arrowes fall the nearest to it in this particu∣lar, viz. That the government of the Church of Christ should rather belong to such as professe a Ministry or Office Spirituall, then to such as are meerly Temporall and Civill. So that in conclusion, the whole controversi concerning the go∣vernment of Christ Kingdome or Church, will be found to lye be∣tween the true and false Ministry, both chalenging the true com∣mission, power and keyes from Christ. Peace. This all glorious diadem of the Kingly power of the Lord Iesus hath beene the eye-sore of the World,The Kingly power of the Lord Jesus troubles all the Kings and Rulers of the Wold. and that which the Kings and Rulers of the World have alwayes lift up their hands unto. The first report of a new King of the Iewes puts Herod and all Ierusalem into frights; and the power of this most glorious King of Kings over the Soules and Consciences of men, or over their lives and worships, is still the white that all the Princes of this World shoot at, and are enraged at the tidings of the true Heire the Lord Iesus in his servants. Truth. You well minde (deare Peace) a twofold exaltation of the Lord Iesus,A twofold ex∣altation of Christ. one in the Soules and Spirits of men, and so he is exalted by all that truly love him, though yet remaining in Babels captivity, and before they hearken to the voyce of the Lord, Come forth of Babel my people. A second exaltation of Christ Iesus upon the Throne of David his Father in his Church and Congregation, which is his Spirituall King∣dome here below. I confesse there is a tumultuous rage at his entrance into his Throne in the Soule and Consciences of any of his chosen;The world ometh at both. but against his second exaltation in his true Kingly power and government, either Monarchicall in himself, or Ministeriall in the hands of his Ministers and Churches, are mustred up and shall be in the battels of Christ yet to be fought, all the powers of the gates of Earth and Hell. But I shall mention one diffrence more between the Kings of Israel and Iudh,A fourth dif¦ference. Kings of Isra¦el ypes. and all other Kings and Rulers of the Gentiles. Those Kings as Kings of Israel were all investd with a typicall and figurative respect, with which now no Civill power in the World can be invested.
They wore a double Crowne,They wore a double Crown First, Civill: Secondly, Spirituall, in which respect they typed out the Spirituall King of Israel, Christ Iesus. When I say they were types, I make them not in all respect so to be, but as Kings and Governours over the Church and Kingdome of God, therein types. Hence all those Saviours and Deliverers, which it pleased God to stirre up extraordinarily to his people,The Saviours of the Jewes, igures of the Saviour of the World. Gideon, Baruc, Sampson, &c. in that respect of their being Saviours, Iudges, and Deliverers of Gods people, so were they types of Iesus Christ, either Monarchi∣cally ruling by himself immediately, or Ministerially by such whom he pleaseth to send to vindicate the liberties and inheritances of his people. CHAP. CXX. Peace. IT must needs be confest that since the Kings of Israel were ceremonially anointed with Oile: and Secondly, in that they sat upon the Throne of David (which is expressely applied to Christ Iesus, Luc. 1. 32. Acts 2. 30. Iohn 1. 49.) their Crownes were figurative and ceremoniall: but some here question whether or no they were not types of civill Powers and Rulers now, when Kings and Queens shall be nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers, &c. Truth. For answer unto such,The Monar∣chicall and Ministeriall power of Christ. let them first remember that the dispute lyes not concerning the Monarchicall power of the Lord Ie∣sus, the power of making Lawes, and making Ordinances to his Saints and Subjects: But concerning a deputed and Ministeriall power, and this distinction the very Pope himself acknowledgeth. There are three great Competitours for this deputed or Ministe∣riall power of the Lord Iesus.3 Great Com∣petitours for the Ministeri∣all power of Christ. First, the Arch-vicar or Sathan, the pretended Vicar of Christ on Earth, who sits as God over the Temple of God, exalting himselfe not only above all that is called God,The Popes great preten∣ders fo the Mi∣nisteriall po∣wer of Christ. but over the soules and consci∣ences of all his vassalls, yea over the Spirit of Christ, over the holy Scriptures, yea and God himselfe, Dan. 8. & 11 chap. & Rev. 15. to∣gether with 2 Thes. 2. This pretender although he professeth to claime but the Ministe∣riall power of Christ to declare his Ordinances, to preach, baptise,
ordaine Ministers,They also upon the point cha∣lenge the Mo∣narchicall also and yet doth he upon the point challenge the Monarchicall or absolute power also, being full of selfe exalting and blaspheming, Dan. 7. 25. & 11. 36. Rev. 13. 6. speaking blas∣phemies against the God of Heaven, thinking to change times and Lawes: but he is the sonne of perdition arising out of the bot∣tomlesse pit, and comes to destruction, Revel. 17. for so hath the Lord Jesus decreed to consume him by the breath of his mouth, 2 Thes. 2. The second great Competitour to this Crowne of the Lord Je∣sus is the Civill Magistrate,The second great preten∣der the Civill Magistrate. whether Emperours, Kings, or other inferiour Officers of State who are made to beleeve by the false Prophets of the World that they are the Antitypes of the Kings of Israel and Judah, and weare the Crowne of Christ. Under the wing of the Civill Magistrate doe three great factions shelter themselves,3 Great facti∣ons chalen∣ging an Arme of Flesh. and mutually oppose each other, striving as for life, who shall sit downe under the shadow of that Arme of Flesh. First, the Prelacie,1. The Pre∣aci. who (though some extravagants of late have inclined to wave the King, and to creepe under the wings of the Pope, yet) so far depends upon the King, that it is justly said they are the Kings Bishops. Secondly, the Presbyterie,2. The Pres∣byterie. who (though in truth they ascribe not so much to the civill Magistrate as some too grossely do, yet they) give so much to the civill Magistrate as to make him absolutely the Head of the Church:The Pope and Presbytei make use of the Civill Ma∣gistrate but as of an Executi∣oer. For, if they make him the Reformer of the Church, the Suppressour of Schismaticks and Herticks, the Pro∣tectour and defendour of the Church, &c. what is this in true plain English but to make him the Judge of the true and false Church, Judge of what is truth, and what errour; who is Schisma∣ticall, who Hereticall, unlesse they make him only an Executioner, as the Pope doth in his punishing of Hereticks? I doubt not but the Aristocraticall government of Presbyterians may well subsist in a Monarchie (not only regulated but also tyran∣nicall) yet doth it more naturally delight in the element of an Ari∣stocraticall government of State, and so may properly be said to be (as the Prelates, the Kings so these) the States Bishops. The third,3. Indepen∣dents. though not so great, yet growing faction is that (so called) Independent: I prejudice not the personall worth of any of the three sorts: This latter (as I beleeve this Discourse hath ma∣nifested)
jumpes with the Prelates,The Indepen∣dents: who come neerest to the Bishops and (though not more fully, yet) more explicitely then the Presbyterians cast down the Crowne of the Lord Iesus at the feet of the Civill Magistrate. And although they pretend to receive their Ministrie from the choice of 2 or 3 private persons in Church-covenant, yet would they faine perswade the Mother Old England to imitate her Daughter New England's practice, viz. to keep out the Presbyterians, and only to embrace themselves, both as the States and the Peoples Bishops. The third competition for this Crown and power of the Lord Iesus is of those that seperate both from one and t'other,The third competition, of those that seperate. yet divided also amongst themselves into many severall professions. Of these, they that goe furthest, professe they must yet come neerer to the wayes of the Son of God: And doubtlesse, so farre as they have gone, they bid the most, and make the fairest plea for the puritie and power of Christ Iesus, let the rest of the Inhabitants of the World be Judges. Let all the former well be viewed in their externall State, pomp, riches, conformitie to the World, &c. And on the other side, let the latter be considered,Their neerer conformitie to Christ. in their more through departure from sinne and sinfull Worship, their condescending (generally) to the lowest and meanest contentments of this life, their exposing of themselves for Christ to greater sufferings,The Churches of the Sepera∣tion ought in Humanitie and Subjects Libertie not to be oppres∣sed, but (at least) permit∣ted. and their desiring no Civill sword nor Arme of Flesh, but the two-edged sword of Gods Spirit to try out the matter by: and then let the Inhabitants of the World judge, which come neerest to the doctrine, holines, povertie, patience and practice of the Lord Jesus Christ; and whether or no these later deserve not so much of Humanitie, and the Subjects Libertie, as (not offending the Civill State) in the freedome of their Soules, to enjoy the common aire to breath in. CHAP. CXX. Peace. DEare Truth, you have shewne me a little draught of Zions sorrowes, her children tearing out their mothers bowels: O when will Hee that stablisheth, comforteth, and builds up Zion, looke downe from Heaven., and have mercy on her? &c. Truth. The Vision yet doth tarry (saith Habacuk) but will most
surely come: and therefore the patient and believing must wait for it. But to your last Proposition, Reasons proving that the Kings of Isra∣el and Judah cannot have any other but a Spirituall Antitype. whether the Kings of Israel and Judah were not types of Civill Magistrates? now I suppose by what hath been already spoken, these things will be evident. First, that those former types of the Land, of the People, of their Worships, were types and figures of a spirituall Land, spirituall People, and spirituall Worship under Christ. Therefore consequently, their Saviours Redeemers, Deliverers, Iudges, Kings, must also have their spirituall Antitypes,Civill Types and figures must needs be answered by Spirituall An∣titypes. and so consequently not civill but spirituall Go∣vernours and Rulers; lest the very essentiall nature of Types, Figures and Shadowes be overthrowe. Secondly, although the Magistrate by a Civill sword might well compell that Nationall Church to the externall exercise of their Naturall Worship:Civill com∣pulsion was proper in the Nationall Church of the Jewes, but most impro∣per in the Christian, which is not Nationall. yet it is not possible (according to the rule of the New Testament) to compell whole Nations to true Repen∣tance and Regeneration, without which (so farre as may be discerned true) the Worship and holy Name of God is prophaned and blasphemed. An Arme of Flesh, and Sword of Steele cannot reach to cut the darknesse of the Mind, the hardnesse and unbeleefe of the Heart, and kindely operate upon the Soules affections to forsake a long continued Fathers worship, and to imbrace a new, though the best and truest. This worke performes alone that sword out of the mouth of Christ, with two edges, Rev. 1. & 3. Thirdly, we have not one tittle in the New Testament of Christ Iesus concerning such a parallel, neither from Himselfe, nor from his Ministers,Neither Christ Jesus nor his Messengers have made the Civill Magi∣strate Israels Antitype, but the contrary. with whom he conversed fourty dayes after his Resurrection, instructing them in the matters of his Kingdome, Acts 1. Neither find we any such commission or direction given to the Ci∣vill Magistrate to this purpose, nor to the Saints for their submission in matters spirituall, but the contrary, Acts 4. & 5. 1 Cor. 7. 23. Coloss. 2. 18. Fourthly,Civill Magi∣stracie essenti∣ally civill, and the same in all parts of the World. we have formerly viewed the very nature and essence of a Civill Magistrate, and find it the same in all parts of the World, where ever people live upon the face of the Earth, agreeing to∣gether in Townes, Cities, Provinces, Kingdomes. I say the same es∣sentially Civill, both from, 1. the rise and fountaine whence it
springs, to wit, the pples choice and free consent. 2. The Object of it, viz. the common-weale or safety of such a people in their bodies and goods, as the Authours of this Modell have themselves con∣fessed. This civill Nature of the Magistrate we have proved to receive no addition of power from the Magistrates being a Christian,Christianitie adds not to the nature of a Civill Com∣monweale, nor doth want of Christianitie diminish it. no more then it receives diminution from his not being a Christian: e∣ven as the Common-weale is a true Common-weale, although it have not heard of Christianitie; and Christianitie professed in it (as in Pergamus, Ephesus, &c.) makes it ne're no more a Commonweale, and Christianitie taken away, and the candlestick removed, makes it ne're the lesse a Commonweale. Fifthly,Rom. 13. evi∣dently prove the Civill work and wa∣ges of the Ci∣vill Magistrate the Spirit of God expresly relates the worke of the civill Magistrate under the Gospel, Rom. 13. expresly mentioning (as the Magistrates object) the duties of the second Table, concerning the bodies and goods of the subject. 2. The reward or wages which people owe for such a worke, to wit, (not the contribution of the Church for any spirituall work, but) tribute, toll, custome which are wages payable by all sorts of men, Natives and Forreigners, who enjoy the same benefit of publick peace and commerce in the Nation. Sixthly, Since the civill Magistrate, whether Kings or Parlia∣ments, States, and Governours, can receive no more in justice then what the People give, and are therefore but the eyes and hands and instruments of the people (simply considered,Most strange, yet most true consequences from the Ci∣vill Magistrates now being the Antitype of the Kings of Israel and Judah. without respect to this or that Religion) it must inevitably follow (as formerly I have tou∣ched) that if Magistrates have received their power from the people, then the greatest number of the people of every Land have received from Christ Iesus a power to establish, correct, reforme his Saints and servants, his wife and spowse, the Church: And she that by the ex∣presse word of the Lord (Psal. 149.) binds Kings in chaines, and Nobles in links of iron, must her selfe be subject to the changeable pleasures of the people of the World (which lies in wickednesse, 1 Iohn 5.) even in matters of Heavenly and spirituall Nature. Hence therefore in all controversie concerning the Church, Ministrie and worship, the last Appeale must come to the Bar of the People or Commonweal, where all may personally meet, as in some Commonweales of small number, or in greater by their Repre∣sentatives.
Hence then no person esteemed a beleever,If no Religion but that which the Common∣weal approves thē no Christ, no God, but at the pleasure of  world.  Ep. Jo 9. and added to the Church. No Officer chosen and ordained. No person cast forth and excommunicated, but as the Common∣weale and people please, and in conclusion, no Church of Christ in this Land or World, and consequently no visibly Christ the Head of it. Yea yet higher, consequently no God in the World worship∣ped according to the institutions of Christ Jesus, except the severall peoples of the Nations of the World shall give allowance. Peace. Deare Truth, Oh whither have our Forefathers and tea∣chers led us? higher then to God himselfe (by these doctrines dri∣ven out of the World) you cannot rise: and yet so high must the inevitable and undeniable consequences of these their doctrines reach, if men walke by their owne common Principles. Truth. I may therefore here seasonably adde a seventh, which is a necessary consequence of all the former Arguments,The true anti∣type of the ngs of Isra¦el and Judah. and an Ar∣gument it selfe: viz. we finde expresly a spirituall power of Christ Iesus in the hands of his Saints, Ministers and Churches, to bee the true Antitype of those former figures in all the Prophecies concer∣ning Christ his spirituall power, Isa. 9. Dan. 7. Mich. 4. &c. compa∣red with Luc. 1. 32. Act. 2. 30. 1 Cor. 5. Math. 18. Marc. 13. 34. &c. CHAP. CXXI. Peace. GLorious and conquering Truth, mee thinkes I see most evidently thy glorious conquests: how mighty are thy spirituall weapons (2 Cor. 10.) to breake downe those mighty and strong Holds and Castles, which men have fortified themselves withall against thee? O that even the thoughts of men may sub∣mit and bow downe to the captivity of Jesus Christ! Truth. Your kinde incouragement makes mee proceed more cheerfully to a fourth difference from the Lawes and Statutes of this Land,A fourth dif∣ference of Lawes and Statutes from all others. different from all the Lawes and Statutes of the World, and parallel'd onely by the Lawes and Ordinances of spirituall Israel. First then consider we the Law-maker,Moses a type of Christ. or rather the Law-pub∣lisher or Prophet, as Moses calls himselfe, Deut. 18. and Act. 3. he is
expresly called that Prophet who figured out Christ Iesus who was to come, like unto Moses, greater then Moses, as the son is greater then the servant. Such Law-givers or Law-publishers never had any State or People as Moses the type, or Christ Iesus, miraculously stirred up and sent as the mouth of God betweene God and his people. Secondly,The Lawes of Israel unparal∣lel'd, concerning the Lawes themselves: It is true, the se∣cond Table containes the Law of Nature, the Law Morall and Ci∣vill, yet such a Law was also given to this people as never to any people in the World: such was the Law of worship, Psal. 147. pecu∣liarly given to Iacob, and God did not deale so with other Nations: which Lawes for the matter of the worship in all those wonderfull significant Sacrifices, and for the manner by such a Priesthood, such a place of Tabernacle, and afterward of Temple, such times and solem∣nities of Festivals, were never to be parallel'd by any other Nation, but onely by the true Christian Israel established by Iesus Christ a∣mongst Iewes and Gentiles throughout the World. Thirdly, the Law of the tenne Words (Deut. 10.) the Epitome of all the rest,Gods owne finger penn'd Lawes for Israel. it pleased the most high God to frame and pen twice with his owne most holy, and dreadfull finger upon Mount Sinai, which he never did to any other Nation before or since, but onely to that spirituall Israel, the people and Church of God, in whose hearts of flesh he writes his Lawes, according to Ier 31. Heb 8. and 10. Peace. Such promulgation of such Lawes, by such a Prophet, must needs be matchlesse and unparallel'd. Truth. In the fift place consider we the punishments and rewards annexed to the breach or observation of these Lawes.Fift difference Temporall prosperity most proper to the tempo∣rall Nationall State of the Jewes. First, those which were of a temporall and present consideration of this life: Blessings and Curses of all sorts opened at large, Levit. 26. and Deut. 28. which cannot possibly be made good in any State, Countrey or Kingdome, but in a spirituall sense in the Church and Kingdome of Christ. The reason is this,The spirituall prosperity of Gods people now, the anti∣type. such a temporall prosperity of outward peace and plenty of all things, of increase of children, of cattell, of honour, of health, of successe, of victory, suits not temporally with the afflicted and persecuted estate of Gods people now: And therefore spirituall and soule blessednesse must be the Antitype, viz. In the midst of revi∣lings, and all manner of evill speeches for Christs sake, soule bles∣sednesse. In the midst of afflictions and persecutions, soule blessednesse,
Math. 5. and Luc. 6. And yet herein the Israel of God should enjoy their spirituall peace, Gal. 6. 16. Out of that blessed temporall estate to be cast or caried captive,What Israels excommuni∣cation was. was their excommunication or casting out of Gods sight, 2 King. 17. 23. Therefore was the blasphemer, the false Prophet, the idolater, to bee cast out or cut off from this holy Land: which punishment cannot be parallel'd by the punishment of any State or Kingdome in the world, but onely by the excommunicating or outcasting of person or Church from the fellowship of the Saints and Churches of Christ Iesus in the Gospel. And therefore (as before I have noted) the putting away of the false prophet,The corporall stoning in the Law, typed out spirituall so∣ning in the Gospell. by stoning him to death, Deut. 13. is fitly answered (and that in the very same words) in the Antitype, when by the ge∣nerall consent or stoning of the whole Assembly, and wicked person is put away from amongst them, that is, spiritually cut off out of the Land of the spiritually living, the people or Church of God, 1 Cor. 5. Galat. 5. Lastly,The rewards or punish∣ments of the Lawes of Is∣rael not to be parallel'd. the great and high reward or punishment of the keeping or breach of these Lawes to Israel, was such as cannot suit with any State or Kingdome in the World beside: the Reward of the Observa∣tion was Life, Eternall Life. The Breach of any one of these Law was death, Eternall death or damnation from the presence of the Lord. So Rom. 10. Iam. 2. Such a Covenant God made not before nor since with any State or People in the world. For, Christ is the end of the Law for righteousnesse to every one that beleeveth, Rom. 10. 4. And he that beleeveth in that Son of God, hath eternall life; hee that be∣leeveth not hath not life, but is condemned already, John 3. and 1 John 5. CHAP. CXXII. Peace. DEare Truth,The wars of Israel typicall. you have most lively set forth the unparallel'd state of that typicall Land and people of the Iewes in their peace and quiet government: Let mee now request you in the last place to glance at the difference of the wars of this people from the wars of other Nations, and of their having no Antitype but the Chur∣ches of Christ Iesus. First, all Nations round about Israel more or lesse, sometime or other, had indignation against this people, Aegyptians, Edomites,
Moabites,Israels Ene∣mis round about. Ammonites, Midians, Philistians, Assyrians and Babylo∣nians, &c. as appeares in the History of Moses, Samuel, Iudges and Kings, and in all the Prophets: You have an expresse Catalogue of them, Psal. 83. sometimes many hundred thousand Enemies in pitcht field against them: of Ethiopians ten hundred thousand at once in the dayes of Asa, 2 Chron. 14. and at other times as the sand upon the Sea shoare. Such Enemies the Lord Iesus foretold his Israel,The Enemies of mysticall Israel. The World shall hate you, Iohn 16. You shall be hated of all men for my Names sake, Matth. 24. All that will live godly in Christ Iesus must be per∣secuted or hunted, 1 Tim. 4. And not only by flesh and bloud, but al∣so by Principalities, Powers, Spirituall wickednesse in high places (Ephes. 6.) by the whole Pagan World under the Roman Emperours, and the whole Antichristian World under the Roman Popes, Rev 12. & 13. Chap. by the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 17. And Gog and Magog, like the sand upon the Sea shoare (Rev. 20.) Peace. Such Enemies, such Armies, no History, no experience proves ever to have come against one poore Nation as against Is∣rael in the type; and never was nor shall be knowne to come a∣gainst any State or Country now, but the Israel of God the Spiritu∣all Iewes, Christs true followers in all parts and quarters of the World. Beside all these without,Enemies a∣gainst Israel in her owne bowells. Israel is betraied within her owne bow∣ells, bloudy Sauls, Absaloms, Sheaes, Adonljahs, Ieroboams, Atha∣lahs raising insurrections, conspiracies, tumults, in the Antitype, and Parallell the Spirituall state of the Christian Church. Secondly, consider we the famous and wonderfull battells, vi∣ctories, captivities, deliverances, which it pleased the God of Israel to dispence to that people and Nation, and let us search if they can be paralleld by any State or people, but mystically and Spiritually the true Christian Israel of God, Gal. 6. How famous was the bondage and slavery of that people and Nation 430 yeares in the Land of Aegypt,The famous typically cap∣tivities of the Jews. and as famous, glorious and miraculous was their returne through the Red Sea (a figure of Baptisme, 1 Corinth. 10. and Aegypt a figure of an Aegypt now, Rev. 11. 8?) How famous was the 70 yeares captivity of the Iewes in Babel transported from that Land of Canaan, and at the full period retur∣ned againe to Ierusalem, a type of the captivity of Gods people
now Spiritually captivated in mysticall Babel, Rev. 18. 4? Time would faile me to speake of Ioshua's conquest of literall Canaan,Their won∣derfull victo∣ries. the slaughter of 31 Kings, of the miraculous taking of Ie∣richo and other Cities; Gideon his miraculous battell against the Midianites; Ionathan and his Armour bearer against the Philistims; David by his 5 smooth stones against Goliah; Asa, Iehosaphat, He∣zechia, their mighty and miraculous victories against so many hun∣dred thousand Enemies, and that sometimes without a blow given. What State, what Kingdome, what warres and combats, victo∣ries and deliverances can parallel this people, but the Spirituall and mysticall Israel of God in every Nation and Country of the World, typed out by that small typicall handfull, in that little spot of ground the land of Canaan? The Israel of God now,The mysticall battells of Gods Israel now. men and women, fight under the Great Lord Generall, the Lord Iesus Christ: Their Weapons, Armour, and Artillery, is like themselves Spirituall, set forth from top to toe, Ephes. 6. So mighty and so potent that they breake downe the strongest holds and Castles, yea in the very soules of men and carry into captivity the very thoughts of men, subjecting them to Christ Iesus: They are Spirituall conquerours, as in all the 7 Churches of Asia, He that overcommeth: He that overcommeth, Rev. 2. & 3. Their victories and conquests in this are contrary to those of this World, for when they are slaine and slaughtered, yet then they con∣quer: So overcame they the Divell in the Roman Emperours, Rev. 12. By the bloud of the Lambe: 2. By the word of their Testimony: 3. The cheerfull spilling of their owne bloud for Christ; for they loved not their lives unto the death: And in all this they are more then Conquerors through him that loved them, Rom. 8. This glorious Armie of white Troopers,The mysticall Army of white troopers R. 19. horses and harnesse (Christ Iesus and his true Israel) Rev. 19. gloriously conquer and overcome the Beast, the false Prophet and the Kings of the Earth up in Armes against them, Rev. 19. and lastly, raigning with Christ a thousand yeares they conquer the Divell himselfe and the num∣berlesse Armies (like the sand on the Sea shoare) of Gog and Ma∣gog, and yet not a tittle of mention of any sword, helmet, breastplate, shield or horse, but what is Spirituall and of a heavenly nature: All which Warres of Israel have been, may be, and shall be fulfilled mystically and Spiritually.
I could further insist on other particulars of Israels unparalled state, and might display those excellent passages which it pleaseth God to mention, Nhem 9. CHAP. CXXIII. Peace. YOu have (deare Truth) as in a glasse presented the face of Old and New Israel, and as in water, face answereth to face, so doth the face of typicall Israel to the face of the Anti∣type, between whom, and not between Canaan and the Civill Na∣tions and Countries of the World now, there is an admirable con∣sent and harmony: But I have heard some say, was not the civill state and Judicialls of that people presidentiall? Truth. I have in part,Whether the Civill state of Israel was pre∣sidentiall. and might further discover, that from the King upon his Throne, to the very Beasts, yea the excrements of their bodies (as we see in their going to War, Deut 23. 12) their civills, moralls, and naturalls were carried on in types: and however I ac∣knowledge that what was simply morall, civill, and naturall in Israels state, in their constitutions, Lawes, punishments, may be imitated and followed by the States, Countries, Cities and Kingdomes of the World: Yet who can question the lawfulnesse of other formes of Government, Lawes and punishments which differ, since civill consti∣tutions are mens Ordinances (or creation, 2. Pet. 2. 13.) unto which Gods people are commanded even for the Lords sake to submit themselves, which if they were unlawfull they ought not to do? Peace. Having thus far proceeded in examining whether God hath charged the Civill State with the establishing of the Spirituall and Religious, what conceive you of that next assertion, viz, It is well knowne that the remissenes of Princes in Christendome in matters of Religion and Worship, divolving the care thereof only to the Clergie, and so setting the Hoes upon the Chur∣ches head, hath been the cause of  invention, usurpa∣tion and corruption in the Worship and Temple of God. Truth. It is lamentably come to passe by Gods just permission,The true Christendome Sa∣thans policie, the peoples sinne, and the malice of the wicked against Christ, and the corruption of Princes and Magistrates, that so many inventions , and corruptions are  in the Worship and Temple of God throughout that part of the World which is called Christian, and may most properly be called the Popes Christendome,
in opposition to Christ Iesus his true Christian Common-weale, or Church the true Christendome: But that this hath arisen from Prin∣ces remissenesse in not keeping their watch, to establish the Purity of Religion, Doctrine and Worship, and to punish (according to Israels patterne) all false Ministers, by rooting them and their worships out of the World, that, I say, can never bee evinced; and the many thousands of glorious Soules under the Altar, (whose blood hath beene spilt by this position) and the many hundred thousand soules, driven out of their bodies by Civill Warres, and the many millions of soules forced to hypocrisie and ruine eternall, by inforced Vnifor∣mities in Worship, will to all Eternity proclaime the contrary. Indeed it shewes a most injurious idlenes and unfaithfulnes in such as professe to be Messengers of Christ Iesus,Great unfaith∣fulnesse in Mi∣nisters to cst the hiefest burden of jud¦ging and esta¦blshng true Christinity upon the Commonweal or worl it selfe. to cast the heaviest weight of their care upon the Kings and Rulers of the Earth, yea, upon the very Common-weales, Bodies of People, (that is, the World it selfe) who have fundamentally in themselves the Root of Power, to set up what Government and Governours they shall agree upon. Secondly, it shewes abundance of carnall diffidence and distrust of the glorious power and gracious presence of the Lord Iesus, who hath given his promise and Word, to bee with such his messengers to the end of the world, Matth. 28. That Dog that feares to meet a man in the path, runnes on with boldnes at his masters comming and presence at his backe. Thirdly,To governe & judge in civill affes load enough on the Civill Magi∣strate. what imprudence and indiscretion is it in the most com∣mon affaires of Life, to conceive that Emperours, Kings and Rulers of the earth must not only be qualified with politicall and state abili∣ties to make and execute such Civill Lawes which may concerne the common rights, peace and safety (which is worke and businesse, load and burthen enough for the ablest shoulders in the Commonweal) but also furnished with such spirituall and heavenly abilities to governe the Spirituall and Christian Commonweale, the flocke and Church of Christ, to pull downe, and set up Religion to judge, determine and punish in Spirituall controversies,Magistrates can have no more power then the com∣mon consent of the people shall betrust them with. even to death or banishment: And beside, that not only the severall sorts of civill Officers, (which the people shall choose and set up) must be so authorised, but that all respe∣ctive Commonweales or Bodies of people are charged (much more) by God with this worke and busines, radically and fundamentally, be∣cause all true civill Magistrates, have not the least ich of civill po∣wer, but what is measured out to them from the free consent of the
whole: even as a Committee of Parliament, cannot further act then the power of the House shall arme and enable them. Concerning that Objection which may arise from the Kings of Israel and Iudah,Thousands of lawfull Magi∣strates who never heare of the true church of God. who were borne members of Gods Church, and trained up therein all their dayes, (which thousands of lawfull Magistrates in the world, possibly borne and bred in false Worships, Pagan or Antichristian, never heard of) and were therein types of the great anointed, the King of Israel, I have spoken sufficiently to such as have an eare to heare: and therefore Lastly,The Spirituall and Civill Sword cannot be managed by one and the same person. so unsutable is the commixing and intangling of the Ci∣vill with the Spirituall charge and Government, that (except it was for subsistence, as we see in Paul and Barnabas, working with their owne hands) the Lord Iesus, and his Apostles, kept themselves to one: If ever any in this world was able to manage both the Spiri∣tuall and Civill, Church and Commonweale, it was the Lord Jesus, (wisedome it selfe:) Yea hee was the true Heire to the Crowne of Israel, being the Sonne of David: yet being sought for by the people to be made a King,The Lord Je∣sus refused so manage both. Joh. 5. he refused, and would not give a president to any King, Prince, or Ruler, to manage both swords, and to assume the charge of both Tables. Now concerning Princes,Nero and the persecuting Emperours not so injuri∣ous to Christi∣anity, as Con∣stantine and others who assumed a po∣wer in Spiri∣tuall things. Under Con∣stantine Chri∣stianity fell into corrupti∣on, and Chri∣stians fell a∣sleep. I desire it may bee remembred, who were most injurious and dangerous to Christianity, whether Nero, Domitian, Iulian &c. Persecuters, or Constantine, Theodosius, &c. who assumed this Power and Authority, in and over the Church in Spirituall things: It is confest by the Answerer and others of note, that under these later, the Church, the Christian State, Religion, and Worship, were most corrupted: under Constantine, Christians fell asleepe on the beds of carnall ease and Liberty: insomuch that some apply to his times, that sleepe of the Church, Cant. 5. 2. I sleep though mine heart waketh. CHAP. CXXIV. Peace. YEs, but some will say, this was not through their assu∣ming of this power, but the ill managing of it. Truth. Yet are they commonly brought as the great Presidents for all succeeding Princes and Rulers in after Ages: and in this ve∣ry controvesi, their practices are brought as presidentiall to esta∣blish persecution for conscience.
Secondly,Who force the consciences of others, yet are not willing to be forced themselves. those Emperours and other Princes and Magistrates acted in Religion according to their consciences perswasion, (and be∣yond the light and perswasion of conscience can no man living walk in any feare of God.) Hence have they forced their subjects to u∣niformitie and conformitie unto their own consciences (what ever they were) though not willing to have been forced themselves in the matters of God and Conscience. Thirdly,Constantine and others wanted not so much affecti∣on as infor∣mation of conscience. Had not the light of their eye of conscience, and the con∣sciences also of their Teachers been darkned, they could not have been condemned for want of heavenly affection, rare devotion won∣derfull care and diligence, propounding to themselves the best patternes of the Kings of Iudah, David, Salomon, Asa, Iehosaphat, Iosiah, Hezekiah: But here they lost the path, and themselves, in per∣swading themselves to be the parallels and antytipes to those figura∣tive and typicall Princes: whence they conceived themselves bound to make their Cities, Kingdomes, Empires new holy lands of Canaan, and themselves Governours and Iudges in spirituall causes, compelling all consciences to Christ, and persecuting the contrary with fire and sword. Upon these rootes,Sad conse∣quences of charging the Civill powers with the care of Spiritualls. how was, how is it possible but that such bit∣ter fruits should grow of corruption of Christianitie, Persecution (of such godly, who happily see more of Christ then such Rulers them∣selves) their Dominions and Jurisdictions being overwhelmed with inforced dissimulation and hypocrisie, and (where power of re∣sistance) with flames of civill combustion, as at this very day, he that runs may read and tremble at. Peace. They adde further, that the Princes of Christendome set∣ting their Hornes upon the Churches head, have been the cause of Antichristian inventions, &c. Truth. If they mean that the Princes of Europe giving their power and authoritie to the seven-headed and ten-horned Beast of Rome,Civill Rulers giving and lending their Horns or Au¦thority to Bi∣shops, both dangerous to the truth of Christ. have been the cause, &c. I confesse it to be one concurring cause: yet withall it must be remembred, that even before such Princes set their hornes or authoritie upon the Beasts head, even when they did (as I may say but lend their hornes to the Bishops, even then rose up many Antichristian abominations. And though I confesse there is but small difference (in some respect) betweene the setting their hornes upon the Priests heads (whereby they are inabled immedi∣ately to push and gore whoever crosse their doctrine and practice)
and the lending of their hornes, that is, pushing and gorig such them∣selves, as are declared by their Bishops and Priests to be hereticall, as was and is practised in some Countries before and since the Pope rose: yet I confidently affirme, that neither the Lord Iesus nor his first ordained Ministers and Churches (gathered by such Ministers) did ever weare, or crave the helpe of such hornes in Spirituall and Christian affaires: The spirituall power of the Lord Iesus in the hands of his true Ministers and Churches (according to Balaams prophesie Num. 23.) is the horne of that Vnicorne or Rhinocerot (Psal 92.) which is the strongest horne in the world,The Spirituall power of the Lord Jesus compared in Scripture to the incompa∣rable horne of the Rhinocerot in comparison of which the strongest hornes of the Bulls of Basan breake as sticks and reeds. Historie ells us how that Vnicorne or one-horned Beast the Rhino∣cerot, tooke up a Bull like a Tennis ball, in the Theater at Rome before the Emperour, according to that record of the Post: Quants erat cornu cui pila Taurus erat? Unto this Spirituall power of the Lord Iesus, the soules and thoughts of the highest Kings and Emperours must subject, Math. 16. & 18. 1 Cor. 5. & 10. chapters. CHAP. CXXV. Peace. DEare Truth, You know the noyse is made from those prophecies, Isa. 46. Kings and Queenes shall be nursing Fathers, &c. and Revel. 21. the Kings of the Earth shall bring their Glory and Honour to new Ierusalem, &c. Truth. I answer with that mournfull Prophet,A time when Gods people are wholly at a losse for Gods worship. Psal. 74. I see not that man, that Prophet, that can tell us how long. How many ex∣cellent Pen-men fight each against other with their pens (like swords) in the application of those prophecies of David, Isa. Ier. Ezekiel, Daniel, Zacharie, Iohn, when and how those Prophecies shall be fulfilled! Secondly,Nursing fa∣thers and mo∣thers. When ever those prophecies are fulfilled, yet shall those Kings not be Heads, Governours, and Judges in Ecclesiasti∣call or Spirituall causes, but be themselves judged and ruled (if within the Church) by the power of the Lord Jesus therein. Hence saith Isaiah, those Kings and Queenes shall lick the Dust of thy feet, &c.
Peace. Some will here aske, What may the Magistrate then lawfully doe with his Civill horne or power in matters of Re∣ligion? Truth. His horne not being the horne of that Vnicorne or Rhi∣nocerot, the power of the Lord Iesus in Spirituall case, his sword not the two-edged sword of the Spirit,The Civill horne or po∣wer being of a humane con∣stitution can∣not but be of a humane ope∣ration. the word of God (hanging not a∣bout the loines or side, but at the lips, and proceeding out of the mouth of his Ministers) but of an humane and Civill nature and constitution, it must consequently be of a humane and Civill opera∣tion, for who knowes not that operation followes constitution? and therefore I shall end this passage with this consideration: The CivillThe Civill power owes 3 things to the true Church of Christ. Magistrate either respecteth that Religion and Wor∣ship which his conscience is perswaded is true, and upon which he ventures his Soule: or else that and those which he is perswaded are false. Concerning the first, if that which the Magistrate believeth to be true, be true, I say he owes a threefold dutie unto it: First, approbation1. Approbati∣on. and countenance, a reverent esteeme and hono∣rable Testimonie, according to Isa. 49. Revel. 21.) with a tender respect of Truth, and the professours of it. Secondly,2. Submission. Personall submission of his owne Soule to the power of the Lord Iesus in that spirituall Government and Kingdome, accor∣ding to Mat. 18. 1. Cor. 5. Thirdly, Protection3. Protection. of such true professours of Christ, whether a∣part, or met together, as also of their estates from violence and in∣jurie, according to Rom. 13. Now secondly,The Civill Magistrate owes to false worshippers. if it be a false Religion (unto which the Civill Magistrate dare not adjoyne, yet) he owes, First permission (for approbation he owes not to what is evill) and this according to Matthew 13. 30. for publike peace and quiet sake.1. Permission. Secondly,2. Protection. he owes protection to the persons of his Subjects, (though of a false worship) that no injurie be offered either to the persons or goods of any, Rom. 13. Peace. Deare Truth, in this 11 head concerning the Magistrates power in Worship, you have examined what is affirmed: that the Magistrate may doe in point of Worship, there remaines a second; to wit, that which they say the Magistrate may not doe in Wor∣ship.
They say, The Magistrate may not bring in set formes of prayer Nor secondly, bring in significant ceremonies: Nor thirdly, not go∣verne and rule the acts of worship in the Church of God, for which they bring an excellent similitude of a Prince or Magistrate in a ship, where he hath no governing power over the actions of the ma∣riners: and secondly, that excellent propheci concerning Christ Iesus, that his government should be upon his shoulders, Isa. 9. 6, 7. Truth. Unto all this I willingly subscribe:The Civill Magistrates conscience torne and di∣stracted be∣tween the di∣vers and con∣trary affirma∣tions even of the most god∣ly Reformers. Yet can I not passe by a most injurious and unequall practice toward the Civill Magi∣strate: Ceremonies, Holy dayes, Common Prayer, and what ever else dislikes their consciences, that the Magistrate must not bring in: O∣thers againe as learned, as godly, as wise, have conceived the Ma∣gistrate may approve or permit these in the Church, and all men are bound in obedience to obey him. How shal the Magistrates conscience be herein (between both) torn and distracted, if indeed the power either of establishing or abolishing in Church matters bee committed to him? Secondly,The Authors of these positi∣ons deal with the Civill Ma∣gistrate, as the souldiers dealt with the Lord Jesus. me thinkes in this case they deale with the Civill Ma∣gistrate as the Souldiers dealt with the Lord Iesus: First they take off his owne clothes, and put upon him a purple Robe, plat a Crowne of Thornes on his head, bow the knee, and salute him by the name of King of the Iewes. They tell him that he is the Keeper of both Tables, he must see the Church doe her duty, he must establish the true Church, true Mini∣stry, true Ordinances, he must keepe her in this purity. Againe, hee must abolish superstition, and punish false Churches, false Ministers, even to banishment, and death. Thus indeed doe they make the blood run downe the head of the civill Magistrate,The rise of high Com∣missions. &c. from the thorny vexation of that power which sometimes they crowne him with (whence in great States, Kingdoms or Monarchies, necessarily arise delegations of that spirituall power, High Commissions) &c. Anon againe they take off this purple robe,Pious Magi∣strates and Ministers con∣sciences are perswaded for that, which o∣ther Magi∣strates consci∣ences con∣demne. put him into his own clothes, and tell him that he hath no power to command what is a∣gainst their conscience. They cannot conforme to a set form of prayer, nor to Ceremonies, nor Holy dayes, &c. although the civill Magistrate (that most pious Prince Edw 6.  and his famous Bishops (afterwards burnt for Christ) were of another conscience which of these two consciences shall stand, if either Magistrate must put forth his civill
power in these cases, the strongest arme of flesh and most conquering bloody sword of Steele can alone decide the Question. I confesse it is most true, that no Magistrate (as no other supe∣riour) is to be obeyed in any matter displeasing to God:To professe the Magistrate must force the Church to her duty, and yet must not judge what that is, what is it but to play in Spi¦rituall things? yet, when in matters of worship we ascribe the absolute headship and government to the Magistrate, (as to keepe the Church pute, and force her to her duty, Ministers and People) and yet take unto our selves power to judge what is right in our owne eyes, and to judge the Magistrate in and for those very things, wherein we confesse he hath power to see us doe our duty, and therefore consequently must judge what our duty is: what is this but to play with Magistrates, with the soules of men, with Heaven, with God, with Christ Iesus? &c. CHAP. CXXVI. Peace. PAsse on (holy Truth) to that similitude whereby they illu∣strate that Negative Assertion: The Prince in the Ship (say they) is governour over the bodies of all in the Ship,An apt simili∣tude discussed concerning the Civill Magi∣strate. but hee hath no power to governe the Ship or the Mariners in the Acti∣ons of it: If the Pilot manifestly erre in his Action, the Prince may reprove him, (and so say they may any Passenger) if hee offend a∣gainst the life or goods of any, the Prince may in due time and place punish him, which no private person may. Truth. Although (deare Peace) wee both agree that civill powers may not injoyne such devices, no nor inforce on any Gods Institu∣tions, since Christ Iesus his comming: Yet for further illustration I shall propose some Quaeries concerning the civill Magistrates pas∣sing in the ship of the Church, wherein Christ Iesus hath appointed his Ministers and Officers as Governours and Pilots, &c. If in a ship at Sea,First quaerie: what if the  com∣mand the Mr. or Pilot to steere such a course which they know will never bring them to the harbour wherein the Governour or Pilot of a ship un∣dertakes to carry the ship to such a Port, the civill Magistrate (sup∣pose a King or Emperour) shall command the Master such and such a course, to steere upon such or such a point, which the Master knowes is not their course, and which if they steere he shall never bring the Ship to that Port or harbour: what shall the Master doe? Surely all men will say, the Master of the Ship or Pilot is to present Reasons and Arguments from his Mariners Art (if the Prince bee capable of them) or else in humble and submissive manner to per∣swade the Prince not to interrupt them in their course and duty pro∣perly
belonging to them, to wit, governing of the ship, steering of the course, &c. If the Master of the Ship command the Mariners thus and thus,2. Quaerie. If the Mr. of the Ship com∣mand the  thus, & the Prince command the contrary, who is to be obey∣ed? in cunning the ship, managing the elme, trimming the saile, and the Prince command the Mariners a different or contrary course, who is to be obeyed? It is confest that the Mariners may lawfully disobey the Prince, and obey the governour of the ship in the actions of the ship. Thirdly, what if the Prince have as much skillIf the Prince have as much skill as the Mr. or Pilo, &c. (which is rare) as the Pilot himselfe? I conceive it will be answered, that the Ma∣ster of the ship and Pilot, in what concernes the ship, are chiefe and above (in respect of their office) the Prince himselfe, and their com∣mands ought to be attended by all the Mariners: unlesse it bee in manifest errour, wherein tis granted any passenger may reprove the Pilot. Fourthly,4. Quaerie. I aske if the Prince and his Attendants be unskilfull in the ships affaires, whether every Sayler and Mariner, the youngest and lowest, be not (so farre as concernes the ship) to be preferred before the Princes followers, and the Prince himselfe? and their coun∣sell and advice more to be attended to, and their service more to bee desired and respected, and the Prince to bee requested to stand by and let the businesse alone in their hands. Fifthly,5. Quaerie. Whether the meanest saylor (in respect of his skill and service) be not to be prefer∣red before the Prince himself in case a wilfull King and his Attendants, out of opinion of their skill, or wilfulnesse of passion, would so steere the course, trim sayle, &c. as that in the judgement of the Master and Seamen the ship and lives shall bee indangered: whether (in case humble perswasions prevaile not) ought not the Ships company to refuse to act in such a course, yea and (in case power be in their hands) re∣sist and suppresse these dangerous practices of the Prince and his fol∣lowers, and so save the ship? Lastly,6. Quaerie. Whether if the Mr. of the ship gratifie the Prince to the casting away of the ship and Prince, &c. he be not guilty and  to answer? suppose the Master out of base feare and cowardise, or covetous desire of reward, shall yeeld to gratifie the minde of the Prince, contrary to the rules of Art and Experience, &c. and the ship come in danger, and perish, and the Prince with it: if the Ma∣ster get to shore, whether may he not be justly questioned, yea and suffer as guilty of the Princes death, and those that perished with him? These cases are cleare, wherein according to this similitude, the Prince ought not to governe and rule the actions of the ship, but such whose office and charge and skill it is.
The result of all is this:The applicati∣on in generall of the ship to the Church, &c. The Church of Christ is the Ship, where∣in the Prince (if a member, for otherwise the case is altred) is a passenger. In this ship the Officers and Governours, such as are appointed by the Lord Jesus, they are the chiefe, and (in those re∣spects) above the Prince himselfe, and are to bee obeyed and sub∣mitted to in their works and administrations, even before the Prince himselfe. In this respect every Christian in the Church,The meanest Christian ac∣cording to his knowledg and grace, to bee preferred be∣fore the high∣est who have received none or lesse grace of Christ. man or woman (if of more knowledge and grace of Christ ought to be of higher e∣steeme (concerning Religion and Christianity) then all the Princes in the world, who have either none or lesse grace or knowledge of Christ: although in civill things all civill reverence, honour and obe∣dience ought to be yeelded by all men. Therefore, if in matters of Religion the King command what is contrary to Christs rule (though according to his perswasion and conscience) who sees not that (according to the similitude) he ought not to be obeyed?A true Mini∣ster of Christ ought to walk by another rule then the command of Civill Autho∣rity in Spiritu∣all causes. yea, and (in case) boldly with spirituall force and power he ought to be resisted: And if any Officer of the Church of Christ shall out of basenesse yeeld to the command of the Prince, to the danger of the Church, and soules committed to his charge, the soules that perish (notwithstanding the Princes command) shall be laid to his charge. If so then, I rejoyne thus: How agree these truths of this simi∣litude with those former positions, viz. that the Civill Magistrate is keeper of both Tables, That he is to see the Church doe her duty. That he ought to establish the true Religion, suppresse and punish the false, and so consequently must discerne, judge and determine what the true gathering and governing of the Church is; what the dutie of every Minister of Christ is;Former positi∣ons compared with this simi∣litude, and found to con∣tradict each other. what the true Ordinances are, and what the true Administrations of them; and where men faile, correct, punish, and reforme by the Civill Sword: I desire it may be answered in the feare and presence of him whose eyes are as a flame of fire, if this be not (according to the similitude, though contrary to their scope in proposing of it) to be Governour of the Ship of the Church, to see the Master, Pilot, and Mariners do their duty, in set∣ting the course, steering the ship, trimming the sailes, keeping the watch, &c. and where they faile, to punish them; and therefore by undeniable consequence, to judge and determine what their duties are, when they doe right, and when they doe wrong: and this not
only in manifest Errour, (for then they say every passenger may reprove) but in their ordinary course and practice. The similitude of a Physitian obeying the Prince in the Body po∣litick;The simili∣tude of the Magistrate prescribing to the Physician in civill things but the Physi∣cian to the Magistrate concerning his body. but prescribing to the Prince concerning the Princes body, wherein the Prince unlesse the Physitian manifestly erre) is to be obedient to the Physitian, and not to be Iudge of the Physitian in his Art, but to be ruled and judged (as touching the state of his body) by the Physitian: I say this similitude and many others suiting with the former of a ship, might be alleadged to prove the distincti∣on of the Civill and Spirituall estate, and that according to the rule of the Lord Iesus in the Gospel, the Civill Magistrate is only to at∣tend the Calling of the Civill Magistracie, concerning the bodies and goods of the Subjects, and is himselfe (if a member of the Church and within) subject to the power of the Lord Iesus therein, as any member of the Church is, 1 Cor. 5. CHAP. CXXVII. Peace. DEare Truth, you have uprightly and aptly untied the knots of that 11 Head, let me present you with the 12 Head,The 12 Head examined. which is Concerning the Magistrates power in the Censures of the Church. First (say they) he hath no power to execute or to substi∣tute any Civill officer to execute any Church censure, under the notion of Civill or cclesiasticall men. Secondly, Though a Magistrate may immediately Civilly cen∣sure such an offender, whose secret sinnes are made manifest by their casting out, to be injurious to the good of the State; yet such offences of excommunicate persons, which manifestly hurt not the good of the State, he ought not to proceed against them, sooner or later, untill the Church hath made her complaint to him, and given in their just Reasons for helpe from them: For to give libertie to Magistrates without exception to punish all excommunicate persons within so many moneths, may prove in∣jurious to the person who needs, to the Church who may desire, & to God who cals for longer indulgence from the hands of thē. Thirdly, for persons not excommunicate, the Magistrate hath no power in mediately to censure such offences of Church mem∣bers by the power of the Sword, but onely for such as doe imme∣diately
hurt the peace of the State: Because the proper end of Civill Government being the preservation of the peace and wel∣fare of the State, they ought not to breake downe those bounds, and so to censure immediately for such sins which hurt not their peace. Hence, first, Magistrates have no power to censure for secret sinnes, as deadnesse, unbeleefe, because they are secret, and not yet come forth immediately to hurt the peace of the State; we say immediately, for every sinne, even originall sinne, remotely hurts the Civill State. Secondly, hence they have no power to censure for such pri∣vate sinnes in Church members, which being not hainous may be best healed in a private way by the Churches themselves. For that which may be best healed by the Church, and yet is prosecu∣ted by the State, may make a deeper wound and greater rent in the peace both of Church and State: the Magistrates also being members of the Church, are bound to the rule of Christ, viz. not to produce any thing in publike against a brother, which may bee best healed in a private way. Now we call that private, First, which is only remaining in Families, not knowne of o∣others: and therefore a Magistrate to heare and prosecute the complaint of children against their parents, servants against ma∣sters, wives against their husbands, without acquainting the Church first, transgresseth the rule of Christ. Secondly, that which is between members of the same Church or of divers Churches: for, it was a double fault of the Corin∣thians (1 Cor. 6.) first to goe to Law, secondly to doe it before an Infidell, seeing the Church was able to judge of such kinde of differences by some Arbitratours among themselves: So that the Magistrates should referre the differences of Church mem∣bers to private healing, and try that way first: By meanes whereof the Churches should be free from much scandall, and the State from much trouble, and the hearts of the godly from much griefe in beholding such breaches. Thirdly, such offences which the Conscience of a Brother dea∣ling with another privately, dares not as yet publish openly, comming to the notice of the Magistrate accidentally, he ought not to make publique as yet, nor to require the Grand Jurie to
present the same, no more then the other private brother, who is dealing with him, untill hee see some issue of the private way. Thirdly, hence they have no power to put any to an oath ex officio, to accuse themselves, or the brethren, in case either crimi∣nis suspecti, or praetensi, because this preserves not, but hurts many wayes the peace of the State, and abuseth the ordinance of an Oath, which is ordained to end controversies, not to begin them, Heb. 6. 16. Fourthly, hence they have no power to censure any for such offences as breake either no Civill Law of God, or Law of the State published according to it, for the peace of the State being preserved by wholesome Laws, when they are not hurt, the peace is not hurt. Truth. In this passage (as I said before) I observe how weakly and partially they deale with the soules of Magistrates in telling them they are the Guardians of both Tables, must see the Church doe her duty, punish, &c. and yet in this passage the Elders or Mi∣nisters of the Churches not only sit Iudges over the Magistrates acti∣ons in Church affaires, but in civill also, straitning and inlarging his commission according to the particular interests of their owne ends or (at the best) their Conscences. I grant the Word of the Lord is the only rule, light and lanthorn,To give the government of the Church to the Civill Ma∣gistrate (as be∣fore) and yet to abridge his conscience, what is it but to sport with holy things? &c. in all cases concerning God or Man: and that the Ministers of the Go∣spell are to teach this way, hold out this Lanthorne unto the feete of all men: but to give such an absolute power in Spirituall things to the Civill Magistrate, and yet after their owne ends or Consciences to abridge it, is but the former sporting with holy things, and to walk in Contradictions, as before I noted. Many of the particulars, I acknowledge true, where the Magi∣strate is a Member of the Church: yet some passages call for Expli∣cation, and some for Observation. First, in that they say, the Civill Magistrate ought not to pro∣ceed against the offences of an Excommunicate person, which ma∣nifestly hurt not the good of the state, untill the Church hath made her complaint for helpe from them. I observe 2 things: First,An evident contradiction. a cleare grant, that when the Church complayneth for helpe, then the Magistrate may punish such offences as hurt not the good of the state: and yet in a few lines after, they say, the Magi∣strates have no power to censure such offences of Church members
by the power of the civill sword, but only such, as doe immediately hurt the peace of the civill state; and they adde the Reason, because the proper end of the civill Government,An excellent confession of the proper end of Civill Go∣vernment. When Civill Lawes are not broken, it is confest that Civill Peace is not hurt. being the preservation of the peace and welfare of the state, they ought not to breake downe those bounds, and so to censure immediately for such sinnes which hurt not their peace. And in the last place, they acknowledge the Magistrate hath no power to punish any, for any such offences as breake no civill Law of God, or Law of the state, published accord∣ing to it: For the peace of the state, (say they) being preserved by wholesome Lawes, when they are not hurt, the Peace is not hurt. CHAP. CXXVIII. Peace. DEare Truth, here are excellent confessions unto which both Truth and Grace may gladly assent: but what is your second Observation from hence? Truth. I observe secondly, what a deepe charge of weaknes is layd upon the Church of Christ, the Lawes, Government and Officers thereof, and consequently upon the Lord Iesus himselfe: to wit, that the Church is not enabled with all the power of Christ, to cen∣sure sufficiently an offendour (on whom yet they have executed the deepest censure in the world,A grievous charge against the Christian Church, and the King of it. to wit, cutting off from Christ, shutting out of Heaven, casting to the Divell) which offendours crime reach∣eth not to hurt the good of the civill state, but that she is forced to make complaint to the civill state, and the Officers thereof, for their helpe. O let not this be tole in Gath, nor heard in Ashkalon! and O! how dimme must needs that eye be, which is blood shot, with that blody and cruell Tenent of Persecution for cause of Conscience? Peace. But what should be meant by this passage? viz. That they cannot give liberty to the Magistrate to punish without ex∣ception all excommunicate persons, within so many months. Truth. It may be this hath reference to a Law made formerly in New England,A strange law in New Eng∣land formerly against Ex¦communicate persons. that if an excommunicate person repented not with∣in (as I have heard) three months after sentence of excommunication, then the Civill Magistrate might proceed with him. These worthy men see cause to question this Law upon good rea∣sons rendred, though it appears not by their words that they wholly condemne it, only they desire a longer time, implying that after
some longer time the Magistrate may proceed: and indeed I see not, but according to such principles, if the Magistrate himselfe should be cast out,A dangerous doctrine a∣gainst all civill Magistrates. he ought to be proceeded against by the Civill state, and consequently deposed and punished (as the Pope teacheth) yea though happily he had not offended against either bodies or goods of any subject. Thirdly, from this true confession that the Magistrate ought not to punish for many sinnes above mentioned: I observe how they crosse the plea which commonly they bring for the Magistrates pu∣nishing of false Doctrines,Many sins pro∣hibited to be punished by the Magistrate and yet they also charge him to punish all sin, Rom. 13. Heretiques, &c. [viz. Rom. 13. The Magistrate is to punish them that doe evill:] and when it is an∣swered, True, evill against the Second Table, which is there onely spoken of, and against the Bodies and Goods of the Subject, which are the proper object of the Civill Magistrate, (as they confesse:) It is replied, why is not Idolatry sinne? Heresie sinne? Schisme and false Worship sinne? Yet heere in this passage many evils, many sins, even of Parents against their Children, Masters against their Ser∣vants, Husbands against their Wives, the Magistrate ought not to meddle with. Fourthly,Originall sin charged to hurt re∣motely (but falsely) the ci∣vill state. I dare not assent to that assertion, That even origi∣nall sinne remotely hurts the civill State. Tis true, some doe, as incli∣nations to murther, theft, whoredome, slander, disobedience to Parents and Magistrates: but blindnes of minds, hardnes of heart, inclination to choose or worship this or that God, this or that Christ, beside the true, these hurt not remotely the civill state, as not concerning it, but the spirituall. Peace. Let me (in the last place) remind you of their charge a∣gainst the Magistrate,Magistrates strangely for∣bidden to hear civill com∣plaints. and which will necessarily turne to my wrong and prejudice: They say, the Magistrate in hearing and prosecuting the complaints of children against their parents, of ser∣vants against their masters, of wives against their husbands, without acquainting the Church first, transgresseth the rule of Christ. Truth. Sweet Peace, they that pretend to be thy dearest friends, will prove thy bitter enemies. First, I ask for one rule out of the Testament of the Lord Iesus, to prove this deepe charge and accusation against the Civill Magi∣strate?Thousands of Common-weales where no true church of Christ. Secondly, This is built upon a supposition of what rarely falls out in the World, to wit, that there must necessarily be a true
Church of Christ (in every lawfull State) unto whom these com∣plaints must goe: whereas how many thousand Common-weales have been and are, where the name of Christ hath not (or not truly) been founded. Thirdly,The com∣plaints of fa∣milies proper∣ly fall into the cognizance of the civill Ma∣strate. The Magistrates office (according to their own grant) properly respecting the bodies and goods of their Subjects, and the whole body of the Common-weale being made up of Families (as the members constituting that body) I see not how (according to the rule of Christ (Rom. 13) the Magistrate may refuse to heare and helpe the just complaints of any such petitioners, Children, Wives, and Servants, against oppression, &c. Peace. I have long observed that such as have been ready to a∣scribe to the Civill Magistrate and his Sword more then God hath ascribed,They who give to Magistrates more then is due, are most apt to dis∣o to be them of what is theirs. have also been most ready to cut off the skirts, and (in case of his inclining to another conscience then their owne) to spoile him of the robe of that due Authoritie with which it hath pleased God and the People to invest and cloath him. But I shall now present you with the 13. Head: whose Title is. CHAP. CXXIX. What power Magistrates have in publike Assemblies of Churches. 13. Head. FIrst (say they) the Churches have power to assemble and con∣tinue such Assemblies for the performance of all Gods Ordi∣nances, without or against the consent of the Magistrate, renu∣ente Magistratu, because Christians are commanded so to doe, Matth. 28. 18. 19. 20. Also because an Angel from God commanded the Apostles so to doe, Acts 5. 20 Likewise from the practice of the Apostles, who were not re∣bellious or seditious, yet they did so, Act. 4. 18. 19. 20. Act. 5. 27 28. Further from the practice of the Primitive Church at Jeru∣salem, who did meet, preach, pray, minister Sacraments, censures, Act. 4. 23. renuente Magistratu.
Moreover from the exhortation to the Hebrewes, 10. 25. not to forsake their Assemblies, though it were in dangerous times, and if they might doe this under professed Enemies, then we may much more under Christian Magistrates; else we were worse un∣der Christian Magistrates then Heathen: therefore Magistrates may not hinder them herein, as Pharaoh did the people from sa∣crificing, for Wrath will be upon the Realme, and the King and his Sons, Ez 7. 23. Secondly, it hath been a usurpation of forraigne Countries and Magistrates to take upon them to determine times and places of Worship: rather let the Churches be left herein to their inof∣fensive Libertie. Thirdly, concerning their power of Synod Assemblies: First in corrupt times, the Magistrate desirous to make Refor∣mation of Religion, may and should call those who are most fit in severall Churches, to assemble together in a Synod, to discusse and declare from the Word of God, matters of Doctrine and Worship, and to helpe forward the Reformation of the Churches God: Thus did Iosiah. Secondly, in the reformed times he ought to give Libertie to the Elders of severall Churches to assemble themselves by their owne mutuall and voluntary agreement, at convenient times, as the meanes appointed by God, whereby he may mediately reform matters amisse in Churches, which immediately he cannot nor ought not to doe. Thirdly, Those meetings for this end we conceive may be of two sorts. 1. Monthly, of some of the Elders and Messengers of the Churches. 2. Annuall, of all the Messengers and Elders of the Chur∣ches. First monthly of some: First, those members of Churches which are neerest together, and so may most conveniently assemble to∣gether, may by mutuall agreement once in a moneth consult of such things as make for the good of the Churches. Secondly, the time of this meeting may be sometimes at one place, sometimes at another, upon the Lecture day of every Church where Lectures are: and let the Lecture that day be en∣ded by eleven of the clock.
Thirdly, let the end of this Assembly be to doe nothing by way of Authoritie, but by way of Councell, as the need of Churches shall require. Secondly Annuall, of all the Elders within our jurisdiction or o∣thers, whereto the Churches may send once in the yeare to con∣sult together for the publike welfare of all the Churches. First, let the place be sometimes at one Church, sometimes at another, as Reasons for the present may require. Secondly, let all the Churches send their waighty questions and cases six weeks or a month before the set time, to the Church where the Assembly is to be held, and the Officers thereof dis∣perse them speedily to all the Churches, that so they may have time to come prepared to the discussing of them. Thirdly, let this Assembly doe nothing by Authoritie, but only by Councell, in all cases which fall out, leaving the determinati∣on of all things to particular Churches within themselves, who are to judge, and so to receive all doctrines and directions agree∣ing only with the Word of God. The grounds of these Assemblies. First, need of each others helpe, in regard of dayly emergent troubles, doubts, and controversies. Secondly, love of each others fellowship. Thirdly, of Gods glory out of a publike spirit to seeke the wel∣fare of the Churches, as well as their owne, 1 Cor. 10 33. 2 Cor. 11. 23. Fourthly, The great blessing and speciall presence of God upon such Assemblies hitherto. Fifthly, the good Report the Elders and Brethren of Churches shall have hereby, by whose communion of Love others shall know they are the Disciples of Christ. CHAP. CXXX. Truth. I May well compare this passage to a double picture:A strange double picture on the first part or side of it a most faire and beautifull counte∣nance of the pure and holy Word of God: on the later side or part, a most sowre and uncomely deformed looke of a meere humane in∣vention.
Concerning the former, they prove the true and unquestionable power and priviledge of the Churches of ChristThe great pri∣viledges of the true Spouse or Church of Christ. to assemble and pra∣ctise all the holy Ordinances of God, without or against the consent of the Magistrate. Their Arguments from Christs and the Angels voyce, from the Apostles and Churches practice, I desire may take  impression written by the point of a diamond, the finger of Gods spirit, in all hearts whom it may concerne. This Libertie of the Churches of Christ he inlargeth and ampli∣fieth so far, that he calls it an usurpation of some Magistrates to determine the time and place of Worship: and say, that rather the Churches should be left to their inoffensive libertie. Upon which Grant I must renew my former Quaerie, Whether this be not to walke in cntradictions, to hold with light, yet walke in darknes?To hold with Ight and walk in darknesse. for How can they say the Magistrate is appointed by God and Christ the Guardian of the Christian Church and Worship, bound to set up the true Church, Ministrie, and Ordinances, to see the Church doe her duty, that is, to force her to it by the Civill sword: bound to suppresse the false Church, Ministrie and Ordinances, and therefore consequently,The Magi∣strate lift up to be the chief  of the Church, and yet cast downe not to have power to appoint the place or time of meeting. to judge and determine which is the true Church, which is the false, and what is the duty of the Church officers and members of it, and what not: and yet (say they) the Churches must assemble, and practice all Ordinances, without his consent, yea against it: Yea and he hath not so much power as to judge what is a con∣venient time and place for the Churches to assemble in; which if he should doe, he should be an usurper, and should abridge the Church of her inoffensive libertie. As if the Master or Governour of a Ship had power to judge who were true and fit officers, mariners &c. for the managing of the Ship,2 Similitudes illustrting the Magi∣strate  be oth governor of the Church and yet usur∣pr in com∣manding. and were bound to see them each performe his duty, and to force them thereunto, and yet he should be an usurper if hee should abridge them of meeting and managing the vessel at their plea∣sure, when they please, and how they please, without and against his consent: Certainly if a Physician have power to judge the dsease of his patient, and what course of Physicke he must use, can he bee counted an usurper unlesse the patient might take what physicke him∣selfe pleased, day or night, summer or winter, at home in his cham∣ber, or abroad in the aire?
Secondly, by their grant in this passage that Gods people may thus assemble and practice ordinances without and against the con∣sent of the Magistrate. Iinfer,If a Church may assemble without and against the Magistrates consent (as is assied) then much more constitute and become a Church, &c. then also may they become a Church, constitute and gather without or against the consent of the Magi∣strate: Therefore may the Messengers of Christ, preach and baptise, that is, make disciples and wash them into the true profession of Chri∣stianity according to the commission, though the Magistrate deter∣mine and publikly declare, such Ministers, such baptismes, such Chur∣ches to be hereticall. Thirdly, it may here be questioned what power is now given to the Civill Magistrate in Church matters and Spirituall affairs? If it be answered that although Gods people may doe thus against the Magistrates consent, yet others may not. I answer (as before) who sees not herein partiality to themselves:Grosse partia∣lity. Gods people must enjoy their Liberty of Conscience, and not be for∣ced; but all the Subjects in a Kingdome or Monarchie, or the whole world beside, must be compelled by the power of the Civill Sword to assemble thus and thus. Secondly, I demand who shall judge whether they are Gods people or no,If the Civill Magistrate be to build the Spirituall or Christian house, he must judge of the matter. for they say whether the Magistrate consent or consent not, that is judge so or not, they ought to goe on in the Ordinances renuente Magistratu? How agrees this with their former and generall assertion, that the Civill Magistrate must set up the Christian Church and Worship, therefore by their owne grant he must judge the godly themselves, he must discerne who are fit matter for the House of God, living stones, and what unfit matter, trash and rubbish? Those worthy men, the Authours of these positions, and others of their judgement have cause to examine their soules with feare and trembling in the presence of God upon this intergatory,A close and faithfull inter∣gatory to the consciences of the authors of these positions viz. whether or no this be not the bottome and root of the matter: If they could have the same supply of maintenance without the helpe of the Ci∣vill Sword, or were perswaded to live upon the voluntary contribu∣tion of poore Saints, or their owne labour, as the Lord Iesus and his first Messengers did: I say, if this lay not in the bottom, whether or no they could not be willingly shut of the Civill power, and left on∣ly to their inoffensive liberties? I could also put a sad Quaerie to the consciences of some,A sad quaerie to some con∣cerning their practice. viz. what should be the reason why in their native Country where the Magi∣strate
consented not, they forbore to practice such Ordinances as now they doe and intended to doe, so soone as they got into ano∣ther place where they might set up Magistrates of their owne, and a Civill Sword, &c. How much is it to be feared that in case their Magistracie should alter, or their persons be cast under a Magistra∣cie prohibiting their practice, whether they would then maintaine their separate meetings without and against the consent of the Ma∣gistrate, renuente Magistratu? Lastly, it may be questioned how it comes to passe that in plea∣ding for the Churches liberty more now under the Christian Magi∣strate, since the Christians tooke that liberty in dangerous times under the Heathen,A marvallou challenge of more Libertie to Christians under a Chri∣stian Magi∣strate then under the Hea∣then. why he quotes to prove such liberty, Pharaohs hindring the Israelites from worship, and Ezra 7. 23. Artaxerxes his feare of wrath upon the Realme? Are not all their hopes and arguments built upon the Christian Magistrate, whom (say they) the first Christians wanted, and yet do they scare the Christian Magistrate (whom they account the gover∣nour of the Church) with Pharaoh and Artaxerxes that knew not God, expecting that the Christian Magistrate should act and com∣mand no more in Gods worship then they? But what can those instances of Pharaohs evill in hindring the Israelites worshipping of God, and Artaxerxes giving liberty to Is∣rael to worship God, and build the Temple, what can they prove but a duty in all Pces and Civill Magistrates to take off the yoake of bondage, which commonly they lay on the necks of the soules of their subjects in matters of Conscience and Religion? CHAP. CXXXI. Peace. IT is plausible,If Magistrates were appoin∣ted by Christ Jesus Gover∣nours of his Kingdome, it were not rea∣sonable that Christians should more freely breake the commands of the Christi∣an, then of the Heathen Ma∣gistrate. but not reasonable that Gods people should (considering the drift of these positions) expect more li∣berty under a Christian then under a Heathen Magistrate: Have Gods people more liberty to breake the command of a Christian then an Heathen governour? and so to set up Christs Church and Or∣dinances after their owne conscience against his consent more then against the consent of an Heathen or unbeleeving Magistrate? what is become of all the great expectation what a Christian Ma∣gistrate may and ought to doe in establishing the Church, in refor∣ming the Church, and in punishing the contrary? 'Tis true (say
men) in Christs time and in the time of the first Ministers and Churches there were no Christian Magistrates, and therefore in that case, it was in vaine for Christians to seeke unto the Heathen Magistrates to governe the Church, suppresse Hereticks, &c. but now we enjoy Christian Magistrates, &c. Truth. All Reason and Religion would now expect more submissi∣on therefore (in matters concerning Christ) to a Christian Magi∣strate, then to a Pagan or Antichristian rule  But (deare Peace) the day will discover, the fire will trie, 1 Cor. 3. what is but wood, hay, and stubble, though built (in mens upright intention) on that foundation Iesus Christ. But (to winde up all) as it is most true that Magistracy in gene∣rall is of God (Rom. 13.) for the preservation of Mankinde in ci∣vill order and peace,The necessry of Civill go∣vernment in generall of God, but the speciall kindes of men, 1 Pet. 2. 13. (the World otherwise would bee like the Sea, wherein Men like Fishes would hunt and devoure each other, and the greater devour the lesse:) So also it is true, that Magistracy in speciall for the severall kindes of it is of Man, 1. Pet. 2. 13. Now what kinde of Magistrate soever the people shall agree to set up, whether he receive Christianity before he be set in office, or whe∣ther he receive Christianity after, hee receives no more power of Magistracy, then a Magistrate that hath received no Christianity. For neither of them both can receive more, then the Commonweal, the Body of People and civill State, as men, communicate unto them, and betrust with them. All lawfull Magistrates in the World, both before the comming of Christ Iesus,Civill Magi∣strates are de∣rivatives from the fountaines or bodies of people. and since, (excepting those unparaleld typicall Ma∣gistrates of the Church of Israel) are but Derivatives and Agents immediately derived and employed as eyes and hands, serving for the good of the whole: Hence they have and can have no more Power, then fundamentally lies in the Bodies or Fountaines them∣selves, which Power, Might, or Authority, is not Religious, Chri∣stian,A beleeving Magistrate no more a Magi∣strate thn an unbeleeving. &c. but naturall, humane and civill. And hence it is true, that a Christian Captaine, Christian, Mer∣chant. Physitian, Lawyer, Pilot, Father, Master, and (so consequent∣ly) Magistrae, &c. is no more a Captaine, Merchant, Physitian, Lawyer, Pilot, Father, Master, Magistrate, &c. then a Captaine, Marchant,The excellen∣  Christs  &c. of any other Conscience or Religion. Tis true, Christianity teacheth all these to act in their severall callings, to an higher ultimate end, from higher principles, in a
more heavenly and spirituall manner, &c. CHAP. CXXXII. Peace. O that thy Light and Brightnes (deare Truth) might shine to the darke World in this particular: let it not therefore be grievous, if I request a little further illustration of it. Truth. In his season God will glorifie himselfe in all his Truths: but to gratifie thy desire, thus: A Pagan or Antichristian Pilot may be as skilfull to carry the Ship to its desired Port, as any Christian Mariner or Pilot in the World, and may performe that worke with as much safety and speed: yet have they not command over the soules and consciences of their passengers or mariners under them, al∣though they may justly see to the labour of the one, and the civill behaviour of all in the ship:The Magi∣strate like a Pilot in the Ship of the Common∣weale. A Christian Pilot he performes the same worke, (as likewise doth the Metaphoricall Pilot in the ship of the Commonweale) from a principle of knowledge and experience: but more then this, he acts from a roote of the feare of God and love to mankind, in his whole course.Christianitie stees a Chri∣stian Pilots course. Secondly, his aime is more to glori∣fie God then to gaine his pay, or make his voyage. Thirdly, he walkes heavenly with Men, and God, in a constant observation of Gods hand in stormes, calmes, &c. So tht the thread of Navigation being equally spun by a believing or unbelieving Pilot,The Christian Pilot hath no more power o∣ver the soules of his Mari∣ners or passen∣gers, then the unchristian or Pagan Pilot. yet is it drawn over with the gold of Godlines and Christianitie by a Christi∣an Pilot, while he is holy in all manner of Christianitie, 1 Pet. 1 15. But lastly, the Christian Pilots power over the Soules and consci∣ences of his Sailers and Passengers is not greater then that of the An∣tichristian, otherwise then he can subdue the soules of any by the two-edged sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, and by his holy demeanour in his place, &c. Peace. I shall present you with no other consideratioon in this first part of the Picture, but this only: Although the tearme Heathen is most commonly appropriated to the wilde naked Americans,The tearmes Heathen and Christian Ma∣gistrate. &c. yet these worthy men justly apply it even to the civilized Romanes, &c. and consequently must it be applied to the most civilized Antichristians, who are not the Church and people of God in Christ. Truth. The Word  in the Hebrew, and  in the Greeke, sig∣nifie no more then the Gentiles or Nations of the Earth, which
were without and not within, the true typicall nationall Church of the Iewes before Christ, and since his comming, the Gentiles or Nations of the World,All out of Christ are hea∣thens, that is of the Nations or Gentiles. who are without that one holy Nation of the Christian Israel the Church gathered unto Christ Iesus in particular and distinct congregations all the World over. Translatours promiscuously render the words Gentiles, Heathens, Nations: whence it is evident that even such as professe the Name of Christ in an unregenerate and impenitent estate, whether Papist or Protestant are yet without, that is Heathen, Gentiles or of the Nations. CHAP. CXXXIII. Peace. DEare Truth, it is now time to cast your eye on the second part of this Head or picture uncomely and de∣formed. Truth. It containes two sorts of Religious meetings or assem∣blies. First, more extraordinary and occasionall, for which he quotes the practice of Iosiah. An. Iosiah was in the type,Josiah a type of Christ Jesus the King of the Church. so are not now the severall Gover∣nours of Commonweales, Kings or Governours of the Church or Israel, whose state I have proved to be a None-such, and not to bee parallel'd but in the Antitype the particular Church of Christ, where Christ Iesus alone sits King in his owne most holy Govern∣ment. Secondly, they propound meetings or assemblings ordinary stated and constant, yearly and monthly unto which the civill Magistrate should give liberty. For these meetings they propound plausible arguments from the necessity of them from Christian fellowship from Gods glory, from the experience of the benefit of them, and from the good report of them, as also those two Scriptures, 1 Cor. 10. 32. 2 Cor. 11. 38. To these I answer,An unjust and partiall desire of liberty to some cosci∣ences, & bond∣age unto all others. If they intend that the civill Magistrate should permit liberty to the free and voluntary Spirituall meetings of their Subjects, I shall subscribe unto them; but if they intend that the Magistrate should give liberty only unto themselves, and not to the rest of their subjects, that is to desire their owne soules only to be free, and all other soules of their subjects to be kept in bondage.
Secondly, if they intend that the Magistrate should inforce all the Elders of such Churches under their Iurisdiction, to keepe correspondencie with them in such meetings, then I say (as before) it is to cause him to give Libertie with a partiall hand, and unequall Ballance: for thus I argue. If the Civill State and Civill officers be of their Religion and Conscience, it is not proper for them to give li∣bertie or freedome, but to give honourable testimonie and approbation, and their own personall submission to the Churches. But if the civill State and Officers be of another conscience and worship, and shall be bound to grant permission and libertie to them, their consciences and meetings, and not to those of his own Religion and Conscience also, how will this appeare to be equall in the very eye of Common peace and righteousnesse? For those yearely and monthly meetings, as we find not any such in the first Churches, So neither will those generall arguments from the plausible pretence of Christian fellowship, Gods glory, &c. prove such particular wayes of glorifying God, without some pre∣cept or president of such a kind. For those Scriptures, 1 Cor. 10. 33. & 2 Cor. 11. 38. expressing the Apostle Paul his zeale for glorifying God, and his care for all the Churches, it is cleere they concerne such as are indeed Pauls suc∣cessors,The Commis∣sion. Mat. 28. of preaching and baptizing not properly directed to the Churches, or fixed Teachers of it, least of al to the Com∣monweale. sent forth by Christ Iesus to preach and gather Churches but those Scriptures concerne not the Churches themselves, nor the Pastours of the Churches properly, least of all the Civill State and Commonwealth, neither of which (the Churches, the Pastours, or Commonwealth) doe goe forth personally with that commission, Matth. 28. to preach and baptize, that is, to gather Churches unto Christ. For as for the first, the Churches are not Ministers of the Gospel: the Angels or Messengers of the Churches, and the Churches them∣selves were distinct, Revel 2. & 3. As for the second,A quaerie, who have now the care of all the Churches? the pastours and Elders of the Church, their worke is not to gather Churches, but to governe and feed them, Acts 20. & 1 Pet. 5. As for the civill Magistrate, it is a Ministry indeed: (Magistrates are Gods Ministers, Rom. 13.) but it is of another Nature, and there∣fore none of these, the Churches of Christ, the Shepherds of those Churches, nor the civill Magistrate, succeeding the Apostles or first Messengers, these Scriptures alleadged concerne not any of
these to have care of all the Churches. Peace. Deare Truth, who can heare this Word, but will pre∣sently cry out, Who then may rightly challenge that commission, and that promise, Math. 28. &c. Truth. Sweet Peace,A Ministrie before the Church. in due place and season, that Question may be resolved; but doubtles the true successours must precede or goe before the Church, making Disciples, and baptizing as the A∣postles did, who were neither the Churches, nor the Pastors and fixed Teachers of them, but as they gathered, so had the care of the Churches. CHAP. CXXXIV. Peace. I Cease to urge this further; and, in the last place, marvell what should be the reason of that Conclusion, viz. There is no power of determination in any of these mee∣tings, but that all must be left to the particular determination of the Churches. Truth. At the meeting at Ierusalem,Acts 15. com∣monly misap∣plied. when Paul and Barnabas and others were sent thither from the Church of Christ at Antioch, the Apostles and Elders did not only consult and advise, but particu∣larly determined the Question which the Church of Antioch sent to them, about Acts 15. and send their particular determinations or decrees to the Churches afterward. So that if these Assemblies were of the nature of that pattern or pre∣sident (as is generally pretended) and had such a promise of the assi∣stance and concurrence of the Spirit, as that Assembly had, they might then say as that Assembly did, Acts 15. It seemeth good to the holy Spirit and to us: and should not leave particular determinations to the par∣ticular Churches, in which sometimes are very few able Guides and Leaders. Peace. But what should be the Reason to perswade these wor∣thy men to conceive the particular Congregations or Churches to be more fit and competent Iudges in such high points, then an Assembly of so excellent and choice persons, who must only consult and ad∣vise,Christs pro∣mise and pre∣sence only makes an As∣sembly blessed &c.? Truth. Doubtlesse there is a strong conviction in their Soules of a professed promised presence of the Lord Iesus in the midst of his Church gathered after his mind and will, more then unto such kind
of Assemblies, though consisting of far more able persons, even the flower and creame of all the Churches. Peace. It is generally conceived, that the promise of Christs presence to the end of the World (Matth. 28.) is made to the Church. Truth. There is doubtlesse a promise of Christs presence in the midst of his Church and Congregation, Matth. 18. but the promise of Christs presence, Matth. 28. cannot properly and immediately belong to the Church constituted and gathered,The promise of Christs pre∣sence, Mat.  8. distinct from that, Mat. 28. but to such Mini∣sters or Messengers of Christ Iesus, whom he is pleased to imploy to gather and constitute the Church by converting and baptizing: unto which Messengers (if Christ Jesus will be pleased to send such forth) that passage, Acts 15. will be presidentiall. Peace. The 14. generall head is this,14. Position examined. viz. What power parti∣cular Churches have particularly over Magistrates. First (say they) they may censure any Member (though a Ma∣gistrate) if by sinne he deserve it. First, because Magistrates must be subject to Christ, but Christ censures all offenders, 1 Cor. 5. 45. Secondly, Every Brother must be subject to Christs censure, Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17. But Magistrates are brethren, Deut, 17. 15. Thirdly, They may censure all within the Church, I Cor. 5. 12. But the Magistrates are within the Church, for they are either without, or within, or above the Church: not the first, nor the last, for so Christ is only above it. Fourthly, The Church hath a charge of all the Soules of the members, and must give account thereof, Heb. 13. 17. Fifthly, Christs censures are for the good of Soules, I Cor. 5. 6. but Magistrates must not be denied any priviledge for their Soules, for then they must lose a priviledge of Christ by being Ma∣gistrates. Sixthly, In Church priviledges Christians are all one, Gal. 2. 28. Col. 3. 11. 2. Magistrates may be censured for apparent and manifest sinne against any Morall Law of God, in their judiciall proceedings, or in the execution of their office. Courts are not Sanctuaries for sin; and if for no sin, then not for such especially. First, because sinnes of Magistrates in Court are as hatefull to God. 2. And as much spoken against, Isa. 10. 1. Mic. 3. 1.
Thirdly, God hath no where granted such immunity to them. Fourthly, what a brother may doe privately in case of private of∣fence, that the Church may doe publikely in case of publike scan∣dall. But a private brother may admonish and reprove privately in case of any private offence, Mat. 18. 15. Luc. 19. 17. Psal. 141. 5. Lastly, Civill Magistracy doth not exempt any Church from faithfull watchfulnesse over any member, nor deprive a Church of her due power, not a Church member of his due priviledge, which is to partake of every Ordinance of God, needfull and requisite to their winning and salvation. Erg, CHAP. CXXXV. Truth. THese Arguments to prove the Magistrate subject (even for sinne committed in judiciall proceeding) I judge, like Mount Zion, immoveable, and every true Christian that is a Magistrate will judge so with mee: Yet a Quaerie or two will not be unseasonable. First,Church admi∣nistrations are charged firstly upon the Mi∣sters thereof. where they name the Church in this whole passage, whe∣ther they meane the Church without the Ministry or Governours of it, or with the Elders and Governours joyntly? and if the latter, why name they not the Governours at all, since that in all admini∣strations of the Church the duty lies not upon the body of the Church, but firstly and properly upon the Elders. It is true in case of the Elders obstinacy in apparent sinne, the Church hath power over him, having as much power to take down as to set up, Col. 4. Say to Archippus, &c. Yet in the ordinary dis∣pensations and administrations of the Ordinances, the Ministers or Elders thereof are first charged with duty, &c. Hence first for the Apostles,The Ministers or Governors of Christs Church to be acknowledged in their dispen¦sations. who converted, gathered & espoused the Churches to Christ, I question whether their power to edification was not a power over the Churches, as many Scriptures seem to imply. Secondly, for the ordinary Officers ordained for the ordinary and constant guiding, feeding, and governing the Church, they were Rulers, Shepheards, Bishops, or Overseers, and to them was every let∣ter and charge, commendation or reproofe directed, Revel. 2. 3. Acts 20. And that place by them quoted for the submission of the Magi∣strates to the Church, it mentions only submission to the Rulers ther∣of; Heb. 13. 17. Those excellent men concealed not this out of igno∣rance, and therefore most certainly in a silent way confesse that their doctrine concerning the Magistrates power in Church causes would
too gosse,A paradox, Magistrates made the Judges of the Churches, and Governours of them, yet censurable by them. if they should not have named the whole Church, and but silently implyed the Governours of it: And is it not wonder∣full in any sober eye, how the same persons (Magistrates) can be exalted over the Ministers and Members, as being bound to esta∣blish, reforme, suppresse by the civill sword in punishing the body or goods, and yet for the same actions (if the Church and Governours thereof so conceive) be liable to a punishment ten thousand times more transcendent, to wit, excommunication, a punishment reaching to their soules and consciences, and eternall estate, and this not only for common sins, but for those actions which immediately concerne the execution of their civill office, in judiciall proceeding. Peace. The Prelates in Q. Elizabeths dayes,Queene Eliz. Bish ptruer to their prin∣ciples, then many of a bet∣ter spirit and profession. kept with more plainnesse to their principles, for acknowledging the Queen to be Supreme in all Church causes, (according to the Title and Power of Henry the 8. her Father, taken from the Pope, and given to him by the Parliament) they professed that the Queen was not a sheepe, but under Christ the chiefe Shepheard, and that the Church had not power to excommunicate the Queen. Truth. Therefore (sweet Peace) it was esteemed capitall (in that faithfull witnesse of so much truth as he saw,Mr. Borowes profession concerning Queen Eliza∣beth. even unto death, Mr. Bar∣row) to maintaine before the Lords of the Councell, that the Queen herselfe was subject to the power of Christ Iesus in the Church: which Truth overthrew that other Tenent, that the Queene should be Head and Supreme in all Church causes. Peace. Those Bishops according to their principles (though bad and false) dealt plainly (though cruelly) with Mr. Barrow: but these Authors, whose principles are the same with the Bishops (concerning the power of the Magistrate in Church affaires) though they wave the Title, and will not call them Heads or Governors (which now in lighter times seems too grosse) yet give they as much spirituall power and authoritie to the civill Magistrates to the full,Is not this too like the Popes profession of servu servorum Dei, yet hol∣ding out his slipper to the lips of Prin∣ces, Kings and Emperours? as ever the Bishops gave unto them, although they yet also with the same breath lay all their honour in the dust, and make them to lick the dust of the feet of the Churches, as it is prophesied, the Kings and Queens of the Earth shall doe, when Christ makes them nursing fathers, and nursing mo∣thers, Isa, 49. The truth is, Christ Jesus is honoured, when the civill Magistrate a member of the Church, punisheth any member or Elder of the Church with the civill sword, even to the death, for any crime against the civill State so deserving it; for he beares not the sword in vain.
And Christ Iesus is againe most highly honoured, when for ap∣parent sinne in the Magistrate, being a member of the Church (for otherwise they have not to meddle with him) the Elders with the Church, admonish him and recover his Soule, or if obstinate in sin, cast him forth of their Spirituall and Christian fellowship, which doubtlesse they could not doe, were the Magistrate supreme Gover∣nour under Christ in Ecclesiasticall or Church causes, and so conse∣quently the true heire and successour of the Apostles. CHAP. CXXXVI. Peace. THe 15.15. Head exa∣mined. Head runs thus: viz. In what cases must Chur∣ches proceed with Magistrates in case of offence. We like it well, that Churches be flower in proceeding to excommunication, as of all other, so of Civill Magistrates espe∣cially in point of their Judiciall proceedings, unlesse it be in scan∣dalous breach of a manifest Law of God, and that after notorious evidence of the fact, and that after due seeking and waiting for satisfaction in a previous Advertisement. And though each par∣ticular Church in respect of the Government of Christ be inde∣pendent and absolute within it selfe, yet where the Common∣weale consists of Church members, it may be a point of Christi∣an wisedome to consider and consult with the Court also, so far as any thing may seeme doubtfull to them in the Magistrates case, wch may be further cleered by intelligence given from them; but otherwise we dare not leave it in the power of any Church to forbear to proceed & agree upon that on Earth, which they plain∣ly see Christ hath resolved in his Word, and will ratifie in Heaven. Truth. If the scope of this Head be to qualifie and adorne chri∣stian impartialitie and faithfulnes with christian wisdome and tender∣nesse, I honour and applaud such a Christian motion: but whereas that case is put, which is no where found in the patterne of the first Churches, nor suiting with the Rule of Christianitie, to wit, that the Commonweale should consist of Church members, which must be ta∣ken privatively, to wit, that none should be admitted members of the Commonweale, but such as are first members of the Church (which must necessarily run the Church upon that Temptation to feele the pulse of the Court concerning a delinquent Magistrate, before they dare proceed) I say let such Practices be brought to
the Touchstone of the true frame of a civill commonweale,The inventi∣ons of men in swarving from the true essentialls of Civill and Spirituall Common∣weales. and the the true frame of the Spirituall or Christian commonweale, the Church of Christ, and it will be seen what wood, hay, and stubble of carnall policie and humane inventions in Christs matters are put in place of the precious stones, gold and silver of the Ordinances of the most High and only wise God. CHAP. CXXXVII. Peace. DEare Truth, We are now arrived at their last Head: the Title is this,16. and last Head exami∣ned. viz. Their power in the Liberties and Priviledges of these Churches. First, all Magistrates ought to be chosen out of Church∣members, Ezod. 18. 21. Deut. 17. 15. Prov. 29. 2. When the Righ∣teous rule, the people rejoyce. Secondly, that all free men elected, be only Church-members. 1. Because if none but Church members should rule, then o∣thers should not choose, because they may elect others beside Church members. 2. From the patterne of Israel, where none had power to choose but only Israel, or such as were joyned to the people of God. 3. If it shall fall out, that in the Court consisting of Magistrates and Deputies, there be a dissent between them which may hin∣der the common good, that they now returne for ending the same, to their first principles, which are the Free men, and let them be consulted with. Truth. In this Head are 2 branches:A great Que∣gion, viz. Whether only Church mem∣bers (that is as is intended) Godly persons in a particular Church estate, be only eligi∣ble or to be chosen for Magistrates. First concerning the choice of Magistrates, that such ought to be chosen as are Church members: for which is quoted, Exod. 18. 21. Dut. 17. 15. Proverbs 19. 29. Unto which I answer: It were to be wished, that since the point is so weighty, as concerning the Pilots and Steeresmen of Kingdoms and Nations, &c. on whose abilitie, care and faithfulnesse depends most commonly the peace and safety of the commonweales they fall in: I say it were to be wished that they had more fully explained what
they intend by this Affirmative, viz. Magistrates ought to be cho∣sen out of Church members. For if they intend by this [Ought to be chosen] a necessitie of con∣cenience, viz. that for the greater advancement of common utilitie and rejoycing of the people, according to the place quoted (Prov. 29. 2.) it were to be desired, prayed for, and peaceably endeavo∣red, then I readily assent unto them. But if by this [Ought] they intend such a necessitie as those Scriptures quoted imply, viz. that people shall sin by choosing such for Magistrates as are not members of Churches; as the Israelites should have sinned, if they had not (according to Iethro's counsell, Exod. 18. and according to the command of God, Deut. 18.) chosen their Iudges and Kings within themselves in Israel: then I propose these necessary Quaries. First whether those are not lawfull Civill combinations, societies, and communions of men, in Townes, Cities, States or Kingdoms, where no Church of Christ is resident,Lawfull Civil States, where Churches of Christ are not. yea where his name was never yet heard of: I adde to this, that Men of no small note, skilfull in the state of the World, acknowledge, that the World divided into 30 parts,The world being divided into 30 parts, 25 never heard of Christ. 25 of that 30 have never yet heard of the name of Christ: If their Civill polities and combinations be not lawfull, (because they are not Churches, and their Magistrates Church members) then disorder, confusion, and all unrighteousnes is lawfull, and pleasing to God. Secondly, whether in such States or Commonweales, where a Church or Churches of Christ are resident, such persons may not lawfully succeed to the Crown or Government,Lawfull heires of Crownes & Civill Govern∣ment, although not Christian and godly. in whome the feare of God (according to Iethroes councell) cannot be discerned, not are brethren of the Church, according to Deut. 17.) but only are fitted with Civill and Morall abilities, to manage the Civill affaires of the Civill State. Thirdly, since not many Wise and Noble are called, but the poores receive the Gospel, as God hath chosen the poore of the World to be rich in Faith, 1 Cor. 1 Jam. 2. Whether it may not ordinarily come to passe,Few Christi∣ans wise and noble, and qualified for affaires of State. that there may not be found in a true Church of Christ (which sometimes consisteth but of few persons) persons fit to be either Kings or Governours, &c. whose civill office is no lesse diffi∣cult then the office of a Doctor of Physick, a Master or Pilot of a Ship, or a Captaine or Commander of a Band or Army of men: for
which services, the children of God may be no wayes qualified, though otherwise excellent for the feare of God, and the knowledge and Grace of the Lord Iesus. 4. If Magistrates ought (that is, ought only) to be chosen out of the Church, I demand if they ought not also to be dethroned and deposed,Some Papists and some Pro∣testants agree in deposing of Magistrates. when they cease to be of the Church, either by voluntary departure from it, or by excommunication out of it, according to the bloody tenents and practice of some Papists, with whom the Prote∣stants (according to their principles) although they seeme to abhor it, doe absolutely agree? 5. Therefore lastly, I ask if this be not to turne the World upside down, to turne, the World out of the World, to pluck up the roots and foundations of all common societie in the World? to turne the Garden and Paradice of the Church and Saints into the Field of the Civill State of the World, and to reduce the World to the first Chaos or con∣fusion CHAP. CXXXVIII. Peace. DEare Truth, thou conquerest and shalt triumph in season: but some will say, How answer you those Scriptures al∣leadged? Truth. I have fully and at large declared the vast differences be∣tween that holy Nation of typicall Israel, and all other Lands and Countries, how unmatchable then and now, and never to be paral∣lel'd, but by the true Israel and particular Churches of Christ residing in all parts (and under the severall civill Governments) of the world: In which Churches, the Israel of God,Those Scrip∣tures, Exod. 18 Deut. 17. & 18. &c. parallel'd in the true spi∣rituall Israel, by 1 Tim. 3. & Tit. 1. and Kingdome of Christ Iesus, such only are to be chosen spirituall Officers and Governours, to ma∣nage his Kingly power and authoritie in the Church, as are (accor∣ding to the Scriptures quoted, not Pope, Bishops, or Civill powers, but) from amongst themselves, Brethren, fearing God, hating cove∣ousnesse or filthy lucre, according to those golden Rules given by the Lord Iesus, 1 Tim. 3. & Tit. 1. The want of discerning this true parallel, between Israel in the type then, and Israel the antitype now, is that rock whereon (through the Lords righteous jealousie, punishing the World, and chasti∣sing his people) thousands dash, and make wofull Ship∣wrack.
The second branch, viz. that all Freemen elected be only Church members, I have before shewne to be built on that saudy and dan∣gerous Ground of Israels patterns: O that it may please the Father of Lights to discover this to all that fear his name I then would they not sin to save a Kingdome, nor run into the lamentable breach of civill peace and order in the world, nor be guilty of forcing thousands to Hypocrisie, in a State worship, nor of prophaning the holy name of God and Christ, by putting their Names and Ordinances upon un∣cleane and unholy persons: nor of shedding the blood of such Here∣ticks, &c. whom Christ would have enjoy longer patience and per∣mission untill the Harvest: nor of the blood of the Lord Iesus him∣selfe, in his faithfull Witnesses of Truth: nor lastly, of the blood of so many hundred thousands slaughtred men, women, and children, by such uncivill and unchristian wars and combustions about the Chri∣stian faith and Religion. Peace. Deare Truth: before we part, I aske your faithfull helpe once more, to 2 or 3 Scriptures, which many alleadge, and yet we have not spoken of. Truth. Speake on; here is some sand left in this our houre glasse of mercifull opportunitie: One graine of Times inestimable sand is worth a golden mountaine; let's not lose it. Peace. The first is that of the Ninevites fast,The Ninevites Fast examined commanded by the King of Ninevie and his Nobles, upon the preaching of Ionah; suc∣ceeded by Gods mercifull answer in sparing of the Citie; and quoted with honorable approbation by the Lord Iesus Christ, Jonah 3. & Math. 12. Truth. I have before proved, that even Iehosaphats fast (he be∣ing King of that Nationall Church and people of Israel) could not possibly be a type or warrant for every King or Magistrate in the World (whose Nations, Countries or Cities cannot be Churches of God, now in the Gospel, according to Christ Iesus: Much lesse can this patterne of the King of Ninevie and his No∣bles, be a ground for Kings and Magistrates now, to force all their Subjects under them in the matters of Worship. Peace. It will be said, why did God thus answer them? Truth. Gods mercy in hearing doth not prove an action right and according to rule. It pleased God to heare the Israelites cry for Flesh, and afterward for a King, given both in anger to them.
It pleased God to heare Aabs prayer, yea and the prayer of the Devils (Luc. 8.) although their persons and prayers in themselves abominable. If it be said, why did Christ approve this example?Object. I answer, the Lord Iesus Christ did not approve the King of Ni∣nevies compelling all to Worship,Answ. but the men of Ninevies repen∣tance at the preaching of Ionah. Peace. It will be said, what shall Kings and Magistrates now doe in the plagues of sword, famine, pestilence? Truth. Kings and Magistrates must be considered (as formerly) invested with no more power then the people betrust them with. But no People can betrust them with any spirituall power in matters of worship, but with a Civill power belonging to their goods and bodies. 2. Kings and Magistrates must be considered as either godly or ungodly. If ungodly, his own and peoples duty is Repentance, and reconci∣ling of their persons unto God, before their sacrifice can be accep∣ted. Without Repentance what have any to doe with the covenant or promise of God? Psal. 50. Againe, if Godly, they are to humble themselves, and beg mer∣cles for themselves and people. Secondly, upon this advantage & occasion, they are stir up their people (as possibly they may) to Repentance: but not to force the consciences of people to worship. If it be said,Object. What must be attended to in this example? Two things are most eminent in this example.Answ. First, the great worke of Repentance, which God calls all men unto, upon the true preaching of his Word. Secondly,How England and London may yet be spared. the nature of that true repentance whether Legall or Evangelicall: The people of Ninevie turned from the violence that was in their hands: And confident I am, if this Nation shall turne (though but with a Legall repentance) from that violent persecu∣ting or hunting each of other for Religion sake, (the greatest vio∣lence and hunting in the wildernesse of the whole World) even as Sodome and Gomorrah upon a Legall repentance, had continued untill Christs day; so consequently might England, London, &c. continue free from a generall destruction (upon such a turning from their vi∣olence) untill the Heavens and the whole World be with fire consu∣med.
Peace. The second Scripture is that speech of the Lord Christ, Luc. 22. 36. He that hath not a sword, let him fell his coat, and buy one. Truth. For the cleering of this Scripture,Luc. 22, the felling of the Coat, to buy a Sword, discus∣sed. I must propose and re∣concile that seeming contrary command of the Lord Iesus to Peter (Mat. 26.) Put up thy sword into his place, for all that take the sword, shall perish by it. In the former Scripture (Luc. 22.) it pleased the Lord Iesus, spea∣king of his present trouble, to compare his former sending forth of his Disciples. without scrip, &c. with that present condition and triall comming upon them, wherein they should provide both scrip and sword, &c. Yet now, first, when they tell him of two swords, he answers, It is enough: which shewes his former meaning was not literall, but figurative, foreshewing his present danger above his former. Secondly, in the same case at the same time (Mat. 26) com∣manding Peter to put on his sword, he gives a threefold Reason thereof. 1 (vers. 52.) from the event of it: for all that take the sword, shall perish by it. 2 The needlesnes of it: for with a word to his Father, he could have 12 legions of Angels. 3 The councell of God to be fulfilled in the Scripture: Thus it ought to be. Peace. It is much questioned by some, what should be the mea∣ning of Christ Iesus in that speech, All that take the sword, shall pe∣rish by the sword. Truth. There is a threefold taking of the sword: First,A threefold taking of the Sword. by mur∣therous crueltie, either of private persons, or secondly, publike States or Societies, in wrath or revenge each against other. Secondly, a just and righteous taking of the sword in punishing offenders against the Civill peace, either more personall, private and ordinary; or more publike, Oppressors, Tyrants, Ships, Navies, &c. Neither of these can it be imagined that Christ Iesus intended to Peter. Thirdly, There is therefore a 3. taking of the sword, forbidden to Peter, that is, for Christ and the Gospels cause, when Christ is in danger: which made Peter strike, &c. Peace. It seemes to some most contrary to all true Reason, that
Christ Iesus,  it selfe, should not be defended. Truth. The foolishnes of God is wiser then the wisedome of Man. It is not the purpose of God, that the Spirituall battailes of his Son shall be fought by carnall weapons and persons. It is not his pleasure that the World shall flame on fire with civill combustions, for his Sons sake. It is directly contrary to the nature of Christ Iesus, his Saints and Truths, that throats of men (which is the highest contrarietie to civill converse) should be torne out for his sake, who most delighted to converse with the greatest sinners. It is the councell of God, that his servants shall overcome by 3 weapons, of a spirituall nature, Revel. 12. 11. And that all that take the sword of steele, shall perish. Lastly, it is the Councell of God, that Christ Iesus shall shortly appeare a most glorious Iudge and Revenger against all his Enemies, when the Heavens and the Earth shall  before his most glorious presence. Peace. I shall propose the last Scripture much insisted on by ma∣ny,Revel. 17. 16. the Kings ha∣ving of the Whore, discus∣sed. for carnall weapons in spirituall cases, Revel. 17. 16. The 10 hornes which thou fawest upon the Beast, these shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and shall burne her with fire. Truth. Not to controvert with some, whether or no the Beast be yet risen and extant. Nor secondly, whether either the Beast, or the Hornes, or the Whore may be taken literally for any corporall Beast or Whore. Or thirdly, whether these 10 Hornes be punctually and exactly 10 Kings. Or fourthly, whether those 10 Hornes signifie those many Kings, Kingdomes, and Governments, who have bowed down to the Popes yoake, and have committed fornication with that great Whore the Church of Rome. Let this last be admitted (which yet will cost some work to cleer against all opposites:) Yet, First, can the Time be now cleerly demonstrated to be come, &c? Secondly, how will it be proved, that this atred of this Whre shall be a true, chaste, Christian hatred against Antichristian who∣rish practices, &c?
Thirdly, or rather that this hating and desolating and making na∣ked and burning shall arise, not by way of an ordinance waranted by the institution of Christ Iesus, but by way of providence when (as it useth to be with all whores and their lovers) the Church of Rome and her great lovers shall fall out, and by the righteous vengeance of God upon her, drunke with the blood of Saints or holy Ones, these mighty fornicators shall turne their love into hatred, which ha∣tred shall make her a poore desolate naked Whore, torne and con∣sumed, &c. Peace. You know it is a great controversie how the Kings of the Earth shall thus deale with the Whore in the 17 Chap. and yet so be∣waile her in the 18 Chapter. Truth. If we take it that these Kings of the Earth shall first hate, and plunder, and teare, and burne this Whore, and yet afterward shall relent and bewaile their cruell dealing toward her: Or else, that as some Kings deale so terribly with her, yet others of those Kings shall bewaile her. If either of these two answers stand, or a better be given, yet none of them can prove it lawfull for people to give power to their Kings and Magistrates thus to deale with them their subjects for their conscience; nor for Magistrates to assume a title more then the people betrust them with; nor for one people out of conscience to God, and for Christ his sake, thus to kill and slaughter and burne each other: However it may please the Righteous Judge, accor∣ding to the famous types of Gideous and Iehosaphats battells, to per∣mit in Iustice, and to order in Wisdome these mighty and mutuall slaughters each of other. Peace. We have now (deare Truth) through the gracious hand of God clambered up to the top of this our tedious Discourse. Truth. O 'tis mercy unexpressible that either Thou or I have had so long a breathing time, and that together! Peace. If English ground must yet be drunk with English blood, O where shall Peace repose her wearied head and heavy heart? Truth. Deare Peace, if thou finde welcome, and the God of peace miraculously please to quench these all-devouring flames, yet where shall Truth finde rest from cruell persecutions? Peace. Oh, will not the Authority of holy Scriptures, the Com∣mands and Declarations of the Sonne of God, therein produced by thee, together with all the lamentable experiences of former and,
present slaughters prevaile with the Sons of Men (especially with the Sons of Peace) to depart from the dens of Lyons, and mountaines of Leopards, and to put on the bowels (if not of Christianitie, yet) of Humanitie each to other! Truth. Deare Peace, Habacacks Fishes keep their constant bloody game of Persecutions in the Worlds mighty Ocean; the greater taking, plundring, swallowing up the lesser: O happy he whose portion is the God of Iacob! who hath nothing to lose under the Sun, but hath a State, a House, an Inheritance, a Name, a Crowne, a Life, past all the Plunderers, Ravishers, Murtherers reach and furie! Peace. But loe! Who's here? Truth. Our Sister Patience, whose desired company is as need∣full as delightfull: 'Tis like the Wolfe will send the scattered Sheep in one: the common Pirate gathers up the loose and scattered Navie: the slaughter of the Witnesses by that bloody Beast unite the Independents and Presbyterians. The God of Peace, the God of Truth will shortly seale this Truth, and confirme this Witnes, and make it evident to the whole World, That the Doctrine of Persecution for cause of Conscience, is most evidently and lamentably contrary to the doctrine of Christ Iesus the Prince of Peace. Amen. FINIS. Errata. PAge 23. line 28. for this, red that. p. 31. l. ult. his soule. p. 32. l. 12. read month, bid. r. person. p. 35. l. 16. r. turned off, or loosed from. p. 37. l. 8. for to, read doc. p. 38. l. 2. dele affirme. p. 41. l. 22. his perilous soule. p. 43. l. 20. r. or l. ult. Answeres. p. 44. l. 2. b closer. p. 49. l. 1. last p 57. l. 22. cut. l. 24. l rme that Justice. p. 58. l. 5. the lying. p 98. l. 6. road, or doe these p. 114. l. 29. r, the 31 question. p. 119 l. 10. remembers. p. 139. l. 9. immunitie. p. 161. l. 28. or Christ. p. 214. l. 36. delt shall. p. 225. l. 19. the Churches of God. 225. l. 25. not might not.
