W3647 12764148 93547
A Parallell betweene Robert late Earle of Essex, and George late Duke of Buckingham. Written by Sir Henry Wotton, Knight, &c. Printed at London, 1641.
Obert Devereux, Earle of Essex: AND Gilliers, Duke of Buckingham. Some Observations by way of Parallell in the time of their Estates of favour. AMongst those Historicall Imployments, whereunto I have devo∣ted my later yeares, (for I read, that old men live more by me∣morie than by hope) we thoght it would be a little time not ill spent, to confer the Fortunes and the natures of these two great personages of so late knowledge, wherein I intend to doe them right with the truth thereof, and my selfe with the freedome. The beginning of the Earle of Essex, I must attribute wholly or in great part to my Lord of Leicester: but yet as an Introducer or Supporter, not as a teacher: for as I goe along, it will easily appeare, that he neither lived nor dyed by his Discipline. Alwaies certaine it is, that he drew him first into the fatall Circle from a kinde of resolved privatenes at his house at Lampsie, in South-Wales, where after the Academicall life, hee had taken such a taste of the Rurall, (as I have heard him say (and not upon any flashes or fumes of Melancholy, or traverses of discontent, but in a serene and quiet Mood) that he could well have bent his mind to a retyred course. About which time, the said Earl of Leicester bewrayed a meaning to plant him in the Queens favour; which was diversly interpreted by such as thought that great Artizan of Court to doe nothing by chance, nor much by affection. Some therefore were of opinion, that feeling more and more in himselfe the weight of time, and being almost tyred (if there be a satietie in power) with that assiduous attendance, and intensive circumspection which a long indulgent fortune did require, he was grown not unwilling for his owne ease, to bestow handsomely upon another some part of the pains, and perhaps of the envy. Others conceived rather, that having before for the same ends brought in,
or let in Sr. Walter Rawleigh, and having found him such an apprentize as knew well enough how to set up for himselfe, he now meant to allie him with this young Earle, who had yet taken no strong impressions: so though the said Sir Walter Rauleigh was a little before this, whereof I now speake by occasion, much fallen from his former splendor in Court; Yet he still continued in some lustre of a favoured man, like billowes that sinke by degrees, even when the winde is downe that first stirred them. Thus runnes the discourse of that time at pleasure; yet I am not ignorant, that there was some good while a verie stiffe aversation in my Lord of Essex, from applying himselfe to the Earle of Leicester, for what secret conceite I know not; but howsoever that honour was mollified by time, and by his mother, and to the Court, hee came under his Lord. The Duke of Buckingham had another kinde of Germination; and surely had he beene a plant, he would have beene reckoned amonst the Sponte Nascen∣tes, for hee sprung without any help, by a kind of congeniall composure (as wee may terme it) to the likenesse of our late Soveraigne and Master of ever blessed memorie, who taking him into his regard taught him more and more to please himselfe, and moulded him, (as it were) Platonically to his owne Idea, de∣lighting first in the choyse of the Materialls; because he found him susceptible of good forme) and afterwards by degrees as great Architects use to doe in the workmanship of his Regall hand, nor staying here, after hee had hardned and polished him about ten yeares in the Schoole of observance, (for so a Court is) and in the furnace of tryall about himselfe, (for he was a King could per∣use men as well as bookes) he made him the associate of his heire apparant, to∣gether with the now Lord Cottington, (as an adjunct of singular experience and trust) in forraine travailes, and in a businsse of love, and of no equall haz∣zard (if the tendernesse of our zeale did not then deceive us) enough (the world must confesse) to kindle affection even betwixt the distantest conditions; so as by the various and inward conversation abroad (besides that before and after at home) with the most constant and best natured Prince, Bona si sua Norint, as ever England enjoyed. This Duke becomes now secondly seized of favour, as it were by discent (though the condition of that estate be no more than a Tenancie at will, or at most for the life of the first Lord) and rarely transmitted, which I have briefely set downe, without looking beyond the vaile of the Temple, I meane into the secret of high inclinations, since even Satyricall Poets, (who are otherwise of so licentious fancie) are in this poynt mo∣dest enough to confesse their ignorance. Nescio quid certe est quod me tibi temperet Astrum. And these were both their springings and Imprimings as I may call them. In the profluence or proceedings of their fortunes, I observe likewise not
onely much difference between them: but in the Earle not a little from himself; First, all his hopes of advancement had like to bee strangled almost in the very Cradle, by throwing himselfe into the Portugal Voyage without the Queenes consent, or so much as her knowledge; wherby he left his friends and dependants neere sixe moneths in desperate suspense what would become of him. And to speake truth not without good reason: For first they might well consider, That he was himselfe not well plumed in favour for such a flight: Besides that now he wanted a Lord of Leicester at home (for hee was dead the year before) to smooth his absence, and to quench the practises at court. But above all, it lay open to every mans Discourse, that though the bare offence to his So∣veraigne and Mistris was too great adventure, yet much more when shee might (as in this case) have fairely discharged her displeasure upon her Lawes. Not∣withstanding, a noble report comming home before him. At his returne all was cleere, and this excursion was esteemed but a Sally of youth: Nay, he grew every day more and more in her Gracious conceit: whether such intermissions as these do sometimes foment affection, or that having committed a fault, he became the more obsequious and plyant to re∣deeme it: Or that shee had not received into her Royall brest any shadows of his popularity. There was another time long after, when Sir Fulke Grevill (late Lord Brooke) a man in appearance intrinsecal with him, or at the least admitted to his Melancholly houres, eyther belike espying some wearinesse in the Queene, or perhaps with little change of the word though more in the dangersome markes towards him, and working upon the present matter (as she was dexterous and close) had almost superinduced into favour the Earle of Southampton; which yet being timely discovered, my Lord of Essex chose to evaporate his thoughts in a Sonnet (beeing his common way) to be sung before the Queene, (as it was) by one Hales, in whose voyce shee tooke some pleasure; whereof the complot me thinkes, had asmuch of the Hermit as of the Post: And if thou shouldst by Her be now forsaken, She made thy Heart too strong for to be shaken. As if hee had beene casting one eye backe at the least to his former re∣tirednesse. But all this likewise quickly vanished, and there was a good∣while after faire weather over-head. Yet still I know not how, like a ga∣thering of Clouds, till towards his latter time, when his humours grew Tart, as being now in the Lees of favour; it brake forth into certayne sud∣daine recesses; sometimes from the Court to Wansteed, other whiles unto
Greenewitch, often to his owne Chamber, Doores shut, Visits forbidden, and which was worse, divers Contestations (betweene) with the Queene her selfe (all preambles of ruine) wherewith though now and then hee did Wring out of her Majesty some petty contentments, (as a man would presse sower Grapes) yet in the meane time was forgotten the Counsell of a Wise, and then a Propheticall Friend, who told him that such Courses as those, were like hot Waters, who helpe at a pang, but if they be too often used, will spoyle the stomacke. On the Dukes part, wee have no such abrupt straynes and precipees as these, but a faire fluent and uniforme course under both Kings: And surely as there was in his naturall Constitution a marvailous equality, whereof I shall speake more afterwards; so there was an image of it in his Fortune running (if I may borrow an ancient comparison) as smoothly as a nume∣rous Verse, till it met with certayne Rubs in Parliament, whereof I am induced by the very Subject which I handle, to say somewhat, so farre as shall concerne the difference betweene their times. WHen my Lord of Essex stood in Favour, the Parliaments were calme: Nay, I finde it a true observation, that there was no impeachment of any Nobleman by the Commons, from the Raigne of King Henry the sixth, untill the eighteenth of King Iames, nor any intervenient president of that Nature, not that something or other could be wanting to be sayed, while men are men: For not to goe higher, wee are taught easily so much, by the very Ballads and Libels of Leicestrian time. But about the aforesayd Yeare▪ many young ones being chosen into the house of Commons, more then had beene usuall in great Councells (who though of the weakest Wiugs, are the highest Flyers) there arose a certayne unfortunate and unfruitfull Spirit in some places; not sowing, but picking at every stone in the Field, rather then tending to the generall Harvest. And thus farre the Consideration of the Nature of the Time hath transported me, and the occasion of the subject. Now on the other side, I must with the like Liberty observe two weighty and watchfull Solicitudes (as I may call them) which kept the Earle in extream and continuall Caution, like a Bow still bent, whereof the Dukes thoughts were absolutely free.
First, hee was to wrestle with a Queenes declyning, or rather with Her very setling Age (as wee may terme it) which besides other respects is commonly even of it selfe the more umbratious and apprehensive, as for the most part all Horizons are charged with certayn Vapours towards their Evening. The other was a matter of more Circumstance, standing thus, viz. ALl Princes, especially those whom God hath not blessed with naturall issue, are (by Wisesome of State) somewhat shye of their Successors, and to speake with due Reverence, there may be reasonably supposed in Queenes Regnant, a little proportion of tendernes that way, more then in Kings. Now there were in Court two names of Power, and almost of Af∣fection, the Essexian and the Cecilian with their Adherents, both well enough enjoying the present, and yet both looking to the future, and there∣fore both holding correspondency with some of the principall in Scotland, and hath received advertisements and instructions, eyther from them, or immediatly from the King as Induciat Heire of this Imperiall Crowne. But least they might detect one another; this was Mysteriously carried by severall instruments and Conducts, and on the Essextian side, in truth with infinite hazard, for Sir Robert Cecill who (as Secretary of State) did dispose the publicke addresses, had prompter and safer conveyance; where∣upon I cannot but relate a memorable passage on eyther part, as the story fol∣lowing shall declare. The Earle of Essex had accommodated Master Anthony Bacon in a par∣tition of his House, and had assigned him a noble entertaynement: This was a Gentleman of impotent feete, bu of a nimble head, and through his hand runne all the intelligences with Scotland; who beeing of a pro∣vident Nature (contrary to his brother the Lord Viscount Saint Albons) and well knowing the advantage of a dangerous Secret, would many tims cunningly let fall some Words, as if hee could amend his For∣tunes under the Cecilians (to whom hee was neere of alliance and in blood also) and who had made (as hee was not unwilling should bee beleeved) some great profer to winne him away; which once or twice hee pressed so farre, and with such tokens and signes of ap∣parent discontent to my Lord Henry Howard, afterwards Earle of Northampton, (who was of the party, and stood himselfe in much Vmbrage with the Queene) that hee flyes presently to my Lord of Essex,
(with whom hee was commonly primae admissionis, by his be side in the morning, and tells him that unlesse that Gentleman were presently satisfied with some round summe, all would be vented. This tooke the Earle at that time ill provided (as indeed oftentimes his Coffers were low) whereupon hee was faine suddainely to give him Essex-House; which the good old Lady of Walsingham did afterwards dis-ingage out of her owne store with 250. pound; and before hee had distilled 1500. pound at nother time by the same skill; so as wee rate this one secret, as it was finely carried at 4000. pounds in present mony, besides at the least 1000. pound of annuall pension to a private and bed-rid Gentleman; what would hee have gotten if hee could have gone about his owne businesse? There was another accident of the same nature on the Cicilian side, much more pleasant, but lesse chargeable, for it cost nothing but Wit. The Queene having for a good while no heard any thing from Scotland, and beeing Thirsty of newes, it fell out that her Majesty going to take the Ayre towards the Heath (the Court being then at Greenewich) and Master Secretary Cicill then attending her: A Post came crossing by, and blew his Horne. The Queene out of curiosity asked him from whence the dispatch came; and being answered from Scotland; ad he stoppes her Coach, and calleth for the Packet. The Secretary though hee knew there were some Letters in it from his correspondents; which to discover, were as many Srpents; yet made more shwe of diligence, then of doubt to obey; and askes some that stood by (so sooth in great hast) for a knife to cut up the Packet (for o∣therwise hee might perhaps awaked a little apprehension,) but in the meane time approaching with the Packet in his hand, at a pretty distance from the Queene; hee telleth her it looked and smelt ill-favouredly comming out of a filthy Budget, and that it should be fit first to open and ayre it, because hee knew she was averse from ill Sents. And so being dismissed home, hee got leisure by this seasonable shift, to sever what hee would not have sene. These two accidents precisely true, and knowne to few, I have repor∣ted as not altogether extravagant from my purpose, to shew how the Earle stood in certaine perplex ties wherewith the Dukes dayes were not distra∣cted. And this hath beee the Historicall part (as it were) touching the difference betweene them in the rising and flowing of their Fortunes. I will now consider their severall ndowments both of Person and Mind, and ten a little of their Actions and Ends. The Earle was a pretty deale the Taller, and much the stronger, and of the abler body: But the Duke had the neater limbes and freer delivery; he was also the uprighter, and of the more comely motions, for the Earle
did bend a little in the neck, though rather forwards then downewards, and he was so far from being a good dancer, that he was no gracefull goe. If we touch particulars, the Duke exceeded in the daintinesse of his leg and foote, and the Earle in the incomparable fairenesse and fine shape of his hands; which (though it be but a feminine praise he tooke from his Father) for the generall Ayre, the Earle had the closer and more reserved Counte∣nance, beig by nature somewhat more cogitative, and (which was strange) never more then at meales when others are least: Insomuch as he was wont to make this observation of himselfe, that to solve any knottie businesse which cumbred his minde, his ablest houres was when hee had checked his first appetite with two or three morsells, after which he sate usually for a good while silent, yet hee would play well and willingly at some games of greatest attention, which shewed that when hee listed he could licence his thoughts. The Duke on the other side, even in the midst of so many diversions, had continually a very pleasant and vacant face (as I may well call it) procee∣ding no doubt from a singular assurance in his temper. And yet I must here give him a rarer Elogie, which the malignest eye cannot deny him. That certainely never man in his place and power, did entertaine greatnesse more familiarly, nor whose lookes were lesse tainted with his felicitie, where∣in I insist the rather because this in my Iudgement was one of his greatest vertues and victories of himselfe. But to proceed, in the attyring and Ornament of their bodyes, the Duke a fine and unaffected politenesse, and upon occasion costlie, as in his lega∣tions. The Earle as he grew more and more attentive to businesse and matter, so lesse and lesse curious of cloathing: Insomuch, as I doe remember those a∣bout him had a conceit that possibly sometimes when hee went up to the Queene, hee might scant know what he had on, for this was his manner, his chamber being commonly stived with friends or Suitors of one kinde or other, when he gave his legs, armes, and brest to his ordinary servants to button and dresse him with little heede, his head and face to his Barbour, his eyes to his letters, and eares to Petitioners, and many times all at once, then the Gentleman of his Robes throwing a cloak over his shoulders hee would make a step into his Closet, and after a short prayer, he was gone: onely in his Baths, he was somewhat delicate, for point of dyet and luxurie, they were both very inordinate in their appetites, especially the Earle, who was by nature of so different a taste, that I must tel a rare thing of him (though it bee but a homely note) that he would stop in the middest of any Physicall potion, and after he had licked his lips, he would drinke of the rest, but I
am weary of such slight Animadversions. To come therefore to the inward furniture of their mindes, I will thus much declare. The Earle was of good Erudition having been placed at study in Cam∣bridge very young by the Lord Burleigh, his Guardian, with affectionate and delberae care, under the oversight of Doctor Whitgift then Master of Tri∣nitie Colledge, and after Archbishop of Canterbury: A man by the way sure∣ly of a most reverend and sacred memory, and (as I may well say) even of the prmitive temper, when the Church in lowlynesse of temper, did flourish in high examples, which I have inserted as a due recordation of his vertues, having been much obliged to him, for many favours in my young∣er time. About sixteen years of his age (for thither he came at twelve) he tooke the formality of Master of Arts, and kept his pulique Acts, and heer. I must not smoother what I have received by constant Information, that his owne Father dyed with a very cold coneit of him, some say through the af∣fection to his second sonne Walter Deverx, who was indeed a yamond of the time, and both of an hardy and delicate temper and mixure: But it seems this Ear like certaine vegetables, did bud and open slowly: Nature sometimes delighting to play an after game as well as fortune, which had both their turnes and tides in couse. The Duke was Illiterate, yet had learned at Court, first to sift and question well, and to supply his owne defects by the drawing or flowing un∣to him of the best Instruments of experience and knowledge, from whom hee had a sweet and attractive manner, to suck what might be for the publike or his own proper use, so as the lesse he was favoured by the muses, he was the more by the graces. To consider them in their Pure Naturalls, I conceive the Earles intel∣lectuall faculties to have been his strongest part, and in the Duke his pra∣cticall. Yet all know that he likewise at the first was much under the expectati∣on of his after proof: such a sodain influence therein had the soveraign aspect, for their Abilities of discourse or pen, the Earle was a very Acute and sound speaker when he would intend it, and for his writings, they are beyond ex∣ample, especially in his familiar letters and things of delight at Court when he would admit his serious habits, as may be yet seen in his Impresses and in∣ventions of entertainment, and above all in his darling piece of love, and selfe love, his Stile was an elegant perspiuity, rich of praise, but seldome any bold Metaphors, and so farre from Tumor that it rather wanted a little Elevation.
The Dukes delivery of his minde, I conceive not to be so sharpe as solid and grave, not so solid and deepe as pertinent, and apposite to the times and occasions. The Earl I account the more liberall, and the D. the more magnificent, for I doe not remember that my Lord of Essex in all his life time did. build or adorn any house, the Queen perchance spending his time, and himselfe his meanes, or otherwise more inclyning to popular wayes, for wee knowe the people are apter to applaud housekeepers then house-raisers, they were both great cherishers of Schollers and Divines, but it seemes the Earle had obteyned of himselfe one singular point, that he could depart his affection betweene two extreames, for though hee bare alwayes a kinde of filiall re∣verence towards Doctor Whitguist, both before and after he was Archbish∣op, yet on the other side, he did not a little love and tender Master Cart∣wright, though I think truely with large distinction between the persons and the causes, howsoever hee was taxed with other ends, in respecting that partie. They were both faire spoken Gentlemen, not Prone and eager to detract openly from any man, and in this the Earle hath been most falsely blemish∣ed in our vulgar story: Onely against one man, he had forsworne all pati∣ence, namely Henry Lord Cobham, and would call him (per Excelleni∣am) the Sycophant (as if it had been an Embleme of his name) even to the Queene her selfe, though of no small insinuation with her and one La∣dy likewise (that I may civillie spare to nominate for her sex sake) whom he used to terme the Spyer of the Court, yet generally in the sensitive part of their Natures the Earle was the worse Philosopher, beeing a great Resenter and a weak dissembler of the least disgrace: And herein likewise as in the rest, no good Pupill to my Lord of Leicester, who was wont to put all his passions in his pockquet. In the growth of their fortunes, the Duke was a little the swifter, and much the greater, for from a younger brothers mean estate he rse to the high∣est degree whereof a Subject was capable either in Title or Trust▪ therein I must confesse much more consortable to Charles Brandon unde Henry the eight, who was equall to him in both. For matter of Donative and addition of substance, I do not beleeve that the Duke did much exceed him, all considered under both Kings. For that which the Earle of Essex had received from her Majesty, besides the Fees of his Offices, and the disposition of great Summes of money in her Armies, was a out the time of his arraignement, when faults use to be aggravated with preceent benefits, valued at three hundred thusand pounds sterling in pure gift for his onely use, to the Earle of Dorst then
Lord Treasurer; who was a wise man, and a strict Computist, and not ill affected towards him. And yet it is worthy of note in the Margent of both Times, that the one was prosecuted with silence, and the other with mur∣mure, so undoing a measure is popular judgement. I cannot heere omit betweene them a great difference in establishing of both their Fortunes and Fames. FOr the first, The Duke had a care to introduce into neere place at the Court divers of his confident Servants, and into high places very sound and grave Personages; whereas except a Pensioner or two, wee cannot scant name any one man advanced of the Earles breeding, but Sir Thomas Smith having beene his Secretary, who yet came never further (though married into a noble House) then to the Clearke of the Councell, and Re∣gister of the Parliament; not that the Earle meant to stanalone like a Sub∣stantive (for he was not so ill a Grammarian in Court) but the Trueth is, in this poynt the Cecilians kept him backe, as very well knowing that upon every little absence or dissaduity, hee should bee subject to take cold at his backe. For the Other, in the managing of their Fames, I note betweene them a direct contrary Wisedome; for the Earle proceeded by way of Apo∣logy which hee Wrot and dispersed with his owne hands at large, though till his going to Ireland they wer but ayery objections. But of the Duke this I know, that one having offered for his ase to doe him that kinde of Service; Hee refused it with a pretty kinde of Thankfull scorne (saying) that he would trust his owne good intentions which God knew, and leave to him the pardoning of his Errours; and that hee saw no fruite of Apologies but the multiplying of discourse, which surely was a well setled Maxime. And for my owne particular (though I am not obnoxious to his memory) in the expression of Taciu, Neque injuria, neque beneficia, saving that he shewed mean ordinary good Countenance. And if I were, yet I would di∣stinguish betweene Gratitude and Truth, I must beare him this Testimony: That in a Commission laed upon me by Soveraigne Commaund to examine a Lady about a certayne filthy accusation grounded upon nothing but a few single names taken up by a Foote-man in a Kennell, and streight baptized: A list of such as the Duke had appoynted to be empoysoned at home, himself being then in Spaine: I found it to bee the most malicious and Franticke surmize, and the most conrary to his nature that I thinke had ever beene brewed from the beginning of the World, howsoever countenanced by a
Libellous Pamphelet of a fugitive Physition even in Print; and yet of this would the Duke suffer any answer to be made on his behalfe, so constant hee was to his owne Principles. In their Military Services the Characters of the Earles imployments were these, viz. His forwardest was that of Portugall before mentioned. The saddest, that of Roan where hee lost his brave Brother. His fortunatest peece I esteeme, the taking of Cadiz Malez, and no lesse modest, for there hee Wrot with his owne hands, a censure of his O∣missions. His jealousest employment was to the reliefe of Callais besieged by the Cardinall Arch-duke: about which, there passed then betweene the Queene and the French King, much Arte. His Voiage to the Azores was the best, for the discovery of the Spanish weaknesse, and otherwise almost a saving Voyage. His blackest was that to Ireland, ordayned to bee the Sepulcher of his Father, and the Gulph of his owne Fortunes. But the first in 88. at Tilbury Campe, was in my judgement, the very poyson of all that followed, for there whilest the Queene stood in some doubt of a Spanish Invasion (though it proved but a Morrice dance upon our Waves) she made him in Field Commaunder of the Cavalry (as hee was before in Curt) and much graced him openly in view of the Souldiers and people, even above my Lord of Leicester: the trueth is from thenceforth hee fed too fast. THe Dukes employment abroad in this nature, was onely in the Action of the Ile of Reez, of which I must note somewhat for the honour of our Country, and of his Majesties times, and of them that perished and survived, and to redeeme it generally from mis-understanding. Therefore after enquiry amongst the wisest and most indifferent me; of that Action I dare pronounce, that all Circumstances pondered, a tumultuary banding o our part, with about one thousand in the whole on theirs ready to receive us with two hundred hors, with neere two thousand foote, and watching their best time of advantage, none of their foote discovered by us before, nor so much as suspected, and only some of their Horse descried stragling, but not in any bulke or body: their Cavalry not a Troop of Biscoigners moun∣ted in hast, but the greater part Gentlemen of Family, and of pickt Reso∣lution, and such as charged home both in Front and on both flankes into
the very Sea about sixescore of their two hundred horse strewed upon the Snd, and none of them but one killed with a great shot, and after this their foot likewise comming on to charge, till not liking the businesse they fell to flinging of stones and so walked away. I say these things considered and laid together, wee have great reason to repute it a great impression upon an unknown place, and a noble argument that upon occasion we have not lost our Auncient vigor. Only I could wish that the Duke who then in the animating of the souldiers shewed them very eminen  assurance of his valour, had afterwards remembred that rule of A∣pelles, Manum de Tabula. But he was greedy of honour, and hot upon the publique ends, and too cofident in the prosperity of beginnings, as some∣where Polybius that great Critique of war observeth of young leaders whom fortune hath not before deceived. In this their Military are & dispensation of reward and punishment, there was very few remarkable occasions under the Duke, saving his continuall vigilancie and voluntary hazard of his per∣son and kindnesses to the Souldiers, both from his own table and purse, for there could b sew disorders within an Iland where the roops had no scope to disband, and the Inferiour Commanders were still in the sight. In the Earle wee have two examples of his severity, the one in the Island voyage where hee threw a Souldier with his owne hands out of a Ship, the other in Ireland where hee decimaed certaine troops that ran away, renewing a peece of the Roman discipline. On the other side wee have many of his Lnitie, and one of his facilitie, when hee did Connive at the bolde Trespasse of Sir Walter Rawligh who before his owne arrivall at Fyll, had banded there aginst his precise Commandement, at which time hee let fall a Noble word being pressed by one (whose name I need not remember) that at the least he would put him upon a Martiall Court. That I would doe (sayd hee) if he were not my friend. And now I am drawing towards the last Act, which was written in the book of necessity. At the Earles end I was abroade, but when I came (home though little was left for writers to gleane after judges) yet, I spent some curiosity to search what it might bee that could precipitate him into such a prodigious Catastrophe, and I must according to my professed freedome, deliver a cir∣cumstance or two of some weight in the truth of that story, which was nei∣ther discovered at his araignment nor after in any of his private Confessions. There was amongst his nearest attendants one Henry Cuffe, A man of secret ambitious ends of his owne, and of proportionate Counsells
smoothered under the habit of a Scholler, and slubbered over with a certayne rude and Clownish fashion, that had the semblance of integrity. This person not above five or sixe weekes before my Lords fatall irruption into the City, was by the Earles Speciall Commaund suddainely discharged from all further attendance, or accesse unto him, out of an inward dis∣pleasure then taken against his sharpe and importune infusions, and out of a glimmering oversight, that he would proove the very instrument of his Ruine. I must adde hereeunto, that about the same time my Lord had received from the Countesse of Warwicke (a Lady powerfull in the Court) and indeed a vertuous user of her power, the best advise that, I thinke, was ever given from eyther Sex. That when hee was free from restraint, hee should take any out-lodging at Greenewich, and sometimes when the Queen went abroad in a good humour, (whereof shee would give him notice) he should come forth, and humble himselfe before Her in the field. This Counsell suke much into him, and for some dayes hee resolved it: but in the meane time through the intercession of the Earle of Southampton, whom Cuffe had gained, hee was restored to my Lords eare, and so work∣ing advantage upon his disgraces, and upon the vain foundation of vulgar breath, which hurts many good men, spun out the finall destruction of his Master and himselfe, and almost of his restorer, if his pardon had not been wonne by inches. True it is, that the Earle in Westminster-hall did in generall disclose the evill perswasions of this man; but the particulars which I have related of his dismission and restitution, hee buried in his owne breast for some reasons apparent enough. Indeede (as I conjecture) not to exasperate the Case of my Lord of Southampton, though hee might therewith a little peradventure have mollified his owne. The whole and true Report I had by infallible meanes from the person himselfe that both brought the advise from the afore-sayd excellent Lady, and carried the discharge to Cuffe, who in a private Chamber was strucken therewith into a Sound almost dead to the Earth, as if hee had fallen from some high steeple, such Turrets of hope hee had built in his owne Fancy. Touching the Dukes suddaine period, how others have represented it unto their Fancies, I cannot determine, for my part I must confesse from my Soule, that I never recall it to minde without a deepe and double asto∣nishment of my discourse and reason. First of the very horrour and attrocity of the Fact in a Christian Court, under so moderate a Governement, but much more at the impudency of the pretence, whereby a desperate discontented Assassinate would after
the perpetration have honested a meere private revenge (as by precedent Circumstances is evident enough) with I know not what publique respects, and would faine have given it a parliamentary cover howsoever. Thus these two great Peeres were dis-roabed of their Glory, the one by judgement, and the other by violence, which was the finall distinction. Now after this short contemplation of their diversities, for much more might have beene spoken, but that I was fitter for Rapsody then commenta∣ry, I am lastly desirous to take a Summarie viewe of their Conformities, which I verily beleeve will be foud as many, though perchance heeded by few as are extent in any of the ancient Parallell. They both slept long in the armes of Forune: They were both of ancient blood, and of Forraigne extraction: They were both of straight and goodly stature, and of able and active bodies: They were both industrious and as∣siduous and intentive to their ends: They were both early Privy Councel∣lors, and imployed at home in the secretest and weightiest affaires in Court and State: They were both likewise Commaunders abroad in Chiefe, as well by Sea as by Land; both Masters of the Horse at home; both chosen Chan∣cellours of the same Vniversity, namely, Cambridge. They were indubi∣table strong and high minded men; yet of sweet and accostable Nature, al∣most equally delighting in the presse and affluence of Dependants and Sui∣tors, which are alwayes the Burres, and sometimes the Briers of Favourits. They were both married to very vertuous Ladies, and sole Heires, and left issue of eyther Sex, and both their Wives converted to contrary Religions. They were both in themselves re and excellent examples of Temperance and Sobriety, but neyther of them of Continency. Lastly, after they had beene both Subject (as all Greatnesse and splendor is) to certayne obloquies of their Actions; They both concluded their earthly felicity in unnaturall ends, and with no great distance of time in the space eyther of Life or Favour. And so having discharged this poore Exercise of my Pen accor∣ding to my knowledge and Reality, let us commit those two noble Peeres to their Eternall rest, with their memorable abilities remay∣ning in few, and their compsssionate infirmities common to all. FINIS.
