D891 12546845 63074
OR The IMAGE of the BEAST, Shewing, by a Paralell Scheme, what a CON∣FORMIST the Church of ROME is to the PAGAN, and what a NONCON∣FORMIST to the CHRISTIAN CHURCH, in i'ts Rites, Service and Ce∣remonys, the better to Exemplify the True and False CHURCH. By T. D. Obed. 6.How are the hidden things of Esau sought out? Dan. 3. 17. 18.Our God whome we Serve, is able to Deliver us, and he will Deliver us: But if not, be it known that we will not Serve your Gods, Nor Worship the Golden Image that ye have set up. Rev. 14. 9.And the Angel said with a Loud Voyce, If any man worship the Beast and his Image, and Recive his mark in his Forehead, or in his Hand, the same shall Drink of the Wine of the wrath of God, which shall be poured out without Mixture, in the Cup of his Indignation. Printed in the Year, 1684.
READER. You have here a briefe and I hope Satisactory account (from many Learned Authoritys) of the Rise and Original of many of the Rites and Ceremonys now in Question (which have and do occasion so much trouble, and distress) the only right way to end disputes, and which was the method Christ took with the Pharises, Mat, 19. 8. And which Dr. Pierce so wisely observes from him, in confuting the Papists. Whereby it is easely discerned what is from above and what from beneath, what from God, and what from Man. This proves their Rise, and Birth, to be many hundred Teares before Christ, therefore not from him for Christian Service. The learned Causabon in his Original of Idolatry (Writ in French and collected (as his Epist tells us) from Elasopolitanes Commentaryes, Translated by Mr. Darcy) Sayes P. 73. That the maine and principal parts of the Mass are digested and brought in by Numa Pompilius, [the 2 King of the Romans, a great Magician about 700 years before Christ, P. 37.] The sarthar Additions were Invented, by other Roman Pontiss, and especially by a Monk called Gregory, the 1st of that Name, who attained the Papacy being Instruct∣ed in Pythagoricall Magick and Philosephy, haveing also studied the Laws of King Tullus Hostilius successor to Num4, and to the end he might Perpetuate his Name, Instituted divers additions to the Mass, &c. You have therefore (for your better Information) this paralell Scheme here presented to you, of the Pagan and Papall, Rites and Ceremonys, where you find the great Harmony and agree∣ment thatis between them theirin (The Child being not more like the Father, then Rome Papal is to Rome Pagan, in its Ecclesiastical Rites and Service) and therefore is it not significantly by the Holy Gost shiled the Image of the Beast? Rev. 13. 14, 15. &c. And did it not prove the healing the deadly wound given to the Dragonical Beast? verse 4. And who you'l find not to be in greater Conformity to the Pagan, then in Nonconformity to the Christan Church, of which you have a briefe Prospect from the Scripture. The true Standard to try and judge all Images and Idols by. But you'l say, why do you give the Heathen the Denomination of a Church, Is that proper? Yes why not? Do not you read of the Church of Evil-doers? Ps. 26. And Synagogue of Satan? Rev. 2. And I know no reason why Rome Pagan the Mother, may not be so called as well as Rome Papal, the Daughter, who fetches so much of her Ecclesiasticall Policie, Church Rites, Services, & Ceremonys, from her; But did not Pagan Rome kilChrist, and disown Christianity which Papal Rome did not? It is trve Rome Pagan, did Murther Christ in his person, and so doth Rome Papal in his members, which is kiling him a fresh, and tho in words they seem with Judas to say hail Mr. And kiss him, with a Jesu Jesu, yet in works they deny, betray, fell, and Crucify, himand by Blasphemous Traditions, and Impious Superstitions, make void his whole Law, usurp his Throne and Authority, sit in the Temple of God as God, changing times, Laws, Ordinances. As to the Authoritys to justify each Particular, which you might have expected under eachhead, I must referr you to a larger Piece, treating theirof, which doth it very distinctly, this being but an Epitome of it, though in the general you may understand the following Authors have been consulted hereupon, viz. Plutarch in Numa, Tacitus, Titus Livius Decad, Pliny Alex ab, Alexander, Blund De Rom triumph, Durandus, Darcys translation of Cousabon, Dr. Moors, Mistry of Iniquity. And that  worthy and most Excelent piece called Pagana  &c. Thine in the Service of Truth. T. D.
OR The IMAGE of the BEAST. Shewing by a Paralell Scheme what a Conformist the Church of Rome is to the Pagan, and what a Nonconformist to the Christian Church, in it's Rites Services and Ceremonies. The Dragonical or Pagan Church Consisteth in, viz. The Beastly Papall Church is conformable to the Pagan in The Christian Church con∣sistoth in, viz. 1. It's Head. 1. It's Head. 1. It's Head. The Emperor of Rome presid∣ing by the Policy of Hell, over all Ecclesiastical affaires as well as Civil, was called Pon∣tifex Maximus or high Priest; to whom was given Divine Honour and prostration at his Feet: And as head of the Church or high Priest had first Fruits. Annates Oblations, &c. payd him and also a Purpurate Synod or Princes in Purple to assist him. The Pope of Rome presiding by the Policie of Hell, over all Ecclesiastical affaires; clayming the Civil also is cal∣led Pontifex Maximus or high Priest; to whom Divine Hon∣our is given and prostration at his Feet: And as Head of the Church and High Priest hath first Fruits. Annates and Oblations, &c. payd him; And a Purpurate Synod, viz. Cardinals in Purple to assist him. Neither Emperor, Pope nor King, but Christ himself to whom the Father has com∣mitted it, having purchased it also with his own blood, who as High Priest & King is the alone Author and Insti∣tutor, of it's Order, Rule and Worship, with all things that belong thereto, and necessary to be Observed therein. To whom Divine Honour is duly payd: God blessed for ever the Government upon his Shoulders, without any Ca∣tholick Vicar to assist. Secondly it's Members. Secondly it's Members. Secondly it's Members. The Members and partes of the Church were the partes of the Empire, as divided in∣to ten parts; Hornes or King∣doms. And those ten King∣doms distributed into Nations, Provinces, Diocess and Cures, under respective Governors. Civil-Military, and Ecclesiast∣ical. The Members and parts of this Catholick Church, are the parts of the Empire, as di∣vided into ten Hornes or ten Kingdoms. And those ten Kingdoms distributed into Nations, I'rovinces, and Di∣ocess, and Parishes, for the bet∣ter Administration of Papal Juris diction The Members of the Christi∣an Church are not any Em∣pire, Region, City Diocess, or Province, but only such of the faithful, or believers in all parts of the World, who are called to visible Saintship and orderly put together in∣to distinct Congregations, as Christ has directed in the New Testament.
3dly, The Gods they Worship. 3dly, The Gods they Worship. 3dly, in Worshiping the true God, only and truly. Besides their Supreame God Jupiter, or Jove, whose name they derived from Jehovah: the Governour of Heaven and Earth, They had diverse inferior Deities, Gods▪ and Goddesses, whom they divine∣ly worshiped, viz. Diva Vesta, (Juno or Luna) the Queen of Heaven (and Mother of God) with Saturn, Mars, Venus, Mercury, Phoebus Beacchus, Vul∣can, to whom they as their Numens Heroes or Intercessors built Temples, erected Al∣atrs and Statues. Dedicated Feasts, and called the days by their names; They had Doe∣mons Ethereal, and Tutular Gods and Goddesses, to be ap∣plyed to, by several Vo∣cations, Country's, Cities, Families, Orders, Sick Persons; As Divus Neptunus for Mari∣ners, Divus Pan for Shep∣herds, Diva Pales for Hus∣bandmen, Diva Flora for the Curtisan, Diva Diana for the Huntsmen, Divus Escu∣lapius for the Physitian, Di∣vus Bacchus for the Good fel∣low, Divus Mercurius for Tradsmen; They had gods for every Family, Country City, Decease, as Cant, sicat, Era, &c. Besides in the Pontifex Max∣imus, and Synod, was placed the right of Apotheosis, or God making, viz. to create and Inrole some deceased, worthy in the number of the Gods to whom Temples, Al∣tars, Orders, and Statues were appointed, and Festi∣vals in their names celebra∣ted. Besides the Supreame God Jehovah, the Governour of Heaven and Earth they pre∣tend to Worship, they have di∣verse inferior Deities, Gods and Goddesses whom they di∣vinely Worship, viz. Diva or Sancta Maria the Queen of Heaven (and Mother of God) with Divus Petrus. St. Paul, St. John, St. Thomas, St. Ste∣phen, St. Andrew, &c. To whom they as their Numens, or Intercessors, build Temples, erect Altars, dedicate Feasts, paying also so much rever∣ance to the Pagan Gods, as to keep up their Names in the Day's of the Week, viz. Sun∣day, Munday, Tusday, Wedens∣day, Thursday, Fryday, Sater∣day. They have also Tutular and Ethereal Gods, and God∣desses, to be applyed to by se∣veral Vocations, Countrys, Citys, Families, Orders, Sick-Persons, as Divus or St. Nico∣las for the Mariner, St. Win∣doline for the Shepherd, St. John Baptist for the Husband∣men, St. Magdaline for the Curtisan, St. Hubart for the Huntsman, St. Crispian for the Shoomaker, &c. The Ci∣ty, Country, Family, and Phy∣sick Gods are innumerable. St. George for England, St. De∣nis for France, St. Mark for Venice. &c. Gods almost for every Disease, Besides the God making power, that is in the Pope and Cardinals to ca∣nonize what deceased worthy, they please and to appoint them Temples, Altars, Orders, Festivals. Though there be that are called Gods, whether in Hea∣ven or in Earth (as there be Gods many, and Lords many) But to us there is but one God; the Father of whom are all things and we in him. And one Lord Jesus, by whom are all things and we by him; 1 Cor. 5. 6. Make no mention of the names of other Gods, nei∣ther let it be heard out of thy Mouth, Ex. 23. 13. Thou shalt have no other Gods besides me, thou shalt not make to thy self any graven Image, or any like∣ness of any thing that is in Heaven above, or Earth be∣neath. Thou shalt not bow down thy self to them, nor serve them; for I the Lord thy God am a Jealous God; Ex. 20. 4, 5. What agreement hath the Temple of God with Idols? For ye are the Temple of the living God? Wherefore come out from amongst them, and be ye seperate saith the Lord and touch not the unclean thing, &c. The things which the Gen∣tles Sacrifice; they Sacrifice to Devils and not to God; and I would not that you should have Fellowship with Devils; 1 Cor. 10. 20. Rev. 18. 4. 2 Cor. 6. 16.
4thly. The Places of their Wor∣ship. 4dly, The places of their Wor∣ship. 4dly, In it's Worship, respect∣ing place. Temples or Fanes both rich and magnificent, they built in the names, and dedicated to the honour of their Gods; As the Temple of Jupiter, the Capital of Rome was dedica∣ted to him. Vesta the Q. of Heaven, and Mother of God, had a Temple, and Nunnery, de∣dicated to her; And so had all the rest of the Gods. Sa∣turn, Mars, Venus, Diana, Minerva, Neptune, Apollo, &c. Yea, one to all the gods called PANTHEON. They build their Temples East, and West, Worshiping towards the East. By their Auguri, and Au∣ruspices, With many Frayers, Ceremonies, and Solemnitys. they consecrated first the Ground, and then the Temple, upon which it was built: Al∣tars were erected in them, and sumptiously adorned, and Statues placed in them with lighted Candels which they Worshiped: A Feast of Dedi∣caiton was Annualy kept to the Honour of the Daemon, the Temple was dedicated to, which after their Rligious Rites were over, was spent in Revelling and Jollity: And This as Gods House, they pay'd great Reverence to. They Enjoy'd the Temples of the Heathen, only new consecrated and dedicated them to their own Gods to whom they gave new Names at their Christnings, As St. Saviours for Jupiters, St. Mary's for Vestas Temple, And so for the rest of their Gods, St. Peters for Apollo's St. Paul for the Temple of Di∣ana (so it was at London) St. Nicolas, for Neptunes, And all Saints, for PANTHEON. They build new Temples, East and West, and Worship as the Heathens did towards the East: And do by their Priests consecrate first the Ground, Then the Temple, upon which it stands; Altars are erected in them, and sumptiously a∣dorned, and Statues, placed on them with lighted Can∣dels, which they Worship; a Feast of Dedication is annu∣ally kept to the Honour of the Saint, the Temple is consecra∣ted to, which is spent with Revelling and Jollity. And this as Gods House they pay great Reverence to. There having been no conse crated place, or holy Ground since the dissolution of the Temple, by Gods appoint∣ment to build Temples, or ho∣ly places for Worship. The true Worshipers, who worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth, are truly his Church, and House, where ever they meet, be it in Wood, Field, House, or Barne; so saith the Apostle, with all who in eve∣ry place call upon the Lord Je∣sus Christ our Lord; 1 Cor. 1. 2. Whose House are ye. Heb. 3. 8. The most high dwel∣ling, not with Temples made with Hands as saith the Pro∣phet; What House will ye build me? Or what is the place of my Rest? Who Filles Heaven and Earth, Act. 7. 48, 49. No Al∣tars and Candels Worshiping East and West, or Feasts of Dedications in Christs Church, being all Pagan and Papal inventions.
5ly. The times of their Wor∣ship. 5dly, The times of their Wor∣ship. 5thly, In respect to the time of Worship. They divided their days into Fasti feast days, Profaesti Working days, and Intercisi hase holy days; The feast days they dedicated, in the Names, and to the Hon∣our of their Gods werev ery many, some of their Capital Feasts were these, viz. Their Saturnalia, kept several days together in December, with Eul-game, Mrs. of Misrule, Mascarading; and all Debo∣cheries, adorniag their Tem∣ples, and Houses with green Leaves, and Boughs, The Epi∣phony, (from the appearing of their Gods) Their Proserpi∣nalia, or Feasts of Candles. In February Their Palelia, or Shepherds Feast on Mid∣suner-day, Their Florialia on May-day, with great Jol∣lity by the young People of both sexes, scattering Boughs and Flowers, and Dancing a∣bout May-poles, Their Amber∣valia, or Procession, when they begged a Blessing on their Gods, upon their Fields and Fruits; The Feast Easter to that Goddess in April. They had their Bacchanalia, their Ceralia, their Venalia & their Panathenea, a Feast to all their Gods. Canonical houres for Sacrifice, and Devotion, and a Jubile, or yeare of Rest They divided their days into Feasts, Fasts, Vigils, and Work∣ing days (as their alender mentions) their Feasts dedi∣cated in the Names, the▪ And to the honour of their Saints (orGods) are ve∣ry many, some of their Capi∣tal Feasts are these, viz. Christmas (their Saturnalia) Observed directly, both in time and manner as theres was, with Eule-games, Mrs. of Misrule, Mascarad's, Deboche∣ries, adoraing their Houses, and Temples, with green Leaves and Boughs. The Epi∣phony Feast, as ther's. Also Candlemas the purification of the Virgin Mary. In Februa∣ry, as their Proserpinalia, or Candle Feast. Ther St. John Baptist on Midsomer-day, as their Palelia, Also Philip and Jacob on May-day, kept as their Floras Feast, time, and manner, Also procession, or Perambulation, in Rogation Week, time and manner with their Ambervalia; Also the Feast of Easter, time, name, and manner, They have their Whitsonales, for their Baccha∣nalia, Their Allsaints, for their Panathenea, Canonical houres for Service, and a year of Ju∣bile for Rest. The firist day of the Week is the Christians Sabbath, and the only standing time for Rest, and Worship to be Ob∣served Holy unto the Lord; The other six days being ap∣pointed for Labour, As the forth Commandment Orders, viz. Remember to keep Holy the Seventh Day, Six Days shalt thou Labour and do all thy Work. The Pope that changer of times saith, Thou shalt Labour but Three or Four Days; the rest are his Holy days. No set times, either sor Feasts, Fasts or Vigils are appointed by Christ, which are only to be Observed as accasion is Ad∣ministred. All their Holy days, and Festivals, celebera∣ted in Honour of the Papal and Pagan Gods, Numens, or Daemons, are an abomination to the Lord, and a great op∣pression to the Nations. God requiring but a 7th part of time for his publick Worship and Service; and they exact half, if not two Thirds of it for the Worship and Sevice of their Idols.
6thly, Their Priesthood. 6thly, Their Priesthood. 6thly, In it's Ministry. They had Superior Priests, viz. Flamins and Arch-flamins, for Sacerdotall service in their Provinces, and Diocess, and Inferior Priests, distinguished by dignify'd names, Tonsures, Orders, Habits, the dignifyed Priests, were those who at∣tended on the Capitall Tem∣ples, as the proper Priests of Jupiter, Appollo, Minerva, Vesta, Diana, Venus, Cybel, some of which were called Dialia, Martialia, Querinalia, Augures, Saliens, Fecialls, And more inferior Priests who had the care of the sacred Celebrations, in the cures cal∣led Curiones, there were pro∣per Habits, for all the Priest∣hood, and particular Vestments, for their Divine Service, viz. Albes, Tunicles, Amicts, they had Tonsures, and shavings, so the Priests of Isis, Diana, Jupiter, divers orders of Priests, whereof most Caeleba∣te, to whom Marriage was prohibited as the Priests of Vesta, Minerva, Appollo, and those of Cybil, who were cast∣rated, Elected, and concecra¦ted according to the Ritual of Numa, and put in to their cures, by the Pontifex, main∣tained, according to their Ec∣clesiastical constitution, the Pontifs, by Annates, Oblations, and the Priests by Benefices, Offerings, Obsequies, &c. Their Priests were either su∣perior, viz. Bishops and Arch-Bishops, for Sacerdotall service in Provinces, and Diocess, or Inferior, distingushed, by dig∣nifyed Names, Tonsures, Or∣ders, Habits, the dignify'd clergy were those who at∣tended the Capitall, or Ca∣thedrall Churches, as Deans, Chaptrs, Prebends, Arch Dea∣cons, And the more inferior Priests, who have care of Sa∣cred Celebrations, in the cures, or Parishes, called i Cureats, Par∣sons, Vicars, Deacons, answear∣ing their Curiones, they have proper Habits for the Clergy, and particular Ʋestments for their holy ministrations, viz. Surplices, or Albes, Chasubles, or Tunicles, Ʋailes, or Amicts, to which they add Coaps, Ephods, Miniples, Zones, &c. They have Tonsuers, or Shave∣ings of their Orders, and most whereof Caelebiate, to whome marriage is forbiden, Elected, and consecrated, ac∣cording to the Popes canons, and put into their Cores, by his Authority, maintained ac∣cording to their Ecclesiastical customes, the Popes by Annates, Oblations, &c. The Priests by Benefices, Offerings, Oslations, Obseques &c. In Christ Church there are only two sorts of Offices, and Officers, (by his New Testa∣ment appointment) viz. El∣ders, and Deacons, the Elders, to administer Ordinances, and Govern the Church. And Deacons, to make Pro∣vision for, to visit, and take care of the Poor, none of the Minestry, distinguished from the Layety, by Habits, or Ton∣suers, which are all Pagan, and Papal, Inventions, and Abomi∣nations. The prohibition of Marriage being a Doctrine of Devils, Elected and Con∣secrated according to Christs cannons, by the particular Congrigations, wherein they serve Christ, and accor∣ding to Christ's Law, and primitive practice, are main∣tained by the vollentary con∣tribution of the Flocks they feed, and Rule, haveing no Benefices or forced main∣tenanc of Tythes to live upon. 7thly, Their Rites and Cere∣monies. 7thly, Their Rites and Cere∣monies. 7thly, Their Rites and Cere∣monies. Their principal service com∣preh ending most of their Rits and ceremonys, was called the Mass, whereof ten principal parts, viz 1. The Asperges, which was their Sprinkling with holy water at the Temple door, all that attended that service for sanctification, 2dly, The Procession, when the Priest in his Ʋest, shaven crown, Taper in his hand, caryed about Shrines, with supplication, and thanksgiveing, with Musick. 3dly, Triming Altars, with Clothes, Lights, and Images. 4dly, The Confiteor, makeing Confession, and Supplication to the Gods. 5dly, The Ʋertegines viz. Antick postures, and gest∣ures, of the Priest at the Alter. 6ly, The Church Musick, Ʋocal, and iustrumentall put∣ing up Canticles, Paeans, Col∣lects to their Gods, with Or∣gans, Flutes, Vials, &c. 7thly, The Thurall part, Offering, Insence, Odours, and Perfumes. 8thly, The Offertory, viz. Obla∣tions, and Offerings. 9thly, The Round host, or small round Loaves, given to the Communi∣cants. 10ly, The conclusion, with Ite missa est pronounced by the Priest they had many curvati∣ons, or bowings, fastings, flagel∣lations or, whipings, lying-won∣ders, by Sorcery, and miracu∣lous Appearing of their Gods, Dirges, worshiping towards the East. There principal service comprehending most of their Rites and Ceremonies, is called the Mass, where we sinde, 1. The Asperges, or Sprinkling with holy water, at the Temple door, for sanctification, all that attend the service. 2ly, The procession, wherein the Priest in his Ʋest, shaven crown Taper, in hand, carryes about the Relicks or Shrines, with Supplication, and Singing, with Musick. 3ly, Adorning the Altars, with Cloths, Lights, Images. 4ly, The confeteor or confession, 5ly, The Ʋertegines viz. Windings turnings, and lifting up of the Priests hands. 6ly, Their Church Musick vo∣call and Instrumental, their puting up Songs, Collects, An∣thems, &c. With Organs, Flutes, Ʋials, voices. 7ly, Of∣fering Insence with Odours, and perfumes. 8ly, The Of∣fertory or offerings. 9ly, The wafer or round Host, given to the Comunicants. 10ly, the conclusion with Ite missa est pronounced by the priest, they have curvations, Flagellations, penances, Lying wonders, dirges, worshiping towards the East, They have also several addi∣tions, to the Mass, as Letanys Epistles, Gospels, Canons, Tracts, Kiss-pix, crosses, Kneelings, &c. No such things in Christs service, by his appointment, as Liturgys, Letanys, Church musick, Organs, Flutes, Ʋials, Singing of prayers, Anthemes or collects, no burning Incence, Odours, Tapers, Candles, up∣on Altars, no cringings cros∣sings, Kneelings, at Altars. bowing to the East, but pray∣ing in the Spirit, and praysing in the Spirit, And receiving the Lords Super, the Bread and the Wine, according to his Institution, without all their Pagan and Papall inven∣tions and Superstitions.
8thly, Their Imposition, and Persecution. 8thly, Imposition and persecuti∣on. 8thly, In it's Loue Meek∣ness. They violently impose their service, and Ceremo∣nies, not suffering the Dissent∣ing Christians, to buy or sell; persecuting them to confisca∣tion and to Blood. They violently Impose their Service, and Ceremonys, not suffring the Dissenters to buy, or sell, but persecute them to confiscation and Blood. No forcible Imposition of Christ's Service, no Persecuti∣on, corporal mulects, and punish∣ments, upon Dissenters, or gain∣sayers, but the exercise of all Love, Patience, and long suf∣fering, with Gentleness to∣wards them. FINIS.
