P2176 P2196 12657532 65411
A DECAD of CAVEATS TO THE People of England, OF General Use in All Times, but most seasonable in These. As having A Tendency to the satisfying such as are not con∣tent with the Present Government, as it is by Law establish'd. An Aptitude to the Setling the Minds of such as are but Seekers and Erraticks in Religion. An Aim at the Uniting of our Protestant-Dissenters in Church and State. WHEREBY The worst of All Conspiracies lately rais'd against Both, may be made the greatest Blessing, which could have happen'd to either of them. To which is added an APPENDIX In order to the Conviction of those Three Enemies to the Deity: The Atheist, The Infidel, and The Setter up of Science to the Prejudice of Religion. By THOMAS PIERCE D. D. Domestick Chaplain to His Majesty, and Dean of Sarum. Partim Jussu, partim Permissu Superiorum. LONDON, Printed for Richard Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1679.
The AUTHOR'S PARAENESIS TO THE READER, Touching his PRINCIPAL DESIGN In the following CAVEATS. Christian Reader, BEing passionately desirous (as by my Calling I am bound, and so with every man's Pardon I am allow'd,) to do as much as in me lies for the con∣verting of a Sinner from the Error of his way, whereby to save a Soul from Death, and cover a Multitude of Sins, I pen'd
the following Discourses as well for pri∣vate as publick Use. For the private use first of some in the world whom they have satisfied, and (by the Bles∣sing of God) have had a good effect on. For the more publick use next of many Noble and Learned Auditors, whose Judgments as well as Qualities being superiour to mine own, have in∣duced me to permit them to pass from the Pulpit to the Press, as conceiving that by their being in common use, they would be also more commonly and tru∣ly usefull. What success they may find, God onely knows, who alone can command it, as He sees fit. But I am conscious to my self of none other than the sincerest and purest Aims, at the Glory of God, and the Good of Men, from the beginning to the end of my whole Performance.
If in the Conduct of my Discourses I shall seem to some Readers to have been in some places too sharp, or pun∣gent, I have This at least to say in my Justification, or Excuse, that the sole End and Motive of my severest Argu∣mentations, has been onely to compel them to be as happy as my self, in the Communion I injoy with the Church of England. As God himself is expressed, by way of Parable, to send his Servant into the High ways and Hedges,Luk. 14. 23. to call the poor, the maim'd, the halt, and the blind, and compell them to come in (to his heavenly Feast,) that his House may be full; so I am earnest (if I am able) to drive Dissenters out of their Hedges and High-ways of Schism and Disobe∣dience, into the True House of God, and the Lord's own Table. The whole De∣sign of my sharpness, either in Argument,
or Expression, is by Reason, and Scri∣pture, and by Scriptural Examples and Comminations, to force our separating Brethren into Ʋnity, and Embraces, and Friendship with us. God is my Wit∣ness, I look upon them with Bowels of Tenderness and Compassion, (not with Hatred, or Contempt,) as Poor, and Maim'd, and Halt, and Blind; as ly∣ing in Hedges of Aberration, and in the High-ways of Corah, which lead direct∣ly both to Temporal, and into the dan∣ger of Endless Ruin: And I would (if it were possible) , even compel them to come in, and partake with us equally of That Coelestial Entertain∣ment we commonly call The Lord's Sup∣per; that so as well The Lord's House, as the Lord's Table may be full of them. We abominate nothing more than such an uncharitable Monopolizing both of
Salvation and the means of it, as Some (we read) have been guilty of; and do love Them so heartily who do as hear∣tily hate Ʋs and our Way of Worship, that if it were in our choise and power, we would not ingross the rich Reward of orderly Walking unto our selves, but would make them partakers together with us. We would not Pray, or hear Sermons, or communicate in Sacra∣ments, or might we have our most ar∣dent Wishes, we would not go to Hea∣ven without them. And it is with This Charity that I indeavour in one Discourse to prove our Separatists have None, so long as they abide in their State of Schism. I know there is a great Difference, betwixt the Weaker, and Wilfuller sort of Dissenters. Some of the former do not know, and None of them pro¦bably
do consider, how the Pharisees had their Name from their Separation, which arose from their Opinion that they were Better than other Men. Much less yet do they imagine, by what sort of Men they are invisibly overacted. They little think that they are Journey∣men to their own vvorst Enemies of each Extreme, vvho drive a Trade of Divi∣sions in Church and State, vvhereby to sacrifice to the Lust of Revenge, or A∣varice; and that They vvho do not in∣tend the very least publick Mischief by their Dissentions, do (before They are aware) carry on Their Designs who intend the greatest. Now there is no∣thing more dishonorable to the Nature of Man, or more to the shame of his Ʋnderstanding, than to be made another Man's Property, another Man's Instru∣ment, or Tool, even without his own
Knowledge, and against his own Will, as well as Interest. And if by any thing I have urged in the Discourses of this Book, Persons abus'd and over-reach'd by men ingeniously wicked (as Innocent Eve by the cunning Serpent,) shall be made sensible of their Wrongs, and as well of their private as publick Dangers; I shall esteem it a great Reward to have been serviceable to the more Ten∣der and the more Treatable Dissenters, though I sustain the Ill-will of the more Obdurate. If any Reader shall Object, (after his perusal of All that follows,) that I have shew'd as much Severity to certain Jesuited Protestants, as to the Jesuites themselves of the Church of Rome, and in one place have parallel'd the Dismal 30 of January 1648. with the 5 of November 1605, my Answer is at
hand, and 'tis plainly this: that the Keeping out of Popery, with all its Plots and Conspiracies of every kind, stands not so much in a Discovery and Confutation of its Errors, (though That has evermore been done, and is still in doing,) as in an effectual Disappoint∣ment and defeating of its Designs. The great and general Design of the Popish Factioners and Factors, (I mean the Jesuits most especially,) is to debilitate by dividing, and to distract by discon∣tenting the People of England; and by That Artifice, (having found by long Experience, They cannot well hurt us without our Help,) to make the Pro∣testants Themselves who would have Popery kept out with Both their Hands, most Instrumental to bring it in by Head and Shoulders. All I say against the Practices of ourHabemus enim & Nos Jesuitas, in∣quiebat Rex Jacobus. Isaaco Cau∣sabono di∣cuntur . Epist. 116. Jesuited Protestants, is
in Displeasure to The Jesuits, who drive them on. And were I to labour for my life against the Inroads or Growths of Popery, and in prevention of the Conspiracies which come from Rome, I would make it my whole In∣deavour, both by Menaces, and Per∣swasions, by Terrors, and Intreaties, by sense of Interest, and Honour, and Shame it self, by all the Means I could use, and all the Arguments I could urge, to convince and convert our Eng∣lish Protestant Dissenters, and make them All meet as One in the Church of England. If 'tis Their Master-piece to divide us, it should be Ours to be uni∣ted. And Now, if Ever. Else in vain do we strive to confute their Er∣rors, though we do it never so well, whilst torn in pieces among our selves we commit the grossest Error (in point
of Policy and Prudence) to be imagin'd. It should therefore (in my opinion) be the Ambition of us All, who are heartily the Sons of the Church of Eng∣land, to prevail from All Topicks with Protestant Sectaries amongst us, (who do agree with us already in the publick Profession of being Protestants, and being equally averse to the Church of Rome,) to lay aside their Animosities, if not to bury them for ever in the same Church-yard; to acquiese in one Govern∣ment by Law establish'd; to submit their single Judgments to the united ones of their Superiours; to sacrifice Pri∣vate Discontents to Publick Interest, and to be as a City which is at unity in it self; to consider that as the Laws would be otherwise than they are, if their Go∣vernours were as They, so if They were as their Governours, the Laws would
still be as they are by their own Con∣trivance; to keep in mind that as of Mortals, who are but Men on this side heaven, He is reckon'd to be the Best who has fewest Faults, not He who has none in a State of Frailty, so of all Go∣vernments upon Earth, That ought to pass for the most Perfect, (as well in respect of its legislative, as of its exe∣cutive Administrations,) which is sub∣ject unto the fewest and most supportable Imperfections. Add to This the Consideration, how many Rebellions and Conjurations rais'd by Christians (so called) against their Governours, have brought The Pro∣fession into an Hatred with Jews and Gentiles ever since; and tempted many even at home into This passionate Im∣precation, Sint Animae nostrae cum Phi∣losophis. Nor can we say who were the
worse, of men pretending to Christia∣nity, They who did execute what they intended on the 30 of January, or They who Intended onely to execute on the 5 of November, the barbarous Murther and Subversion of King and Kingdom. And if our present Dissenters (such I mean of their Number as mean the Best,) would but impartially consider, or sufficiently compare, as well the Prin∣ciples, and the Parties, as the Projects Themselves, which Those Two Days have made so signal, I cannot chuse but believe They would abominate them alike; or the Later perhaps the more, for the Infamy Then brought on the Eng∣lish Name. I know not whether I shall be able, but I am willing to do them Service, by undeceiving and disabusing them in All the Caveats which ensue. Being as hopefull our Common Enemies
will in Time make us Friends, as I am sure our Common Dangers ought to make us all intent on our Common Safety. This they will and must do, in case we will but permit our selves, either in Piety, or in Prudence, to be provoked by our Enemies to Aemulation. For if All sorts of Papists, even the Sorbonists, and the Jesuits, the Dominicans, and the Franciscans, the Professors of the Gal∣lican and Spanish Churches, however dif∣fering in Opinions, and burning in Ha∣treds of one another, do yet agree against the Protestants, and in the same Church of Rome, as much as Caiphas a Jew, and Pontius Pilate a Gentile, did Both agree against Jesus Christ; what can hinder All sorts of Protestants, All the English ones especially, (however di∣vided in some Opinions and Disaffec∣tions to one another, as much perhaps
as even the Molinists and the Jansenists Themselves,) from meeting together and agreeing in the same Church of England, whose Reformation is made Authentick by the Highest Authority under Heaven? Especially when their Agreement is a most Necessary Preserva∣tive of those Four things which are dearest to them, their Religion, their Liberties, their Livelihoods, and their Lives? What can hinder them from converting the most Inhumane Combi∣nation or our blood-thirsty Enemies, into an Excellent Security against it self? or from making our remaining and yet present Dangers become the most Instrumental to our Escape? There is a trite and stale objection, against the King, and the Bishops, and against all Inferiour Men of the Church of England, that they are Popishly af∣fected,
if not a kind of Cassandrian Pa∣pists. And This Objection or Calum∣ny, how weak soever, has yet been strong enough to be mischievous unto a world of well-meaning, but weaker Bre∣thren; although it has ever been confu∣ted by all the Barbarous Combinations, and Diabolical Conspiracies, against the Fathers and the Sons of the Church of England, from the Days of Queen Eli∣zabeth, to These we live in. For if there is in any of us such a Tincture of Popery, or of Papistical Inclination, as the Jesuited Papists have taught our Jesuited Protestants to say and publish, why should the Emissaries of Rome be more industriously intent upon our De∣struction, (for being men of the Church of England,) than upon the Extirpation of all other Protestants in the World? Is it not because the Church of England
is still the Ornament, and the Apology, the Support, and the Protection, of All the Protestant Churches beyond Sea throughout the World? Is it not that foreign Protestants cannot be root∣ed out with Ease, or but persecuted with Safety, whilst there is a Church of England, to stand as a Rampire in the Way between Them and Ruin? Whereas destroy or extinguish the Church of England, and All the Re∣formed Churches abroad will fall to Ruin of Themselves. If Real Mira∣cles are not ceased, (as some say they are, and some that they are not,) The Church of England's Preservation (and of late more than ever,) is the best Ar∣gument I can think of, whereby to prove the Continuance of them. O that our Separatists were wise! that they understood This! that they would
but consider▪ That Hand from Hea∣ven, by which the chief Protestant King, and the chief Protestant King∣dom of all the World, and the chief Protestant Church which is the Secu∣rity of the Rest, are yet alive at This Day, to own and Honour their De∣liverer, and to be practically thankfull for their Deliverance. One thing more I have to say, in This Monition to the Reader, concerning both the Nature, and the Liberty of a Man's Conscience; which He who offers to invade, and so to violate, does attempt to make a Breach on the Gates of Heaven. (As the EmperorHujus sen∣tentiam An∣nales Hanc referunt, nul∣lum enormius peccatum esse posse, quàm in Conscientias exercere vel∣le imperium. Nam Consci∣entiis impe∣rare, est Ar∣cem Goeli in∣vadere. Maximilian thought good to word it.) Only 'tis every Man's Concernment to learn exactly what it is, wherein the Nature of a Man's Con∣science, and the just Liberty is to consist. I give a Caveat touching the first, in the
Third Sermon following; and touching the second in the Fourth. To each of wch if our Dividers will but deliberately ad∣vert, They will be much better Subjects both to God and the King, than they are at present; and we who are Lovers of the Government by Law establish'd, shall have the fairer Quarter from them for That Conjunction. This (one would think) should be agreed to, even by Men of All Parties: that if the Consciences of Some (as Some do use the word Con∣science) contend for a Liberty to resist, or at least to contradict, and to defame the Laws in force, sure the Consciences of o∣thers may have a Liberty to obey them without offense Which yet has been en∣vied, or deny'd us, we know by whom. If, where the matter is indifferent, or barely lawfull, All the immediate Laws of Men are also the mediate Laws of God, by be∣ing
enacted by That Authority, which God has enacted we shall obey; and if it is a prime part of That Christian Liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free,Gal. 5. 1. to sub∣mit our selves (with S. Peter) to every Or∣dinance of man, and to do it for the Lord's sake, (as S. Peter bids us,) 'Tis equally strange, and unexcusable, that They who call it most falsly their Christian Liberty, to despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dig∣nities, to live in Schism and Disobedience to Laws in force, should seek to defraud us of That genuine and True Christian Liberty, The Liberty to obey such as are over us in the Lord, and such asHeb. 13. 17. Watch for our Safeties, whilst we are Sleeping. In this Grand Doctrine of Jesus Christ, the Doctrine of submission to every Or∣dinance of man,1 Pet. 2. 13. by way of Climax and Gradation from the bottom to the Top of All Authority upon Earth, (from
the Constable or the Tithing-man who labours at the Plough, to Him who sits upon the Throne as the Supreme Resort of Justice, and to whose De∣termination the last Appeal lies,) we have a Principle of Ʋnity, which either will bind up all our Breaches, or else will make our Divisions innocent. For our Judgements all meeting in This One Point, (as very easily they may, and unavoidably they must, if we do heartily and truly believe the Gospel,) All our other Disagreements in point of Opinion or Perswasion will not be publickly Inconvenient, much less Per∣nicious: because when Inbred Insur∣rections are made impossible, (as they are in the Case premised,) no Inva∣sions from without can ever hurt us. On the other side I cannot forbear to prophecy, (wishing my Prophecy
may be false, as it is modest and but conditional,) that if we fix not on some Expedient whereby to agree a∣mong our selves, (nor can I imagin any one likelier than the Great Prin∣ciple of obedience to God's Anointed, whose Life is every day endanger'd for his Adherence to our Religion,) we shall not have a way left to keep out a foreign Jurisdiction, or to pre∣vent its coming in with a foreign Force. I have the more reason to hope, the greater reason I have to pray, that my Caveats may find their Readers in so much Temper as to weigh the se∣veral Arguments made use of in This Conjuncture, which are in hopes to outweigh whatsoever witty Malice may urge against them. And that This may be an Instance of God Almighty's
great Mercy to This most coveted, and indanger'd, and (not despised, but) Envied Land, is so far the Hope; as it is the Prayer of The Reader's well-meaning and faithfull Servant T. P.
THE GENERAL HEADS or CONTENTS of the several Caveats. 1 JOH. 4. 1. I. Of Trying the Spirits before we Trust them. p. 1. 2 THESS. 3. 6. II. Of the exceeding sinfulness of Schism; in how many great Regards it is worse than Haeresie; and why more dam∣ning than other Crimes. p. 39. EPH. 5. 15, 16. III. Of Circumspection in Thesi. p. 79. MATTH. 24. 4. IV. Of Circumspection in Hypothesi▪ p. 115. 1 COR. 10. 12. V. Of Fear as necessary to Faith in the well-ordering of our Lives. p. 161.
HEB. 12. 14. VI. Of Peace and Holiness united, as equally required to our Salvation. p. 193. 1 THESS. 5. 22. VII. Of Abstaining from all Appea∣rance of Evil. p. 237. 1. PET. 2. 11. VIII. Of Abstaining in general from Fleshly Lusts. p. 273. 1 PET. 2. 13. IX. Of Abstaining in particular from Disobedience to Authority in things In∣different, as from the worst and the most scandalous of all Fleshly Lusts in S. Pe∣ter's Judgement. p. 317. HEB. 12. 25. X. A Caveat touching the Danger of Refusing those Caveats our Lord hath given us in his Gospel. p. 345. To which is added an Inquiry, How God is said to be the Object of Real Knowledge, and how of Faith onely; and why Faith (rather than Knowledge) is essentially belonging to All Religion. p. 389.
A SEASONABLE CAVEAT Against the Dangers of CREDƲLITY IN OUR Trusting the SPIRITS Before we Try them; Delivered in a SERMON BEFORE THE KING AT WHITE-HALL On the First Sunday in February, 1678/9. By THOMAS PIERCE D. D. Domestick Chaplain to His Majesty, and Dean of Sarum. Published by His Majestie's especial Command. LONDON, Printed by E. F. for R. Davis, Bookseller in Oxford. MDCLXXIX.
A SERMON PREACHED before the KING. 1 JOHN 4. 1. But try the Spirits whether they be of God. § 1. THERE are Multitudes of De∣ceivers in these our last and worst Times, by way of Antidote unto whose Venom These words of S. John are a good Provision. And however they are numerous, I think they may fall under two general Heads.Vide Haeresin Jenxuanam apud Maffae∣ium, l. 16. Some are so credulous as to be∣lieve every Spirit; and some so Atheisticall, as to believe none at all. Both are Enemies
to Religion, though not Both alike. For though the first are bad enough, the last are very much worse. The first are Meteors in Religion, expressed to us in Scripture by Clouds without water, and wandring Stars; such as are carried to and fro with every Wind of false Doctrine; men so unlearned and so unstable, so in love with New Light, and so given to change, that not contented with one or two, (though the best and soun∣dest,) they heap up Teachers unto themselves; and by the Novelty of the Doctrine putting an estimate or value on him that brings it, they are easily made Proselytes to every New Prophet who next bespeaks them; little con∣sidering with S. John, (in the next words after my Text,) that there are many false Prophets (many even in His Time, and many more sure in ours,) gone out into the World. The second sort of Enemies (which are the worst too) are the Disciples of the Book which is call'd Leviathan; the grea∣test Monster in all the World, excepting onely the Authour of it. For if the perfectest Definition of Man as Man, is to be Animal
Religiosum, which still includes Rationale, and therefore makes the most exact Defi∣nition, (as many great and good Writers have very rationally esteem'd it;) then He must certainly be aVid. Ar∣rian. Epict. l. 3 c. 29. & l. 4. c. 5. Plotin. Enn. 3. l. 2. Monster, more properly then a Man, who is so destitute of Reason, as wholly to be void of Religion too. And for any one to Teach, (as the Monster of Malmesbury has been permitted to doe in Print,) that there is no Spirit at all, or that there is no incorporeal Substance, (two Ex∣pressions of the same Thing,) what is it but to pluck up all Religion by the Root? 'Tis publickly to set up a School of Atheism. For God (if any thing) is a Spirit; not for This reason onely,Joh. 4. 24. because our Apostle S. John affirms it, (whom the Hobbists will not be∣lieve;) but for this other reason also, (which even our Hobbists cannot but yield to,) that, supposing a God there is, (or that 'tis but possible for him to be,) He must be Infi∣nite, and Indivisible; and yet, we know, He can be neither, if He is any way Corpo∣real. For All Corporeal things have Parts, and so by consequence are divisible, and so
by consequence are finite. And for God to be finite, or divisible, is for God not to be God; the worst and grossest of Contradic∣tions. From whence it follows unavoida∣bly, that for any one to teach, and to teach in publick, (not publickly from the Pulpit, but much more publickly from the Press,) that an Incorporeal Substance is in it self a Contradiction, (the Positive Doctrine of the p. 214. Leviathan,) is publickly to open a School of Atheism: It being publickly to teach There is no Spirit, and (by a Consequence unavoidable) There is no God. For every thing that is, is either an Accident, or a Substance. (What is neither, is not.) And every Substance (a nobler sort of Being then any Accident can be) is either Corporeal, or Incorporeal. That denominates a Body, and This a Spirit. To say that God is the for∣mer, implies the horridest Contradiction; (as hath been shewn;) and so He must be the latter, by undeniable Consecution. To say, He is not a Spirit, or not an Immaterial Substance, is neither better nor worse then to say, He is not. It is to say, There is no such Thing.
§ 2. Against the dangerous Contagion of the premised two Extremes, S. John in this Text has timely given us Two Caveats; one express'd, and another imply'd. First, 'tis express'd in plain terms, that, seeing many false Prophets (or false Pretenders to the Spirit) are gone out into the World, we are bound, for that Reason, not to believe Every Spirit. Next, 'tis as evidently im∣ply'd, (as if it were expressed in words at length,) that though Many Prophets are False, we must not thence reckon that None are True: as though many Lines are crooked, we must not thence argue that none are strait; seeing every crooked Line must needs presuppose and imply a strait one. Nor may we sottishly disbelieve the Spirit of Ho∣liness and Truth, for fear of believing with too much ease a Spirit of Errour and Ʋn∣cleanness. But as my Text is in the middle between an important Dehortation, [Believe not every Spirit,] and as important a Reason of it, [for many false Prophets are gone out into the World:] so our Course is to be steer'd in a middle way, betwixt the Scylla
of Credulity, and the Charybdis of Ʋnbelief. We must examin all Pretenders, and try of what sort they are. We must get a Lapis Lydius, whereby to learn the true difference betwixt the two sorts of Spirits in the sixt Verse of this Chapter, the Spirit of Truth, and the Spirit of Errour: or, (to express it without the Metonymie which our Apostle here useth,) betwixt a True, and False Pro∣phet; betwixt1 King. 13. 1. a man of God, and aDeut. 13. 1, 3. Dreamer of Dreams; betwixt a Theopneust, and a Dae∣moniack; betwixt a reall Possessor of Divine Revelations, and a phantastick Pretender to them. For as there were Prophets in the Old Testament, both True and False, so are there also in the2 Pet. 1. 21. & ch. 2. ver. 1. New. As there were Spi∣rits under the Law, too many to be good, so there are also under the Gospel. There was in That a familiar Spirit, (Lev. 20. 27.) a lying Spirit, (1 King. 22. 22.) and a Spirit of Perverseness, (Isa. 19. 14.) There is in This a foul Spirit, a deaf and dumb Spirit, (Mar. 9. 25.) a Spirit of Errour and of De∣lusion, (2 Thess. 2. 11. 1 Joh. 4. 6.) a Spirit of Slumber, (Rom. 11. 8.) Still the more
and the worse the unclean Spirits are, the greater need we have to Try them. And though there are also as many Good Spirits, as there are Angels who never fell; yet all their Good∣ness is but derivative, from the one Spirit of God, who is God the Spirit. To Him are ascribed the famous Gifts, 1 Cor. 12. 4. And amongst all the severall Gifts wrought by one and the same Spirit, the Discerning of Spirits is worthily reckon'd to be a chief, (v. 10.) Which Gift of Discerning 'twixt good and bad Spirits, (as all the rest,) The Spirit of God divides to every man severally as He will, (v. 11.) to some in a greater, and to some in a lesser measure. And in this Gift S. Pe∣ter did very mnch excell S. Philip. (For so 'tis obvious to collect from the 8th. of the Acts, by comparing the 13th. with the 23th. verse.) § 3. Now whatever can be meant by the Subjects of Triall we are to make, whether Churches or Church-men, whether Prophe∣cies or Prophets, whether Doctrins or Doc∣tors, whether Inspirations or men Inspir'd, or every one of these equally; however dif∣ferent they may be, or inconsistent with one another; 'tis plain they All pretend alike
unto the same Spirit of God. And therefore , Try and prove them, (says our Apostle,) whether they are what they pre∣tend: whether really they are Gold, or do but eminently glister: whether they speak by Commission, and as the Oracles of God, or onely run ere they are sent, inspir'd by Ava∣rice, and Ambition, and by the Impulse of the Devil: whether they teach the sound Doctrins of Christ's Apostles and of his Church, whose Faith and Doctrins we are to follow; or are but some of the foolish Pro∣phets (in the 13th. of Ezekiel) who follow their own Spirit,Ezek. 13. 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, &c. and prophesie out of their own Hearts; are like the Foxes in the De∣sarts, have spoken Vanity, and seen Lies, say∣ing, The Lord saith, and the Lord hath not sent them. In any case we must try them, of what sort they are. § 4. Nor must we onely try Them; but we must also try the Rule by which they All are to be tried. For severall Tests and Rules of Triall (who are true or false Teachers, and which Doctrins are right or wrong,) have been lately set up to the hurt of Souls, by the Two sorts of Enemies whereof I spake in the beginning; to wit, the Pretenders to
Enthusiasm, and the Disciples of the Levia∣than. The first of these will allow of no other Test, than the Sturdiness and Strength of their own Perswasion, which it is their will and pleasure to call The Testimony within them. And by running in a Circle they grow so giddy, that the longer we Catechize, the more we lose them. And 'tis worthy to be observ'd, how they wrest and misapply the Word of Life to their Destruction. For, If we ask how they know they have a Testimony within them from God the Holy Ghost; We know it (say they) by This, that1 Joh. 4. 13. God hath given us of his Spirit. If we ask how they know that He hath given them of his Spirit; We know it (they say) by This, that1 Joh. 3. 9. we cannot sin. If we ask how they know that they can∣not sin; their Answer is,Ibid. We are born of God. If we ask how they know This; We know it, (they will answer) because we haveRev. 2. 17. a new Name given us, which no man knows but He that hath it. If we ask how they know of a new Name given them; they will answer, We know it by thatRom. 8. 11▪ Spirit which dwelleth in us. If we ask how they know the Spirit of Truth from the Spirit of Errour; their Answer is still at hand, (and still out of the Scriptures,)
He that knoweth God heareth us,1 Joh. 4. 6. and he that is not of God heareth not us. If we ask them for a Witness whereby to prove it;Rom. 8. 16. The Spirit (their Answer is) beareth witness with our Spirits. If we bid them produce their Witness; He that believeth (they will say) hath the witness in himself.1 Joh. 5. 10. If we call for any Witness of men;ver. 9. they tell us, The Witness of God is greater. Thus they argue by their Circular and Identical way of discourse, [They have the Holy Spirit of God, because they are (for∣sooth) assured; and assured of it they are, be∣cause of the Spirit which dwelleth in them.] So strongly does the Spirit of Perverseness shew it self in such as are delivered up to be∣lieve a Lie. (For that is sometimes the case, 2 Thess. 2. 11.) The other Enemies of Religion, (who are withall by much the worst,) in a derision and contempt of supernatural Revelation,Leviath. p. 36. & 169. will have no better Test of true and false Prophets, or of right and wrong Doctrins, than the War∣ranty and Allowance of the Sovereign Powers,Ibid. p. 232. in every Kingdom and Commonwealth, of whatsoever Denomination throughout the world. Which Position of the Leviathan, (fetcht as 'tis from Japonia, and there from
the Sect of the Jenxuani) is so prodigiously absurd, that it either makes no difference 'twixt Right and Wrong, and infers True and False to be a couple of empty words, (which signifie nothing, or the same thing, the Will and Pleasure of the Prince;) or else infers this Contradiction, that the same Things and Persons are in severall Times and Places both True and False. So that according to This Position, the Christian Religion was a false one under all the Heathen Emperours, who did publickly prohibit the Teaching of it; yet a most true one under Constantine sur∣nam'd the Great, and under all the following Emperours, who strictly commanded it to be Taught. Jesus Christ (with Mr. Hobbs) must have been a false Prophet, as not approved of by Herod and the Then-Emperour of Rome; whilst Mahomed must be a true one, because allow'd by the great Sultan, supreme Gover∣nour of the Turks. The Will and Pleasure of the Prince being set up by That Monster, as the sole Touchstone, or Criterion, whereby a Prophet, or a Doctrin, or a Religion is to be try'd.Leviath. p. 250. None (says He) but a Sovereign in a Christian Commonwealth, can take notice what is, or what is not the Word of God. A greater
power than is ascribed by the Jesuites them∣selves, either to the Bishop or Church of Rome: a power to abrogate the old, and (as often as he will) to make a new Canon of Scripture, or none at all. § 5. Had such Seducers of the people appear'd in publick among the Jews, a pre∣sent Death without Mercy had been inflicted as the wages of Their Iniquity. (Deut. 13. 5. and ch. 18. v. 20.) The Setters forth of new Doctrins in that Mosaical Dispensation could not escape their publick Trials in the Great Parliament of Israel they call'd The Sanedrim; and were condemn'd as false Tea∣chers, either to be strangl'd, or ston'd to death. Yea,Deut. 13. 1, 2▪ though they had shewn Signs and Won∣ders, and though their Signs came to pass too, yet could it not exempt them from suffering Death, in case they tended to seduce the silly Admirers of their Wonders to worship Idols, or any other way to enervate the Law of Mo∣ses: which none could be allow'd to doe, and yet be thought a True Prophet, unless he could doe as real Miracles as Moses, and give as cogent Demonstrations as Moses had given, of his having been inspired and sent by God. Therefore None but the Messias, who out-did
Moses, and that as well in point of Miracle, as in Holiness of Life, and in illustrating or com∣pleating the whole Moral Law, could lawfully abolish the Ceremonial. Yea even Those Di∣vine Prophets or Men of God (as they were call'd) who still asserted the Law of Moses, and disswaded men with vehemence from Idolatry and Schism, were fain to prove they were of God by unfeigned Miracles. By such a Real Miracle of the anonymous Prophet at Bethel,1 King. 13. 4, 6. Jeroboam's Hand was dry'd up, and restored to him. By such a Miracle of Elijah, the Fire of the Lord fell down from Heaven,1 King. 18. 38, 40. and consum'd the Burnt-sacrifice, together with the Altar on which it lay. Whereby the People were incens'd against the false Prophets of Baal, and presently slew them all as Cheats by the River Kishon. By such a Miracle of Elisha,2 King. 5. 15. even Naaman an Idolater was sud∣denly cleansed from his Leprosie, and convin∣ced of Jehovah's being the onely true God. By the like unfeigned Miracles, Moses baffled all the lying ones of the Sorcerers in Aegypt. And if the Prophets Then had need of shewing many and great Miracles, to prove the Truth of That Religion which the Israelites were then in Possession of; How much a greater
need of Miracles should our Seducers stand in, whereby to make us leave our Old, and where∣with to draw us on to their New Beliefs? That Doctrin (for example) of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, [that we must obey them who have the Rule over us, and that we must submit our selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lord's sake,] was confirmed by greater Miracles (if any greater can be) then Moses and the Pro∣phets confirm'd theirs by. And by Conse∣quence, if our Pretenders to supernatural Il∣lumination will have us adhere to their New Doctrin, [that we must not submit to every Ordinance of man, but rebell against them; nor obey, but resist such as have the Rule over us; nor do any thing in Religion with any Decency or Order, but all as rudely and as confusedly as we can,] they must perswade us by greater Miracles than those of Christ and his Apostles, whom we believe. At least they must be able to convince us of Errour in Life and Doc∣trin,Num. 16. (as Moses did Corah and all his Sepa∣ratist-Relations,) by commanding the Earth to open, and to swallow us up quick: or strike us dead without a blow, (just as Peter did Ananias,) for our usurping That Autho∣rity to preach God's Word, which our Schis∣maticks
and Enthusiasts of each Extreme are wont to arrogate as a Right belonging onely to them∣selves. But (God knows) we have too many, who need no working of Signs and Wonders to de∣ceive them: so very fond they are of Novelties in Religion it self, that they are often drawn from it without a Miracle. Yea, if the True Prophet from Judah could suffer himself to be deceiv'd by the cunning False Prophet who dwelt in Bethel, (1 King. 13. 18.) for which (not the False, but) the True Prophet was slain; (v. 24.) how apt are others to be deceiv'd who are no Prophets at all? Very great need therefore we have, to Try Pretenders to the Spirit, before we Trust them, whether or no they have indeed a Prophetick Spi∣rit; and whether they speak the mind of God by any Immediate Revelation. § 6. A general Rule whereby to try them (though 'tis particularly apply'd) S. John sets down in the next verse after my Text; Hereby know ye the Spirit of God. Every Spirit which confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is of God. A Text whose pithy Brevity makes it difficult and obscure, and so it stands in some need of an Explication. I take its meaning to be This. Every Spirit which confesseth, or every Pretender who owns our Saviour, not onely by
word of Mouth, but in Life and Practice, and from the Heart, both as Jesus a Saviour, and as Christ a King too; Every one who does own him as well by his Faith, as his Confession, and as well by his Obedience, as by his Faith, to be the onely true Shiloh that was to come; Every one who does own him to be come in the Flesh too, not onely in his Divine, but in his Humane Nature also, which Cerinthus and Ebion and Simon Magus did deny; (unto whom in particular S. John alludes in this place;) lastly, Every one who owns him in his Exinanition, in his most despicable Condition, which made his Friends to fly from him, and Pe∣ter himself to disavow him; Every one who does own him in his tremendous Crucifixion, his Death, and Burial, and confesseth him even so to beMar. 16. 16. the Son of the living God, or God manifest in the Flesh, 'Tis plain that every such Spirit must be conclu∣ded to be of God. So that if any shall here object against S. John's Rule of Triall, that many Hereticks and Schisma∣ticks do confess Jesus Christ to be come in the Flesh, who notwithstanding are of the Devil, and not of God; Two Answers are to be given for the Ob∣jector's behoof and satisfaction; one from Estius, and another from Tirinus. (Though the Sub∣stance of them Both I have anticipated already.)
Estius answers, that S. John did direct This Rule against the Hereticks of his own Times, who de∣nied Jesus Christ to have come in the Flesh: and such were those Three whom I nam'd a little be∣fore. Which Answer is indeed good, but not suf∣ficient. Tirinus therefore adds fitly, that by our Confessing Jesus Christ to have come in the Flesh, is meant our Confessing and Believing (to wit, our practical Believing) that Jesus Christ is the Mes∣sias;Act. 5. 31. both a Saviour and a Prince, (as S. Peter calls him,) who gives Repentance unto Israel,Ibid. and Forgiveness of sins. Not Forgiveness without Re∣pentance, nor Forgiveness before Repentance; but Repentance in the first place, and Forgiveness in the second. In which very order, both of Dig∣nity and Nature, S. Peter had exhorted to Both before, (ch. 3. v. 19.) Repent, and be converted, that your Sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. And all sincere Repentance implies. Obe∣dience, as the same S. Peter argues, Act. 5. 32. This Answer is very good and sufficient too, un∣less, by being too short, it may be also too obscure, or not sufficiently perspicuous to some of the slowest apprehensions; for which defect in the next place I shall endeavour to make amends. § 7. And because where the Touchstone it
self is False, all sorts of Trial must needs be foo∣lish; Therefore Pretenders to the Spirit are to be try'd by such a Touchstone, as needeth not it self Another Touchstone for its Trial. And such a Touchstone is to be taken out of those plainest Places of Scripture, whose sense and meaning is agreed on even by men of All Judgements; Texts deliver'd in such clear and univocal Terms, that opposite Parties do apprehend them in the very same way; And as they never have been yet, so they never can be matter of any Cavil, or Dispute. And because I pretend not to teach my Fellow-Teachers, or such as need not to be thus taught, (though the most knowing may not disdain to be put in remembrance of what they know,) but onely the Ignorant and the Ʋnstable, who (for want of due Knowledge, or of sufficient Consideration,) are like Clouds without water, carried about of Winds, (as S. Jude describes them;) I shall be carefull that every Part of the Test or Criterion I am to give, may be short, and yet easie, and (I hope) without all Question. The several Parts of the Touchstone will be no fewer than 6 or 7. Nor are the Spirits to be try'd by any one or two of them, but by All put together, whether or no they are of God. First,Joh. 14. 17. The Spirit that is of God is the Spirit
of Truth. And therefore if any man, who is out∣wardly of a seeming good Life, is yet of very ill Judgement in Fundamentals, in Points essential to Christianity,1 Pet. 2. 13. as in the Doctrin of Obedience to every Ordinance of Man,Rom. 13. 1. to the Higher Powers, to Them that have the Rule over us,Heb. 13. 17. and do watch for our Souls; (a Doctrin running in a Vein through∣out the Body of the Gospel, and essentially belon∣ging to All Religion;) especially if he ascribes to a sinfull man (not to say, The Man of Sin,) That Incommunicable Attribute of God himself, [Infal∣libility,] and gives to every Priest the Privilege to doe a much greater Miracle than ere was done by Christ Himself, so far forth to transubstantiate a piece of Bread, as first to make his own Saviour, and then to eat him; He must needs be misinstruc∣ted by the Spirit of Errour and Fascination,1 Joh. 4. 6. the Spirit with which he is bewitch'd,Act. 8. 9, 11. (as S. Paul speaks to the Galatians,)Gal. 3. 1. let his outward Conver∣sation be what it will, let his visible Course of life be never so plausible, or severe. Next,Rom. 1. 4, 18. The Spirit that is of God is the Spirit of Holiness and Purity, as well as Truth. And there∣fore if any man, who is Orthodox, is at the same time Dishonest, of some good Opinions, but evil Practice, does hold the Truth, but in unrighteous∣ness; especially if he takes upon him (by That Vi∣per
of Morality and all Religion, the Jesuites Doc∣trine ofVid. Les Provinciales 5. 6. & Ca∣ramuel de Theologiâ Fundamenta∣li p. 71, 72. & Escobar Theol. Moral. Tom. 1. l. 2. c. 2. p. 34. 39. 43. 160. &c. Probability) not onely to allow, but to in∣courage and abett the grossest Villanies in the World, (without exception;) He is not season'd by the Holy, but theMar. 5. 8. Ʋnclean Spirit, let his Ortho∣doxie of judgement, as to some Fundamentals, be what it can. An honest Heathen is not so bad as a Christian Knave. Thirdly, The Spirit that is of God isEph. 4. 3, 4. the Spi∣rit of Ʋnity and Love. And therefore if any sort of men shall take upon them to be Reformers by ma∣king Schism, by dissolving the Bond of Peace, wherein the Ʋnity of the Spirit is to be kept, and shall crumble Religion into as many small Par∣cells, as the Caprices of Idle men shall have the li∣berty to suggest; especially if they shall labour to separate Subjects from their Sovereign, by absol∣ving them from their Oaths of Christian Obedi∣ence and Fidelity, or by instructing them to swear, with a Design to be forsworn; They are miss-led by That Spirit whose Name is Legion,Mar. 5. 9. even the Spirit of Division,Rev. 12. 9. That old and cunning Serpent which deceiveth the whole World. Fourthly, The Spirit that is of God is the Spi∣rit of Meekness and of Order.1 Cor. 4. 12. And therefore if any despise Dominion,1 Cor. 14. 23. and speak evil of Dignities, and in pretense of being the Meek ones who are by
right of Promise to inherit the Earth, demurely tread upon Crowns and Crosiers, and love to be levelling with their Feet, whatsoever (according to God's special Providence) does overtop them by Head and Shoulders; especially if they pre∣sume to place the single Bishop of Rome above Ge∣neral Councils, invest him with a Power to excom∣municate Kings, and subvert whole Kingdoms, and make the People hope to Merit by the most pro∣digious Murthers; They must be led by That Spi∣rit,Rev. 9. 11. which is called The Angel of the Bottomless Pit, Abaddon, and , that is, Destroyer; even the Spirit which is still working in the Children of Disobedience.Eph. 2. 2. Fiftly, The Spirit that is of God is the Spirit of Sincerity, induing All whom He inhabits with an absolute Simplicity and Singleness of Heart. And therefore They who do hold up their Left hand to God, but their Right against their Governours; having Godliness in their Profession, but practical Atheism in their Lives; hating Idols from the Teeth outwards, but loving Sacriledge from the Heart; crying down Superstition, but preaching up the Creature-comforts flowing from Plunder, which they call Providence; declaring with zeal against the Prelates, but ever voting up the Papacy of their Superintendents; declaiming much against
the Sectaries who are not of their Denomination, but breaking down the Hedge of Discipline where∣by the Herds are to be kept from God's Inclosure; especially They who have invented the Art of Ae∣quivocating and Cheating, the Art of Swearing any thing safely, by mental Exceptions and Reser∣vations, the Art of Couzenage by the Contract they call Mohatra, and the like; must needs be acted by that Spirit whom the Scripture has expressed by the Father of Lies,Joh. 8. 44. even the Spirit of Hypocrisie,2 Cor. 11. 14. That black Prince of Darkness, which transforms himself with ease into an Angel of light. Sixtly, The Spirit that is of God is the Spirit of Knowledge,Isa. 11. 2. and Wisedom, and Ʋnderstanding. And therefore if any man cites Scripture against the whole Tenor and Stream of Scripture, and wanders into the wrong way, even by That very Word which does direct him into the Right one; especially if he levells the Canon of Scripture with the Apocrypha, and makes the Pure Word of God to truckle humbly under Tradition, whereby it be∣comes Matth. 15. 6. of none effect; if men so learned, and so acute,Mar. 7. 13. and so sagacious as the Jesuites, after all the heinous things they have done and taught, are so far from discerning what Spirit they are of, that they utterly mistake an Evil Spirit for a Good one; a Spirit from Hell, for one from Heaven; the Spirit
which reigns in the Court of Rome, for the Spirit which guides in the Church of England; if they can think it the Top of Piety, to advance the Lord Jesus quite against the Lord Christ, and make the Christian Religion the greatest Transgression of It∣self (which moves the Jansenists to call them The Antichristian Society;) if they can take it for the Comble of Christian Merit and Perfection, to e∣spouse and put in practice this Turkish Maxime, that Religion is to be propagated (where 'tis pos∣sible) by the Sword; They must needs be possess'd by the Spirit of Slumber,Rom. 11. 8. the Spirit of dead Sleep, the God of this World which blindeth the mind:Isa. 29. 10. for so the Devil is once call'd, 2 Cor. 4. 4. What I have thus drawn out at length, our Bles∣sed Lord does wind up into This short Bottom, (Matth. 7. 20.) Ye shall know them by their Fruits. But the Fruits of That Spirit that is of God are rec∣kon'd up by S. Paul to be such as These;Gal. 5. 22, 23. Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Meekness, Good∣ness, and the like. And therefore They who, in stead of loving Enemies, do persecute and oppress the mystical Members of the same Body whereof Christ is the Head; who lay the Cross of Christ Jesus on Christian Shoulders, robbing one of a Living, a∣nother of a Liberty, a third of a Life; and this for no other Crime than being constantly Conscientious,
(and very real Friends to All, because the Flat∣terers of None, though able to injure, or to oblige them;) must needs be managed by That carnal and unclean Spirit, which makes them so fruitfull and so abounding in the works of the Flesh: such as Hatred,Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. Variance, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, He∣resies, and the like. § 8. Now if All these Particulars be laid to∣gether in our minds, I suppose we have a Touch∣stone to Try the Spirits of Pretenders, whether or no they are of God; and such a Touchstone, as needs not it self another Touchstone to be Try'd by. But because the best Touchstone is nothing worth to such as know not how to use it, we shall doe well to take notice of one Rule more in the using of it. For, considering how manyTroppo con∣fina la Virtu col Vitio. Vices do too much border and confine upon several Vertues, and how many Lies are more plausible to flesh and bloud than ma∣ny Truths; and hardly any thing can be so false, but may have Colours and Probabilities to set it off; (being neatly laid on by men ingeniously wicked;) and that a multitude of Ignaro's do of∣ten swallow the grossest Errours, (presented to them in the Disguise of the greatest Truths,) by not distinguishing Words (as they ought) from Things, and blending one thing with another, and taking them down all at once, without any masti∣cating
or chewing; I say, for This reason, we must not pass our last Judgement upon Pretenders to the Spirit, untill we have made our selves acquain∣ted as well with their Habits, as with their Acts; as well with the main or general current of their Lives, as with the meer conduct and carryings on of their Designs; with the Means they make use of, as well as with the End they pretend to aim at; with the Building which is erected, as well as with the Scaffold by which 'tis rais'd; with All their Actions in a lump, as well as with the most specious and fai∣rest of them. And when This is done throughly, Then let the Hypocrites and Impostors be what they will, let the Forms of Godliness and the Fea∣tures of Religion be never so artificially and neat∣ly drawn, let the Colours be laid on with never so delicate a Pencill, and let that Pencill also be ma∣naged with never so exquisite Address; 'twill be most easie to find the difference between the Picture and the Life. Let Zeuxis his lively Grapes be never so apt to deceive the Birds, yet the Deadness of his Boy will unfold the Cheat. § 9. The very Truth of it is, We should be ut∣terly unexcusable, if we should fall into the Snare of The certain men among us crept in unawares, of ei∣ther sort, because their Arts of deceiving are gross and obvious; fit to infatuate Understandings of the
lowest size onely, and such as are willing to be delu∣ded. There were Counterfeits in the most primitive and purest Times of the Church, who were brave Cheats indeed; who, besides their Form of Godliness, besides their Praying and their Preaching, could also set forth themselves by Signs and Wonders.2 Thess. 2. 9. The Devil had taught them That subtil Trick of trans∣forming themselves into Angels of light;2 Cor. 11. 14. and so of deceiving (if it were possible) the very Elect.Matth. 24. 24. Such were Barchochebas, Apollonius, and Simon Magus. Whereof the First had got a faculty even of vomi∣ting flames of Fire; the Second could tell the men of Ephesus, what in That very Hour was done at Rome; the Third (like a Cherub) could fly abroad into the Air. So that They had some kind of Colour for their giving out themselves to be the Messen∣gers of Heaven, some Pretences for their Broaching a New Theology to the People; because their Coun∣terfeited Miracles, however derived from below, might seem at least to short Reasons to have been gi∣ven them from Above. And to be couzen'd by such as These, were a more tolerable Infirmity; a Credu∣lity more to be pitied, and very much more (rather than less) to be pardon'd also. The Magicians also in Aegypt were such admirable Deceivers, that They were able (as well as Aaron) to turn their Rods into Serpents,Exod. 7. & 8. and their Slime into Frogs, and
their Waters into Bloud. So as if Moses and Aaron (through God's Assistance) had not publickly con∣victed them of downright Sorcery and Inchant∣ment, (wherein the Magicians grew eminent through the Assistance of the Devil;) If Aaron's Rod at last had not swallow'd up Their Rods, and turn'd the Dust into Lice through all the Land, wch the Magicians could not doe, but confessed (to their own shame) that The finger of God was in it; Lastly, if Moses had not smitten the very Sorcerers them∣selves (as well as the rest of the Aegyptians) with Boyls and Blains, insomuch that the Magicians could not stand before Moses; They had had a shrewd Advantage in the deceiving of the People, and the People so deceiv'd had been excusable à Tanto. Whereas our modern Enthusiasts, or Preten∣ders to Revelation, and to a Testimony within them from God the Holy Ghost, are not so much as good Jugglers; They are woefull Impostors, and silly Cheats; such as Satan indeed has furnished with very much Industry, but with very small Wit; whereby He does not more strongly Tempt them, than he discovers them to be His. They being so far from being indow'd with extraordinary Gifts, whereby to prove to us an extraordinary Commis∣sion; so far from setting out themselves by Signs and Wonders, (like those Primitive Deceivers of
whom our Saviour gave all his Disciples Warning, (in the 24th. of S. Matthew,) or like Those of whom Moses forewarn'd His People, (in the 13th. of Deuteronomy;) that they come short of most men of the Church of England, even in Those very things wherein they would be thought eminent. The onely Gifts of the Spirit which they pretend to, are but Praying and Preaching; in their Performances of which they signalize themselves by Nothing; or at least by nothing more, than Noise, and Nonsense. The Gift of Tongues, or the Gift of Healing, or the Gift of being subject to Higher Powers, for Conscience sake, or for the Lord's, or any other such remarkable A∣postolical Gift of the Holy Ghost, I never heard that our Adversaries on either side did ever yet so much as pretend unto. They seem to be as unapt to obey their Governors for Conscience sake, (which is one special Gift of the Holy Ghost,) as to speak with new Tongues, or to raise the Dead. § 10. Now if those Exquisite Pretenders, in the Infancy of the Gospel, Barchochebas a Jew, and A∣pollonius Tyanaeus an arrant Heathen, Simon Magus, Menander, Basilides, and the like, who by Profession at least were Christians, were not Then to be be∣liev'd, notwithstanding their Inchantment and Magick-miracles; If a false Prophet under the Law, who led the People into New Errours, (as Vincen∣tius
Lirinensis expounds that Passage Deut. 13. 1, 2, 3.Vin. Lir. c. 15. and applies it to a false Teacher in the Times of Christianity, in particular and by name, to Va∣lentinus, Donatus, Photinus, Apollinaris,) was not onely not to be heeded or hearkened to, but also was by That Law to be put to Death; yea (one step far∣ther,) If an Angel from Heaven, who shall preach a∣nother Doctrin than what hath hitherto been deli∣ver'd, (whereby to lead us into Rebellion, or Schism, or Sacrilege, or any Conspiracy whatso∣ever against the Government we are under,) must be no otherwise entertain'd, than with an Anathe∣ma Maranatha; How much less may our Shallower and Ʋnskilfuller Impostors be believed to be of God upon their own single Word, and without a Witness, whilst they cannot confirm or commend their Novelties, no not so much as by seeming Mi∣racles? no not so much as That Man of Sin, That Son of Perdition, of whose Coming S. Paul saith to his Thessalonians,2 Thess. 2. 3, 9. that 'tis after the working of Sa∣tan, with all Power, and Signs, and (with stupen∣dous, though) lying Wonders? But grant they had (what they have not) an A∣bility to shew us some Signs and Wonders;Matth. 24. 24. yet A∣pollonius Tyanaeus would put them down. Suppose they preached extremely well,Matth. 7. 22. (as 'tis plain they do not,) yet Photinus and Nestorius would go beyond them.
Do they make very long Prayers?Matth. 13. 14. So did the Pharisees for a Pretence, that they might the more slily devour Orphans and Widows houses. Have they a readiness and facility in citing Scripture? So had Julian the Apostate when he disputed against the Gospel. So had Satan in his tempting our Blessed Saviour;Matth. 4. 4, 6. when he wrested God's Oracles with as much subtilty and address, as the keenest of our Recusants (of what strain so∣ever) are wont to do. Do they pretend their being warranted by an immediate Revelation? So did Numa the Roman; and so did Eumenes the Greek: so did Mahomed the Saracen; and Alarichus the Goth: lastly, so did the Pretenders in the Primitive Church; which made S. John exhort Christians to Try the Spirits; alledging This for his reason, that many false Pro∣phets are gone out into the World. Is God's permitting them to be prosperous,Quomodo ob Religionem Magni, qui∣bus Magnitu∣do de irreli∣giositate pro∣venit? Ter∣tull. Apolog. cap. 25. p. 56. or to sin on with great Impunity, any Argument that he approves them? No, 'tis the weakest way of reaso∣ning which our Adversaries of Rome have deligh∣ted in. For, (besides that we find them confuted of∣ten by their Afflictions,) God permits, what he abo∣minates, his own Dishonour. How patiently did he permit the Disobedience of the First Adam, and Crucifixion of the Second? All the Villanies in the
world do come to pass by God's Permission, how∣ever contrary they are to his Rules and Precepts. And if prosperous Impiety does therefore cease to be Impiety, because 'tis prosperous and permitted, (that is) not hinder'd by force and violence, (inconsistent with a free and a moral Agent;) Then the great Sultan; and the great Cham, and the great Mogul, as well as the great Bishop of Rome, are by an e∣qually-sound Consequence the greatest Favou∣rites of Heaven. And then the Argument ofapud Pru∣dentium ad Valentin. Si Romanae Religiones regna prae∣stant, nun∣quam retro Judaea reg∣násset, De∣spectrix com∣munium ista∣rum Divini∣tatum. Ter∣tull. Apol. c. 26. p. 57. Symma∣chus had been unanswerably conclusive against the Primitive Christians, who for 300 years and up∣wards lay groaning under the Yoke of the Heathens Tyranny. Lastly, if Permission were still a Mark of Ap∣probation; Then Dionysius (or Diagoras) had argued logically well, when, having robb'd the Delphick Temple, & immediately after escap'd a Shipwreck, he gave it out, that the Gods had approv'd his Sacrilege. Not at all that he believ'd, but laught at Providence. § 11. What now can be said farther, in the be∣half of our Pretenders to the same Spirit's Illumi∣nation, which clear'd the Heads of the Apostles, and warm'd their Hearts? Can it be said they live strict and religious lives, though lives of Schism and Disobedience to humane Laws and Lawgivers, expresly said in Holy Scripture to be the Ordinan∣ces of God? But admit it were True, (which yet is so false, that it implies a Contradiction,) 'twere not
prevailing.Hieron. ad Marcellam. For the Heretick Montanus grew so proud of his Strictness, of his Demure Course of life in point of Abstinence and Sobriety, and suffering Hardships, as to believe himself in Time to be The Paraclete downright;Philostrat. l. 3. not a Godly man onely, but even The Holy Spirit of God. In which case 'tis very evident, that even his strictness was his Disease: and that the Spirit which overrul'd him was from his Spleen. The Heathen Brachmans also of India were so temperate, and chast, and so addicted to Self-de∣nials, (in Maffaem Hist. Ind. l. 12. p. 319. & l 14. p. 398. 1 Cor. 7. 31. order to their gaining upon the opi∣nions of the People with whom they liv'd,) that they seemed (in all appearance) to use This World as not abusing it: (exactly so as S. Paul exhorts the followers of Christ.) Such an externally-strict Per∣son was the Papalins S. Francis; who yet disco∣ver'd his Humility and passive Meekness (as I have read many years since, apud Authorem nescio Quem, as Cicero speaks in the like case,) to have partly been a Cloak, and partly an Instrument of his Pride. For, being ask'd why he rejoyced amidst the hard∣ships of his Imprisonment,Ideo me exul∣tare noveri∣tu, quia ad∣huc-Sanctus per totum Seculum ad∣or ator. Because. (said he) the whole world will even adore and canonize me among their Saints. Hereby we see the strict Necessity of the last Rule I mention'd for the right using of the Great Rule by wch the Spirits are to be Tried. For, Lastly, by neglecting to Try the Spirits of Pre∣tenders, whether or no they be of God, (and to try
them impartially by every part of That Touchstone I lately gave,) How very many have we known of our poor Separatists in England, (acted as they have been by the late Emissaries of Rome,) so strangely shallow, and over-credulous, as readily to imagin that every Schismatick is a Saint, who is not a Sabbath-breaker, or Swearer, not a Drunkard, or an Adulterer, and is so or so qualified in point of Judgement; or (to speak more exactly) in point of Party, and of Opinion? It must therefore be well consider'd, and carried constantly in mind by such as These, that of the two 'tis less intole∣rable to be a Swearer, than a Rebel; a Drunkard, than a Thief; a common Thief, than a Sacrilegious one; and a less horrid thing, to be corporally vile, than to be spiri∣tually proud of one's own Perfections. We must beware of all the former, as we ever hope to fly from the wrath to come; but more especially of the latter, as being much the more Luciferian Sins. Sins which can never attend men to Heaven, having brought down the An∣gels of Heaven to Hell. Drunkenness and Whoredom (however damning) are Sins the Devil cannot commit: but Envy, and Malice, and Schism, and Sacrilege, Hy∣pocrisie, and Rebellion, and intoxicating Pride, are pe∣culiar to him; they are the Devil's Sins so properly, that they are properly call'd Devilish in Men, or Christians, whereever found. And as These of all Sins are much the most Diabolical, so they are the most damning of any other, for ought I can collect from
the words of Christ, (Matth. 23. 14.) and by the words of S. Peter, (2 Pet. 2. 9, 10.) If they who hate our Congregations and way of Worship, because they judge the Holy Ghost to have forsaken our Mee∣tings, and to dwell onely in theirs, or because we do not easily shut the Door against Sinners, (till by Authority authoriz'd,) though they are under the Reputation either of Drunkenness, or Whoredom, or any other the like Scandalous and Deadly Sin, but not under the Sentence of legal Excommunication, (till when we cannot lawfully shut them out from our Communion,) I say, if the Censurers of our Pa∣tience and Longanimity towards such would but turn their Eyes inwards, or duely reflect upon them∣selves, and compare those Sins which the Devil ne∣ver commits, with those several other Sins which are proper to him; If they would not onely observe, but also remember, and consider, and religiously lay to heart,2 Pet. 2. 9, 10. the terrible Emphasis and force S. Peter puts on the word , saying of Them who despise Government, that they are chiefly, or most especially, reserved by the Lord unto the day of Judgement to be punished; and the most formidable Importance of That Greater Damnation,Matth. 23. 14. which our Saviour has denounced against those Hypocrites, who for a Pre∣tence do make long Prayers; I say again, if our dis∣senting & separating Brethren (in love and pity to whose Souls we pray & preach for their Conformi∣ty)
would have the Patience and the Humility to chew enough on these things, They would think with more Charity of our Communion, and with less Arrogance of their own. They would not separate from us Then, unless for contrary Inducements than now do move them. They would separate from us Then, in an humble opinion of their own Vileness; saying from the heart with the meek Centurion,Luk. 7. 6. Lord, we are not worthy that Thou shouldst enter under our Roof, and are by conse∣quence unworthy to have admittance under Thine. They would not separate from us Then, unless in the Spirit of S. Peter, afraid to approach unto Christ him∣self, with a Depart from me, O Lord, for I am a Sinfull man. They would not separate from us Then, like those Idolaters in Isaiah,Isa. 65. 2, 5. with a Stand farther off, come not near to us, for we are holier than you; But rather, like the Lepers under the Law of Leprosie, would cover their faces with Confusion, and stand aloof from God's House,Lev. 13. 45, 46. accusing themselves of their Ʋncleanness: or, like the  &  in the Primitive Times of Discipline, falling down flat upon their faces, (not in the Church, but the Churchyard, at an humble Di∣stance,) would beg the Charity of Their Prayers whom they saw entring into God's House at the Times of Prayer. Were they such Separatists as These, and from such a Principle as This, from the excesses onely of Meekness, and not of Pride, we should receive them with the Embraces of Arms and Hearts; we should
readily afford them even the Right hand of Fellow∣ship; we should conclude the Holy Ghost had so de∣scended upon their Souls, as once he did upon the Heads of the 12 Apostles,Act. 2. 41. or rather upon the Hearts of thse 3000 who at S. Peter's one Sermon were added to them: Though not in the Edifying Gifts which were bestowed upon the former, yet in the Sanctifying Graces which were infused into the latter. § 12. But having spoken enough already of Trying the Spirits in other men, I think it fit to say something of Trying them also in our selves. For considering the words of the Prophet Jeremy, The Heart of man is de∣ceitfull above all things; and that 'tis given to very few, (few, I mean, in comparison,) to know what Spirits they are of; I guess it concerns us all in general, and every one of us in particular, to resume the whole Text, and bring it home unto our selves; to search and try our own Hearts, and to examin our own Spirits, whether or no they are of God. 'Twas the Precept of Pythagoras to every man of his Sect, that he should bring himself to the Test, or call himself to an Accompt, every Evening of his whole Life, with a ; what he had done in That Day which he ought to have omitted,. and what good thing he had omitted which 'twas his Duty to have done: Nor was he to suffer himself to sleep, till he had made up this Rec∣koning three several Times. So 'twas the Precept of S. Paul,2 Cor. 13. 5. in his 2d Epistle to the Corinthians, Examin
your selves whether ye be in the Faith: (meaning That Faith which does work by Love all manner of Obedi∣ence to the Law of Christ's Gospel:) , prove or try your own selves, whether ye have not yet received the True Faith of Christ; or whether, having once received, ye still retain it. Know ye not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Repro∣bates? So S. Paul reason'd with his Corinthians; and so must we with or within our selves. Know we not that Christ is in us, by the Presence of his Spirit? and by the Power of his Word? and by the evident effects of His O∣peration? Such as our Sorrow for our sins past, our ha∣tred of our selves in Remembrance of them, and our stedfast Resolutions of better life? Know we not that Christ is in us by such Evidences as These? If we do, Then let us treat him in such a manner, as may become so Divine a Guest. But if we do not, we have some rea∣son to fear, lest we have sinn'd-away our Saviour, as ar∣rant Reprobates and Castaways; as men unworthy to be call'd Christians; as men who either are not at all Re∣generate, or else are fallen from That State of Regene∣ration which we were in; or (to express it with S. Paul) as men who have received the Grace of God in vain. And as it concerns us on all occasions to try the Spi∣rit which is in us, whether 'tis a good, or an evil Spirit; so most especially does it concern us at such a Time as This is, when we Tread in God's Courts, to offer up the Gospel-sacrifice of Supplication and Thanksgiving; to
hear His Word, & to partake of his Sacraments (Duties equally belonging to the first Sunday of the month.) For the Bread of God's Children must not be cast unto the Dogs; and the Food which is Spiritual belongs to Them onely who can spiritually discern it, and who live not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. I do not mean after every Spirit, (for there are many more than good, as I shew'd before,) but after The Spirit that is of God; The Spirit of Holiness, and Truth; The Spirit of Ʋnity, and Love; The Spirit of Meekness, and of Order; The Spirit of Singleness, and Sincerity; The Spirit of Wis∣dom, and Ʋnderstanding; The Spirit of Counsel, and Ghostly Strength; The Spirit of Knowledge, and true Godliness;Isa. 11. 2. and lastly, The Spirit of God's Holy Fear; (as the divine Prophet Isaiah expresseth him resting upon Christ, of whom the good King Hezekiah was but a Type in That place.) Unto all which if I should add, The Spirit of Promise,Eph. 1. 13. (with S. Paul,) and The Spirit of Pro∣phecy (with S. John,)Rev. 19. 10. The Spirit of Grace,Zech. 12. 10. (with holy Za∣chary,)1 Pet. 4. 14. and The Spirit of Glory, (with S. Peter,) I should but say, The same Spirit, in the vindicating of whom from the many False Spirits, which (in this last Age especially) have been debauching the Christian World, I have imploy'd the little Time which is allow'd for this Part of our Morning Service. To Him therefore with The Father in their Unity with The Son, Sing we Hosannahs, and Hallelujahs, Blessing, Glory, Honour, and Power, To Him that liveth for evermore.
OF The exceeding Sinfulness OF SCHISM; In how many GREAT REGARDS It is worse than HAERESIE; AND Why more damning than other Crimes. 2 THESS. 3. 6. Now we command you, Brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every Brother that walketh dis∣orderly. § 1. A TEXT exciting us to a Duty which does equally invite and command At∣tention. For the Duty is introduced with as important an Obtestation, as is any-where us'd in
S. Paul's Epistles: and it must certainly be a matter of exceeding great moment, which could extort from our Apostle so great and signal an Obtestation. He calls us Brethren, (for we are now in the place of the Thessalonians,) to win our Love, and to shew his own. But withall he commands us, as God's Embassador, that he may make as good impression upon our Fear too. We may take his whole Meaning in This plain Paraphrase. , We charge you, and that by virtue of our Commission, or in the power of our Apostleship, in the name and the behalf, by the Bowells and the Authority of our Lord Jesus Christ, as ye will answer it at the great and terrible Day of Discrimination,2 Thess. 1. 7, 8, 9. the Day wherein the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming Fire, taking ven∣geance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting Destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power; by every thing that is dreadfull, or dear unto you, , we declare, we de∣nounce, we command you, Brethren, that if ye observe any Professor of the Christian Religion (who for that reason onely is call'd a Brother)
to forsake his proper Calling, his Place and Sta∣tion, and to meddle as a Buisybody in other mens Matters, (v. 11.) and so to cast off all Obe∣dience to the Rules of Direction which we have given; (especially if ye observe him to leap from the Shop into the Pulpit, or out of the Church into a Synagogue consisting of the most factious and disorderly Opiniators, who, under colour of serving God, despise the Ordinances of Men;) ye presently Note him, and mark him out, as a Disorderly Walker, as a Disturber of Society, as a Disseminator of Discords, the very Bane of all Religion, and the Discredit of Christi∣anity; most unworthy to be admitted to any Commerce or Conversation with regular Chri∣stians; but to be shunn'd like any Leper, and to be cast out of your Company, as if he had a Plague-sore. (v. 14.) Thus I paraphrase the Text, as I find it re∣lating to the Context; and by comparing our Apostle's with our Saviour's own Rule. For , A Brother walking disorderly, in this present verse, does seem to be the same unruly and irregular Person, who is expressed by the word  1 Thess. 5. 14. Which be∣ing a Military expression, and of peculiar use in Tacticks, does properly signifie a Souldier
who runs away from his Colours; quits the Ser∣vice he undertook and ingaged in; denies obe∣dience to his Commander; not onely to his Lieu∣tenant, but Captain-General; (that is to say, without a Metaphor,) depraves the Doctrin, disturbs the Disciplin, disowns the Government of the Church: By any one of which Three he is disorderly in his Walking, however they are commonly all Three in one. § 2. Now when a Brother, (that is) a Chri∣stian, (at least in Profession and Pretense,) is so disorderly in his Walking, as that he will not hear the Church, but is a Contemner of Autho∣rity, and Publick Order; He is, by the Rule of our Blessed Saviour, to be look'd upon and dealt with, just asMatth. 18. 17. Heathen-men and Publicans were look'd upon and dealt with amongst the Jews: We must avoid him, as a prophane and an impious person; as one who is void of all Religion, and as it were without God in the World. Thus we must brand and stigmatize him for two good Rea∣sons, and pious Ends: first, that himself may be asham'd, and being asham'd may be converted; (2 Thess. 3. 14.) next, that others also may 1 Tim. 5. 20. fear to doe, and suffer, by his Example. § 3. That This was the meaning of our Lord, (Matth. 18. 17.) seems to me very evident from
Two especially of his Apostles; I mean, the most learned, and most beloved. They tell us Both, that when a Brother is become contumacious, and not reclaimable either by private, or by publick Admonitions, we must not onely not religiously, but not so much as civilly entertain commerce with him. We must not1 Cor. 5. 11. eat with such a Brother, or keep him company; must not 2 Joh. 1 receive him into our Houses, or bid him God speed. And there is reason for this Severity, which S. Paul and S. John have thus injoyn'd us. For can there be any thing more apposite, more pertinent, or proper, than to deny them our Com∣pany in private Houses, who disdain to afford us their own in God's? Why should we eat and drink with Them, either at Their, or Our Tables, who are therefore too unworthy, because they think they are too Good, to eat and drink in our company at the Table of the Lord? Why should we any-where go with Them, who will not go with Ʋs to Heaven; and hate the means of Sal∣vation, so far forth as we injoy them? Is it any way consistent either with Charity, or Reason, that we should bid a man God speed in the ways of Co∣rah; or affect his Society, who hates our Reli∣gion, and our God? No, he is rather (says our Apostle) to be put away from us,1 Cor. 5. 2. & 13. and from among
us, (as a foul, pestilential, accursed thing,) and even deliver'd up to Satan by the Censures of the Church:1 Tim. 1. 20. although it be to this charitable and wholsome end, that he may learn not to blas∣pheme; that he may learn to be conformable to Rules and Rulers;1 Cor. 5. 5. and so that his Spirit may be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus. § 4. 'Tis true that All vicious persons are dis∣orderly Walkers, who walk as far as they are able from the strait Path of God's Command∣ments: and from All that are Scandalous we are commanded to withdraw. For so saith S. Paul, (1 Cor. 5. 11.) I have written unto you, not to keep company, if any man that is call'd a Brother be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an Ido∣later, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Ex∣tortioner, with such a one no not to eat. No not in one of your private Houses, much less in the Sacrament, and House of God. But I do not here speak (nor does S. Paul) touching abso∣lute Apostates, who do renounce and fall away from the whole Faith of Christ, and the very Profession of Christianity; because They are not so much as call'd, or accompted Brethren. Nor do I speak of Jews, or Heathens, who, because they are avow'd and open Enemies of Christ, may with much the more safety, or rather with
much the less danger, be traffick'd with. (And accordingly S. Paul has excepted Them, in the very next verse before my Text, and the next verse after.) But I speak of gross Sinners, on whom the name of Christ is call'd. And amongst Them, in special manner, I aim at two sorts of men who are called Brethren; and so (like Judas downright) do betray the whole Cause of Christianity with a Kiss. I mean the Haeretick for one, who breaks the Unity of the Church in point of Doctrin, by denying one or more of her Fundamentals: I mean the Schismatick for another, who breaks the Unity of the Church in point of Disciplin, by doing as much as in him lies to overthrow her very Government, Laws, and Order. The First of These we must reject, and withdraw our selves from, in case he shall not reform himself, after a couple of Admo∣nitions: Tit. 3. 10. MuchNulla ab iis tanta po∣test fieri cor∣ruptio, quan∣ta est Schi∣smatis perni∣cies. Iren. l. 4. c. 62. more the Second, as the more Scandalous, and the more mischie∣vous, and the more impious of the two. And being by much the most irregular of all disorder∣ly Walkers my Text intends, he is the fitter to be the Subject of my Discourse at this Time. For an Haeretick, as he is such, does onely offend against Faith and Truth; and keeping his Er∣rour to himself, (as very easily he may, and very
many there are that do,) so as it never shall run out, either at his Tongue's or his Finger's end, is no body's Enemy but his own; is a regular Ci∣tizen, and a good Subject, living friendly with his Neighbours, and in an uniform Obedience to his Superiors. Whereas a Schismatick, as he is such, does also offend against Peace and Charity; and cannot possibly keep his Schism unto himself, but needs must hurt others with it, because 'tis publick in its own Nature, and can∣not be Schism, unless it be so. For he separates himself from the publick Worship; affronts the Governors, and scorns the Government of the Church; cuts himself off from the Communion of the Body of Christ; sets up Altar against Al∣tar, Dan and Bethel against Jerusalem and Sion; sets up a Ministry of his own making, against a Priesthood ordain'd by God; abetts a Conventicle prohibited by God and Man, against a Church set apart by the Laws of Both; like Jeroboam downright, whose Sin consisted in This especial∣ly, that he made Israel to Sin. Now an active Divider in and of the Church of God, must needs be worse than any other, who is but pas∣sively divided and cut off from her. And to destroy a whole Society by subverting the whole Legislative power, must needs be worse than to
violate a particular Law. And That which makes way for all the Haeresies in the world, as well as for all the Immoralities of life, (which Schism does evidently do,) must needs be worse than any Haeresie, which does onely make way for itself. And so a Schismatick is the more im∣pious, and the more mischievous of the two. Again, a Schismatick is worse than a simple Haeretick as such, not for this reason onely, be∣cause a vitious Practice is naturally worse than a wrong Opinion; (though that is reason great enough;) but for this other reason also, (not so commonly observ'd as I wish it were,) be∣cause a Schismatick ipso facto is mostly anHieron. ad Tit. c. 3. See Dr. Ham. of Schism, c. 1. p. 7. Haere∣tick into the Bargain. For besides his renoun∣cing the Ninth Article of the Creed, (that Form of sound words deliver'd to us by Christ's A∣postles,) The holy Catholick Church, and The Communion of Saints; (duly expounded and understood;) I say, besides That, He flatly despises, and detests (for 'tis a little thing to say, he disowns, and disbelieves,) That prin∣cipal Doctrin of the Gospel, That Fundamen∣tal of Christianity, That great Essential to All Religion,1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15. that we must heartily submit to e∣very Ordinance of Man; and that as well for the Lord's sake, as for our own; nor one∣ly
for fear of Wrath, but forRom. 13. 5. Conscience sake. § 5. Why I chuse to call This, a principal Doc∣trin of the Gospel, a Fundamental of Christianity, and the great Essential to All Religion, I seem to my self to have so many and great Reasons, that if they were every-where urged, and laid to heart, (especially by the Parties who are the least aware of them, but most concern'd to take them in,) they might suffice to put an end to those numerous Schisms, which now do threaten to put an end to our whole Religion. The Doctrin of Obedience to humane Governours and Laws, is certainly the ap∣test of any other, (next to that of our Obedience to God himself, whereof this Doctrin is a most neces∣sary part too,)Eph. 4. 3. to keep the unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace; and to congregate into one Body the most disjoynted and scatter'd Members in Church and State. A Doctrin laid for this pur∣pose by God the Father, from the Foundations of the World; and that in the Law of the first Crea∣tion. A Doctrin propagated by Moses, as Taught of God to teach others. A Doctrin perfected by Christ, as by the Wisedom of the Father, who pray'd his Followers might be one, even as his Father and He were one: (Joh. 17. 11.) which yet without Obe∣dience to this very Doctrin can never be. A Doc∣ctrin inculcated and inforced by God the Holy
Ghost, as by the Spirit of Love, and Meekness, of Peace, and Ʋnion. A Doctrin extended to All Au∣thority upon Earth; not onely Regal in the first place, (1 Pet. 2. 13.) but Ecclesiastical in the second, (Heb. 13. 17.) To summe up all in a word, There is not a Doctrin in all the Gospel, either more earnestly, or more assiduously, either more plainly, or more expresly prescribed to us, (and that under pain of Damnation too,) than that of our uniform Obedience to All that are over us in Authority. I say, to All; not onely to the Best, (the Good and Gentle,) but as well to the worst, and most1 Pet. 2. 18. froward Governours. § 6. It is not onely most foolishly, but most nefariously pretended, that the Piety, or Impiety, the Religion, or Irreligion, of them that are over us in the Lord, can either widen, or contract our divine Obligation to strict Obedience. For never was any incarnate Devil more incomparably im∣pious than those Emperours of Rome, Tiberius and Nero; whom yet our Saviour and S. Paul commanded their Followers to obey, and obey'd Themselves. For Obedience to Magistrates being of Divine right, strongly founded upon the Will and the Word of God, and even a part of our Obedience to God Himself, (whilst it is paid to that Authority which God has commanded us to
pay an Obedience to,) cannot possibly be due to the men, as men, or to the Good, as they are Good; but to the Magistrates or Masters redu∣plicativè, as they are such: 'Tis due to the Go∣vernours as they are Governours,Rom. 13. 1, 2. and as the Ordi∣nance of God; let their Practices and Opinions be what they will. § 7. 'Tis true, when our Governours are Ʋsurpers, or (being None) do command us what God forbids; There there lies an Exception to our Obedience, due to God, rather than Man. But This Exception makes strongly for all I have hitherto said; and that by virtue of the old Axiom, Exceptio firmat Regulam in non exceptis. So that by this Rule and Reason, that when God and His Deputies do stand in competition for our Obedience, God must have our whole Active, and His Deputies our Passive Obedience onely; It cannot but follow, that when our Governours are rightfull, and do onely command what God does no-where forbid, or do onely forbid what God does no-where command us, There we must obey God, by obeying Man: there being no other way of paying God our Obedience, in such a case. For There our Governours Command is the Com∣mand of God too. There the very same Law which is immediately Humane, is also mediately
Divine; Because we There are commanded by That Authority upon Earth, which in the Old and New Testament God has commanded us to obey. Nor is there any one Duty, belonging to us as Men or Christians, which God is pleas'd to make a stricter Provision for. We are no more commanded to fear God, than to honour the King: nor are we more forbidden to worship Idols, than to resist or disobey such as are over us in Authority. § 8. This I do the rather insist upon, in my Design upon the Welfare and the Conversion of our Schismaticks, (the most Disorderly Wal∣kers of all my Text alludes to, or comprehends in its Importance,) because I can no more sepa∣rate (no not so much as in my Conception) the Sin of Schism from Disobedience to just Authority, than Disobedience from Rebellion against the Gospel, or a State of Damnation from either of them. They are all three united in the Schi∣smaticks of old, as S. Jude describes them. For, speaking in his Epistle of Certain men crept in unawares,Jude 4. despising Dominion,8. and speaking evil of Dignities,12. Clouds without Water carried about of Winds,13. raging Waves of the Sea, foaming out their own shame, wandring Stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever; He
proceeds in his Description to call them Mur∣murers,16. Complainers, Walking after their own Lusts,19. Separating themselves [from the Church Establish'd,] and pretending to have, but in∣deed having not the Spirit. This is S. Jude's Hypotyposis or Description of the Gnosticks, who were the first and worst Schismaticks, the first and worst Haereticks, the first and worst Re∣bels in the Primitive Church; the first who sepa∣rated themselves upon this account, that they thought themselves perfecter and purer Christians than others were; the first who preached up Christian Liberty to consist in an Exemption from all Authority upon Earth, from all Superiours whatsoever, whether Masters, or Kings, or A∣postles and Governours of the Church; The first we meet with in all the Gospel match'd and par∣allel'd (for wickedness) with Cain and Core, yea with Sodom and Gomorrah, yea with Those Schismaticks in Heaven, the Angels that kept not their first Estate, but left their own Habitation, (v. 6.) and were thrown headlong by their Schism from Heaven to Hell; Briefly, the first in the New Testament, who are set forth for an Example, (as Sodom and Gomorrah were in the Old,) of suffering the Vengeance of eternal Fire, (therein tormented day and night for ever and
ever, Rev. 20. 10.) And so they are parallel'd (for their Misery, as well as Sin,) with them that separated themselves from the Church Trium∣phant;Jude 6. reserved therefore by the Judge in ever∣lasting Chains under Darkness, unto the Judg∣ment of the Great Day. In all this S. Jude agrees exactly with S. Paul, (1 Tim. 6. 3, 4, 5.) and as exactly with S. Peter, (in his whole 2d Chap∣ter of his 2d Epistle,) as if the one had taken Notes out of the other. No less terrible are the Expressions of the Epistle to the Hebrews, con∣cerning such as persevere in the Sin of Schism, Heb. 10. 23, 25. to v. 30. where They that do not hold fast the Profession of the Faith without wa∣vering, (v. 23.) but forsake the Assembling of themselves together, (at the Stated Times and Places by just Authority appointed,) as the manner of some is, (v. 25.) are inferr'd to sin wilfully, after they have received the knowledge of the Truth, (v. 26.) and there remains nothing for such, but a certain fearfull looking for of Judgment and fiery Indignation, (v. 27.) § 9. Nor indeed is it a wonder that the Holy Ghost's Penmen and Amanuenses should set them∣selves, as 'twere on purpose, to terrifie Schisma∣ticks from their Schisms, and to persuade them into Conformity,2 Cor. 5. 11. by shewing the Terrours of the
Lord; by thundering out Damnation, more to That single Sin, than to all the rest: For a wil∣full and a Groundless Separation from the Catho∣lick and Apostolick Church, or from a National Church onely, which is a true Part of the Ʋni∣versal, (such as is the Church of England, where nothing sinfull is required as the Condi∣tion of our Communion,) whether by Breach of that Communion in which a man ought to have continu'd, or by a Refusal of that Communion which 'tis his Duty to be of, (and that as well by Divine as by humane Laws,) is so infinitely far from walking orderly, or according to the Tra∣dition we have received of S. Paul, (that is, according to the Rule of a Christian Life, de∣liver'd to us in the Scriptures,) that 'tis to give the greatest Scandal which can be given to Christ's Enemies, and tends to make the whole Gospel of none effect. It helps to justifie the Turks; the Jews, and Gentiles, in the Praejudices they have to the Christian Name. It helps to harden them in their hatreds, and even tacitly forbids them to be Believers. 'Tis true that Haeresie and Schism do so agree in one generical Signification, that Haeresie is Schism in point of Doctrin, and Schism is Haeresie in point of Ʋse. But they are so very different in their specifical acceptions, that Schism
is many ways the worse, as I said before. And if S. Paul by the word Haeresies doesNote that  placed after  may well signifie Schisms, be∣cause the word is so taken Rom. 16. 17. and because Schisms are a kind of Ecclesiastical Seditions. not sig∣nifie them Both, it follows that Haeresie of itself is rank'd with Hatred, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Mur∣thers, Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. And then how dam∣ning a Sin is Schism, whereof Haeresie is but a Part, as I shew'd before? This is also there reckon'd among the Works of the Flesh. For Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, what are they all, but several Mem∣bers or Concomitants of Schism? implying Schism to be a System or Body of Sin epitomiz'd. S. Paul accordingly speaks of Schism, as of a complicated Carnality, which (like the prover∣bial Trojan Horse) carries an Army of Impieties within its Bowels. 'Twas That (by way of eminence) S. Paul accused, of having made his Corinthians carnal.1 Cor. 3. 3, 4. And the Character which is given to the Double-minded man (Jam. 1. 8.) belongs as well to the Schismatical or Carnal∣minded man, that he is unstable in all his ways. For such exactly is the Schismatick by way of peculiarity; who having faln from his Center, [The Church of God,] knows not after where to fix; but wanders about from Sect to Sect, from Party to Party, from Haeresie to Haeresie, from Schism to Schism, and so indeed does try
all things, (in a most perverse and peevish sense,) as never to hold fast what is good. Experience is the Mistriss by which we have been taught This. (I mean the wofull Experience of Six and Thirty years old.) And we are most prodigious Dunces, if after so many years Instruction in the School of Affliction and Experience, we are no whit the wiser for such a Lesson. For what things are there in Holy Writ, (how essential soever to Christianity,) which have not been question'd, and disputed, if not deny'd, and rejected, since Schism took place in the Chair of Scorn? To this alone we owe the raging of the Sea, and the roaring of the Waves, whereby the Madness of the People is oft express'd. To this alone we owe the Legion, I do not say onely of Creeds, of Re∣ligiosities, of Dogmatizings here in England, (since the year 41. in especial manner,) but even of Skepticism, Apostasy, and of Atheism it self. § 10. Now if any are desirous to know the Reasons, why our Schismaticks, rather than o∣thers, (however Scundalous in their lives,) are singl'd out from the whole Herd of Notorious Sinners, to be paradigmatiz'd as disorderly Wal∣kers, from whom we arePejus hoc crimen est, quàm quod admisisse Lapsi viden∣tur. Cyprian. de Ʋnitate Ecclesiae.——Eusch. l. 6. c. 36. most to withdraw our∣selves; I shall endeavour their Satisfaction by
these 4 Reasons.  First, because of all Sinners, They seem to be the most destitute of Christian Meekness and Humility.  Next, because of all Sinners, they are the most void of Christian Cha∣rity, as That is Superiour to Faith and Hope. Thirdly, because of all Sinners, they are the greatest Ʋnderminers of Society and Govern∣ment; the greatest Adversaries to God, as the God of Order; the greatest Disturbers (and the most dangerous) of private Propriety, and pub∣lick Peace.  Lastly, because of all Sinners, our Schismaticks here in England are the most bar∣barously ingratefull, and most deplorably un∣excusable of any other. I am very much mista∣ken, if I have not great reason for these 4 Rea∣sons. But whether so, or not so, I leave to the Judgment of my Superiours; and content my self with This, that (without any passion) I speak mine own. § 11. To the first of my 4 Reasons I pre∣mise S. Paul's Character touching Schismaticks in general;1 Tim. 6. 3. to wit, that they consent not to whol∣some words, and the Doctrin which is according to Godliness;4, but are proud, knowing nothing, doat about Questions, and Strifes of words, where∣of cometh Envy, Strife, Railings, evil Surmises, perverse Disputings of men of corrupt Minds,5. and
destitute of the Truth. From such (says he to Timothy) withdraw thy self. S. Peter adds, They are presumptuous,2 Pet. 2. 10, 15. selfwill'd, despise Govern∣ment, have forsaken the right Path, and are gone astray. Now from Scripture thus speaking, let us reason the case a little, and then apply it. Can any be farther from Humility, than They who know nothing, and yet are proud of their Know∣ledge? Can any Pride be more prodigious, than that by which the very basest and the most despi∣cable of Subjects do not onely abhor, but de∣spise their Governours? nor onely the Persons, who are but Men, but even Government it self, which is avowedly Divine in its Institution? The Apostle's Expression is rich and elegant, as well as true. For to despise, or contemn, to de∣pretiate and scorn, and as it were to look down upon Those above us, does not savour of a vul∣gar, or of a middle-siz'd Pride, but of Pride in its Exaltation. Can any Pride be more mon∣strous, than for vile Dust and Ashes even to Dei∣fie It self? yet the Schismatick seems to doe it in Three respects. For first, he arrogates to himself God's Incommunicable Attribute, whilst he founds his grossest Errours upon an Infalli∣bility: which he does not onely ascribe (as others do with more modesty, and shew of
Reason, although 'tis no more than a shew of Reason,) to the whole, either diffusive, or repre∣sentative Church; but to his own individual Per∣son, acted (forsooth) and over-acted by That which he calls (speaking out of his own Heart) the infallible Spirit of God. In any Controversie arising touching the sense of any Scripture, He does not appeal to the Original, or Context, to Fathers, or Councils, or Commentators, (all riff∣raff in his Esteem,) but to Illumination, and Re∣velation, and The Testimony within him. Nor can I imagin what should keep him from returning in∣to the Church he has turned from, unless it be the worst Effect of the greatest Pride, a shamefulness to confess he has ever err'd. Next he Deifies himself by not enduring God's Yoke, or indeed that God should reign over him. For if the Powers that are on Earth are ordain'd by God, (as S. Paul affirms,) it is evident that we live under a ; that God, by Them, does reign over us: and they that resist shall receive Damnation, be∣cause they will not be under God. This is cer∣tainly at the Bottom both of S. Jude's, and S. Paul's, and S. Peter's reasonings, when they infer eternal Torments (as they every-where do) from Disobedience to the Authorities, and the lawfull Commands of Men. Besides, the Schis∣matick
seems to Deifie himself, by seating him∣self on the Throne of God, and undertaking to be the Judge of Quick and Dead; by opening the Seals of the Book of life; and expounding God's Decrees of Particular mens States from all Eternity. He takes upon him before the Har∣vest, to sever the Wheat from the Tares, and the Sheep from the Goats. He forsooth, and his Party, and none besides, are the Elect; whilst all from whom they All separate, are Vessels of Wrath and Reprobation. Again, how far is That Professor from Christian Meekness, who says as the Schismaticks did of old, in the Prophet Esa.Isa. 65. 5. Stand farther off, come not near me, for I am holier than Thou? thanking God that he is not as other men are, neither a Sab∣bath-breaker, nor Swearer, nor even as this or that Publican; no Conformist, no Royalist, nor even as this or that Excize-man, gathering Tri∣bute-money for Caesar: and proudly taking to his Party the name of Saints at every turn, which he denies to the Apostles in all Discourse he makes of them on all occasions. Briefly, for a Person of very low Parts, and little Learning, of contemptible Education, and small Improve∣ments, to separate from a Great and Admired Church, The Church of England, and from the
Devotions of the same in her Publick Liturgy, All contrived by the Wisedom, directed by the Learning, embraced by the Piety, established by the Authority of such a Nation, confirmed by at least 33 Acts of Parliament, and by as many Convocations, or Representatives of the Clergy, sign'd and seal'd by the Sufferings of many Confessors and Martyrs, lastly, asserted and defended against the Wit and the Malice of all Opponents; I say, for a person grosly igno∣rant, and knowing nothing in comparison, to scorn or pity all his Teachers, as Fools and Blind; for him to think he sees more or better, than the two Ʋniversities put together, com∣monly call'd the two Eyes of this National Body, (which is as if the silliest Sheep that ever leap'd out of a Fold, should take upon them both to guide and to feed their Shepherd;) This does argue such an Arrogance, Self-conceitedness, and Pride, as no Rhetorick can express, no Charity excuse, no Humility not censure. Although Novatus was made a Schismatick by a proud opi∣nion of his own Purity, and by his carnal Am∣bition to head a Party, as Simon Magus did the Gnosticks in the Apostles own Times, on the same account; yet now the Copy and Transla∣tion has so outdone its Original, that our Schis∣maticks
have accus'd the Laws and Canons (for Ʋniformity) of being Such. They could approve of most things, in case they were not impos'd by Law. The very Reason why they ought, is the Reason they will not serve God in order. They dare not doe what they know they may lawfully, for fear they should seem to think an human Law binding. The onely fault of our Liturgy, is its having been com∣pos'd, Authoriz'd, and made use of, by the wisest and the Best of our English World, especially by the Governours in Church and State. They will have Parliaments and Synods strike sail to Them. Whatsoever is Great or Sacred is mar∣ked out for the object of their Contempt. Un∣less Antiquity and Authority will condescend and stoop to them, yea unless they may tread upon Crowns and Scepters, there is not any thing will please them, or give them rest. For∣sooth They want a main part of their Christian Liberty, unless they may not onely be suffer'd to cast away their Cords from them, but also to bind their Kings in Chains,Psal. 149. 8. and their Nobles with links of Iron. § 12. Nor are our Schismaticks onely arriv'd at the Top of Pride, (which is my first reason,) but they are also sunk down even below the
very Bottom of Christian Charity, (which is my second.)1 Cor. 13. 5. For Charity thinketh no evil, but our Schismaticks nothing else. They cannot see their own Eyes, much less the Beams that are in them; but in the Eye of a Conformist they can see every Mote, and easily look it into a Moun∣tain. They perfectly hate, whomsoever they have injur'd for being blameless; that is, for re∣fusing to walk with Them in the ways of Corah: And if we strive to doe all things (in the pub∣lick worship of God) with any Decency or Or∣der, as S. Paul and our Governours do strictly bind us; they pretend to see nothing, (such is the yellow, or black Jaundise of Malignity and Prejudice,) but either Popery or Paganism in all our Service. Hence they separate from us, (though not Christians onely, but Protestants,) with no less aversion (in all appearance,) than from Papists, and Pagans, and Limbs of Satan. Nor can they rationally deny, that they esteem us as bad as either: for if they judge not our Communion to be as absolutely Ʋnlawfull, as they do their own Communion to be of absolute Necessi∣ty to their Salvation, they cannot separate from us, and excuse themselves at the same time. They will not pretend they are unwilling to go to Hea∣ven in our Company; but that they leave us as
going on in the way to Hell. This must needs be their meaning, or else they cannot excuse themselves unto themselves. So as they must be void of Charity by either side of the Dilemma. For either they really do believe us to be as well their fellow-Saints as their fellow-Subjects, or they do not: truly if they do not, they then are void of all Charity to Ʋs, in thinking nothing but evil of us; not the best our Case will bear, but the worst to be imagin'd. And (on the other side) if they do, they are at the least as void of Charity to Themselves, and do despise their own Souls, by excommunicating themselves from their fellow-Saints. For what Pretense can they have for their separating from us, if they think us Christ's Members, as well as They? The terrible Saying of S. Cyprian,Etsi tales oc∣cisi in Con∣fessione nomi∣nis fuerint, Macula ista nec sanguine abluitur; Inexpiabilis culpa Discor∣diae, nec pas∣sione purga∣tur. Cyprian. de unit. Eccl. 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2 3. [that Mar∣trydom is not sufficient to make amends for a man's Schism,] is as true, as 'tis notorious, and as rational, as 'tis true. And yet it can be nei∣ther, unless it be on this Ground, that Schism is exclusive of Christian Charity: on which sup∣posal S. Cyprian did strongly argue out of S. Paul. Though I speak with the Tongues of Men and Angels, though I have the Gift of Prophecy, Faith, and Knowledge, though I bestow all my Goods to feed the Poor, lastly, though (by Martyrdom)
I give my Body to be burnt, and have not Charity, it profiteth me nothing. But if I live in Schism, I have no Charity; because I separate my self (as from the Children of the Devil) from many Thousands of thousands better Men, better Christians, better Protestants than my self. And so my Alms in that case are but Ostentation: my yielding up my self to be burnt alive, is a mad kind of Martyrdom in such a Case; 'tis but a Sacrifice to my Humour, to my Obstinacy, and Stomack, like that of Clement and Ravilliac, who died Martyrs to the Popedom, and not to Christ; or like the Martyrdom of Hierocles, who writ a Book against Christ, and after That at By∣zantium died a Martyr to his Stoicism, as our English Regicides to their Fanaticism, and Van∣ninus to his Atheism. Those alone were the Deities which they ador'd, and died for. 'Tis not the Bravery of the Sufferer, but the Divinity of the Cause, which makes a Martyrdom meri∣torious (if any properly can be such) in any measure: and so S. Cyprian said rightly, (being but rightly understood,) that even Martyrdom cannot expiate the Sin of Schism. § 13. Thirdly, Schism is destructive, (in its Tendency at least,) not onely of Government, wheresoever there is any; but of Society itself,
upon a supposal that there is none. Every body knows, (as well as Machiavel,) that to divide, is to infeeble, and so the very shortest way to destroy a Nation. The Church of Eng∣land is but one, and in its Ʋnity lies its Safety, because its Strength. But many and many are the Sects, which Schism has made by dividing from her; and so it is a Devil whose name is Legion. For the effects of which Legion, we shall not need consult more, than our own Me∣mories and Experience. For from the year 41 till 60, all our National Calamities began in Schism; in Schism they continued; and if ever they are completed, 'twill be in Schism too. Schism was ours, as it was Corah's first Crime. For though Mutiny and Rebellion were the natu∣ral Issue of it, (as Schism in the Church does ever carry Faction in the State along with it;) yet 'twas chiefly as aOptatus l. 1. p. 25. Schismatick, that Corah was swallow'd up alive, and his separate Congregati∣on together with him. 'Twas Schism which did set up The Assembly of Divines, against our regu∣lar Convocations and National Synods of the Clergy. 'Twas That that set up the Directory, a∣gainst the Liturgy of the Church. 'Twas Schism made Sacrilege, and a Sale of the Crown-Lands, and kill'd God's Anointed in order to it. But
for Schism, we had not heard either of Plunder, or Sequestration; the sound of those Names had never reach'd our English Ears. 'Twas Schism call'd Strength the Law of Justice. 'Twas Schism which founded all Right in Dominion, and Right of Dominion onely in Grace; and so (by their Doctrin of irrespective and necessita∣ting Decrees,) inferr'd the Great Turk to have much more Grace than our Christian Princes, be∣cause more Right, by more Dominion. Finally, Schism was the Dam of all the Blasphemies, both of those and the present Times. The Leviathan itself was but the Spawn of That Parent. Behind the Veil of Toleration, which Schism begot too, and under the Protection of Christian Liberty, which Schism expounded into what we now see it, Horrid Ochlocracy, and Chirocracy, and ugly Anarchy itself, has been hatching, or ingendring, ever since Monarchy was restor'd. For some are longing after the Onions and the Flesh-pots of Aegypt, as much as ever. And as we have liv'd to see a Triumph without a War, or a Skirmish, (in the most happy Resuscitation of God's Spouse, and his Vicegerent;) so do we live to see a War too, within the Bowells of Church and State, without other Weapons than those of Schism. For our Schismaticks are an Army,
however yet without Arms. Happy we, that they are so; and most unhappy, if they are otherwise. For hardly ever were there Schis∣maticks (in any Part or Age of the Christian World) without this Turkish and Popish Prin∣ciple, that Religion is to be propagated (where 'tis possible) by the Sword. § 14. Lastly, our Schismaticks here in Eng∣land are of all others the most ingratefull, and unexcusable in their Schism. The most ingrate∣full; because by Those very Laws, and under the Protection of those Legislators, which they hate, and despise, and conspire against, they hold the greatest Injoyments that men are capable of on Earth; to wit, their Liberties, and their Safe∣ties, their Livelihoods, and their Lives. Again, the most unexcusable; because they cannot but know, yea they cannot but acknowledge, (and their Chieftains do it in Print,) that we are Christians, and Protestants, which they also pre∣tend to be: that we have all the Fundamentals (which they pretend also to have) of the true Religion; whether as it consisteth of Faith, or Practice: we own the Creed, and the Command∣ments, and the whole Word of God, as all (or most of) our Schismaticks pretend to doe. We agree in all Essentials with All the Protestant
Churches of Christendom, as The Harmony of Confessions will convince every Creature who will but read them. Whence then the Murmu∣rings and Disputings (against Authoritative Commands) so strictly forbidden by S. Paul, Philip. 2. 14? or what excuse can be found for a Separation? Let us examin the whole Affair from Top to Bottom; and let us consider what they would have to make us worthy of their So∣ciety; and why they separate from Ʋs of the Church of England, as from Papists, if not Pa∣gans, and Brands of Hell, as I said before. 'Tis plain, we do not worship Idols; and 'tis plain, we have none to worship. We add no Articles of our making to the Apostles own Creed, (as we know who do.) Nor do we pare away one of the Ten Commandments, and slit another in the midst, to complete the num∣ber. Nor do we equal the Apocrypha with the Canonical Books of Scripture. We have but two Sacraments; and pray in English. Wives are permitted to our Clergy; and by Them to the Laity the Cup of Blessing. We do not buy and sell Pardons; nor do we trust in any Me∣rits save those of Christ. We pray for none at all who are departed this Life; and much less to them. We renounce the strange Doctrin of
Transubstantiation, as we do all Pretensions to Infallibility upon Earth. If we yield the Bishop of Rome a naked Primacy of Order, we do refuse him at the same Instant all Supremacy of Power; and do limit his Jurisdiction within his own own Dioecese, or Province. Then what Pretense can any have, (who are not Papalins Them∣selves,) to dread, or hate a Communion with us? If some things indifferent, and uncomman∣ded in Holy Writ, do make them separate from us of the Church of England, They must not onely separate (for the very same reason) from all the Reformed Churches of Europe; but they must separate from Themselves too, and from their separate Congregations, wherein some things must be Indifferent. I hope they will not here alledge, They love Division quatenus ipsum; and that to cross S. Paul's Precept, they love as much as in them lies to live unpeaceably with all men;Rom. 12. 18. or think it their Duty to be Disturbers. They will not say, they are obliged to turn the World upside down, as once the Apostles were said to doe, by Ill-will. They will not pretend they are bound in Conscience, to set up That Parti∣tion-Wall our Saviour came to break down; and throw the World into a Chaos of Confusion, worse and wilder than That, out of which 'twas first
taken. Nor do I think that they will plead, They were decreed to love Schism, and cannot help it. They will not say (whate're some think) that any man's Avarice was decreed to midwive Schism into the World, for the Love of sweet Sacrilege, or other Spoils: or that his Envy was Praedetermin'd to sow the Tares of Dissension for sweet Revenge: However Envy and Ambition are as probable Impellents, as any other. For, had Aërius been timely made a Bishop himself, he had not envied That Order, much less headed a Sect against it. And were our Schismaticks Legislators, they would inforce such a Conformity, as now they will not forgive, much less comply with. They seem to reckon themselves oppress'd, in that they are not permitted, much less made choise of, to be our Rulers. Which yet by their Principles of Li∣berty and Conscience, (as They expound them,) they are incapable of being, should we desire them. For if things which are Indifferent are not properly the matter of Human Laws, (as hu∣man Laws are contradistinct unto Divine,) No∣thing else with any reason can be pretended so to be. For Necessary things are all sufficiently commanded by God already in his World: and All things unlawfull are There as evidently for∣bidden:
and things impossible are not comman∣dable at all. 'Tis very evident that the For∣mer, both affirmative and negative, are the Di∣vine Laws of God, and in no wise human. So that if our disobedient and Schismatical Bre∣thren should now be chosen or admitted our Le∣gislators; Then by the Principles they are of, (would they be but true to them,) there would be but one Law (precisely human) which They could possibly enact, and it must be This; That every Christian man living should be a Law unto Himself. Every man's Reason should be his Guide; and every man's Will should be his Reason. Therefore, according to their own Principles, they cannot possibly be our Rulers, if we would have them. For every man's Rea∣son would be his Royalty. All besides would be Rulers, as much as They. And so for Them to be our Governours implies a gross Contra∣diction; by nothing in the world to be avoided, but by their quitting Their Principles, and ow∣ning ours. Now I am tempted to appeal to our Schisma∣ticks themselves, whether they are not , Sinners in whose behalf no Apology can be made. Whether they are not the worst Re∣cusants, because the most unexcusable. Whether
they are not worse than Those who were accused by the Apostle of being tossed to and fro by every blast, and carried about with every Wind of false Doctrin, when (not our Doctrins, true or false, but) even our Surplices can scare them, and Organs blow them out of the Church. Whe∣ther it will not be more tolerable in the tremen∣dous day of Judgment, for them that never were Members of Jesus Christ, than for them, who ha∣ving been Members, did excommunicate Them∣selves, and even cut themselves off from his Mystical Body, which is his Church. Whether, when the publick Safety cannot evermore sub∣sist without publick Peace, nor publick Peace without Compliance on one side or other, it is not fitter that such as They should meekly com∣ply with their Superiours, than that their Supe∣riours should bow to Them? Whether an yiel∣ding can be made better, than by the ignorant to the most learned, by the fewest to the most numerous, by the Shrubs to the Cedars, or by the Subjects of Law to the Legislators. Indeed Obedience to one another, that is to Equals, and Obedience to Inferiours, or People exceedingly below us, might be grievous and vexing with some Excuse. However Christians are (in love) bid to serve one another; and Christ did wash
his Disciples Feet; and England has had her Saturnalia; during which, some of the greatest and noblest Masters did indure a December of Twelve years long, and did contentedly see their Servants to bear Rule over them. But Obedience to Superiours, to men above us (not against, but) according to the Laws of Heaven and Earth, (such as was the Obedience of Christ to Caesar; for Christ according to his Manhood was but a Subject, though King of Kings in re∣gard of his Divinity; and Caesar was one of those Mortal Gods, who liv'd like Devils, and died like Men;) I say, Obedience unto Superiours whom the Scripture calls Gods, is the most noble, and the most natural, and the most ne∣cessary Duty; such as bears up upon its shoul∣ders (by God's Assistance) both the whole Fabrick of the Church, and all the Kingdoms of the Earth, and of Heaven itself. Whereas Schisms are Pioneers, which digging below their very Foundations, do clearly strive to under∣mine and subvert them All. § 15. I have now done with my 4 Rea∣sons, why our Schismaticks rather than others, (however scandalous in their Lives,) are singl'd out from the whole Herd of Notorious Sinners, to be made the chief Exemplars of dis∣orderly
Walking, from whom we are most to withdraw our selves. These (I say) are the chief reasons, why by this Precept of S. Paul, compar'd with Those of S. John, and our Bles∣sed Saviour, we are chiefly bound to separate from Separatists. Yet would I not here be thought to mean, that every Subject should be a Judge, from what kind of Separatists (in Civil Conversation) he ought to separate. (For pub∣lick disorder and confusion might Thence en∣sue.) But I would be understood to intend Those Schismaticks, who are censured by their Gover∣nours and proper Judges to be Such. From a civil Commerce with such (and a commerce of free choice) I think it a Duty to abstain, and to abstain in such a measure, as our Lord and His Apostles have mark'd out to us. § 16. And now I may have done with my Sermon too, but that I have remaining an hearty Wish, that our Separating Brethren would un∣passionately consider Three obvious Truths. First, that if Obedience to Christian Governours and Laws is not really so essential to Christia∣nity itself, but that still it is possible (as some imagin) that Saints may be Schismaticks, and Schismaticks Saints, Then our Faith, and our Preaching, yea and our Scriptures are all in
vain. Welcome Anarchy and Disorder; and Farewell to all Society. Next, that however Sin and Errour are very different in themselves, yet a Wilfulness in Errour does make such an Errour become a Wilfull Sin too. And the con∣temning of Authority, link'd with an obstinate contumacious fomenting of Divisions, is such a Monster, that the least Errour of Judgment which had been venial in itself, is by these Aggrava∣tions made great and grievous, and contracts unto itself as well a Diabolical, as Damning Quality. Thirdly, that Schism, were it no Sin, were very well worthy the parting with, for the purchasing of so pretious and so inestimable a Jewell, as Publick Peace; the fruits of which (rightly us'd) are Piety, and Prosperity, Strength, and Safety. 'Twas for the purchasing of This, that S. Paul has his Compliances with Jews and Gentiles. 'Twas for This that he yielded to cir∣cumcise Timothy; and 'twas for This that he re∣fused to circumcise Titus; (as well as for the shewing his Christian Liberty and obedience to the Conciliar Constitution Then first Enacted.) 'Twas his great Business and Design,1 Cor. 9. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. to make the most adverse Parties agree in Christ. To gain the Jews therefore, he deny'd himself the use of his Christian Liberty: and as well to
win the Gentiles, he resum'd the use of it with equal Care. 'Twas to unite dissenting Parties, and make them meet in one Church, that the Apostles (meeting together in a full Council at Jerusalem) thought it requisite to establish Things Indifferent by a Law. Thereby giving aAct. 15. 28, 29. Necessity à parte post, to things Indifferent à parte ante. It was to gain both Jews and Gen∣tiles, that our Lord in some things comply'd with Both. And to hope that our hitherto-dissenting Brethren, who now do enfeeble and indanger both Church and State by their Disobedience, will one day comply with their Superiours upon the Reasons I have given, (if by any fair means they may be brought to their knowledge, and laid before them,) is at present the greatest Charity I can have for those men, who are void of All Charity, till That is done. § 17. Finally, Brethren, farewell: and suffer a word of Exhortation from S. Paul and S. Peter,1 Pet. 3. 8. Both joyn'd together. Be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another; love as Brethren, be pitifull, be curteous: so S. Pe∣ter:) to which I add out of S. Paul, ,2 Cor. 13. 11. be knit-together and compacted, (so the Greek,) or be ye perfect, (so the English,) because your being perfect, must consist in your
being well knit-together and compacted in one Communion.Phil. 3. 16. Therefore walk by the same Rule, and mind the same things, live in Peace; and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you. To Him be Glory for ever and ever.
OF CIRCUMSPECTION In THESI. EPH. 5. 15, 16. See that ye walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise, Redeeming the Time, because the days are evil. 1. AS Philostratus once said of Apollonius Tyanaeus, , That he writ not his Life, but his Peregrina∣tion; after the very same manner may I say here, The Life of man is butGen. 47. 9. Heb. 11. 13. a Pilgrimage, and that Pilgrimage but a Walk; A going up∣hill on one side, and down-hill on the other. First of all he walks up-hill, untill he comes to his 30th. or 40th. year; And from thence he walks down-hill, untill he comes to fourscore. For
All, after That, is a Descending into the Pit, (or if it must needs be call'd walking,) a kind of walking in the Valley of the shadow of Death. 2. First then , be sure to walk: do not faintly lie down, or yawningly lean upon your Elbows:. Hippocrat. Aphor. 1. . Jam. 4. ; Sophoc. for your Journy is long, and your Time but little. Therefore up, and be doing. Set your feet in his steps, who went about doing Good, and rejoyced as a Giant to run his Course. For rather than be benigh∣ted, we must not walk onely, but run too. So saith the Author to the Hebrews;Heb. 12. 1. Let us lay aside every weight, and the sin that so easily besets us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us. 3. And yet withall we must remember Ve∣spasian's Motto, (which deserves to be ingra∣ven in all our Rings,)Quàm im∣pensè etiam Octavius Au∣gustus Caesar eodem Dicto delectatus fuerit, videre est apud Aul. Gell. l. 10. c. 11. & Ma∣crob. Satur∣dal. l. 6. , to make haste slowly; that is, to make no more haste than may consist with good speed. Be∣cause the way we are to walk in is not sleep onely, but slippery. Therefore look to your footing, and mark your steps as you walk along: for the footing of a David had well-nigh slipt. Nor is the way onely slippery, but narrow too. Nay our Saviour saith farther, (though 'tis not
express'd in our English Bibles,) 'Tis , a way incumber'd as well as nar∣row, 'Tis very difficult to find it, and very easie to tread aside. And therefore , see how ye walk. (So it is in the Greek, though somewhat otherwise in the English.) 4. And then in the next place, , see how circumspectly ye do it, (as it is in the translation,) or see how exactly, (as it is in the original.) The word  is of an higher signification, than our ordinary Bible doth here express. It imports a Providence, and a Caution, which being joyn'd with Circum∣spection, make up the Integral Parts of a Christian Prudence. Now we must walk so exactly in all these respects, (with so much Providence, and Caution, and Circumspection,) as not to turn an hair's breadth to the right hand, or to the left. We must not be Latitudinarians in point of Practice; but must rather , walk with such regular and upright Feet, as to abstain , in either notion of the word; not onely from all the kinds, but all the Appearan∣ces of evil. 5. Not at all like those Hypocrites, who are indulgent to the Evil, and onely abstain from the bare Appearance; not like Him in the Epi∣gram,
who put himself to Death, for fear of Dying; not like the Pharisees of the Times, who think it their Duty to rebell, for fear of a little Disobedience; and greedily swallow the greatest Camels, for nothing else but their avoiding the smallest Gnats. This is a foolish Circumspection, to be so shy of a Ceremony, as to run headlong into a Schism; and for fear of Superstition, to swallow practical Atheism. For are not they the greatest Atheists, who (to use S. Paul's words of the antient Gnosticks) profess to know God, but in their works deny him? And They deny him in their works, who quite disown him in his Word, where it calls for Compliance (in All things lawfull) with his Vicegerents. For sure the same Spirit that saith, Obey God rather than Man, doth also say,1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lord's sake. The same Spirit that saith, Call no man Master upon Earth, and Be ye not the Servants of men, doth also say, Servants obey your Masters in all things, that the Name of God be not blasphemed; nor onely with Eye-service, as men-pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ. Again, the same Spirit that saith, Thou shalt have no God but me, doth also say,Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves,Rom. 13. 1, 2, 5, &c. &c. for the Powers that
are, are ordain'd of God, and He that resists, receives Damnation. From all which it follows, that for a Professor of Christianity to disobey the Laws of men, under pretense (rather than fear) of disobeying the Laws of God, when this is one of God's chiefest Laws, That we obey the Laws of men, shews such a spirit of Contradiction, as 'tis not Charity to indure. We must be cir∣cumspect of our ways, as well as of our walking. For a Circumspect Walker in the ways of Corah, who dares not do as God bids him for fear of Sin, and shews a Zeal to serve God by his Dis∣obedience, who craves for Liberty of Conscience to break the Bonds of Society, which are the Laws of the Nation wherein we live, (that is to say, in the Consequence, for a Liberty of Conscience to cut mens Throats,) and because the Meek shall inherit the Earth, does think it a part of his Humility to set his foot upon Crowns and Scepters; such a Circumspect Walker is the greatest Monster to be imagin'd. He may pro∣fess to know God, as the Gnosticks did; but in his works he denies him, like any Gnostick. And as a practical Atheist is still the worst, so such a Boutefeux is the worst of all practical Atheists. 'Twas by so foolish a Circumspection, and too easie a Connivence at all such Folly, that so
many of our days have been so evil, and stand in need of a Redemption. And therefore for the future, See that ye walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise, redeeming the Time, because the days are evil. 6. The words are seasonable and fit in a threefold respect. In respect of the Counsel which our Apostle here gives; in respect of the Occasion on which he gives it; and in respect of the Reason wherewith he does inforce it on those that read him. The subject mat∣ter of the Counsell is Christian Prudence. The Counsell is given upon Occasion of great and manifold Temptations, whereby a Christian is ensnared on every side. The principal Reason why it is press'd, is the present Corruption of the Time. A Time wherein there is requir'd the Wisedom and Wariness of the Serpent, whereby to preserve the Inoffensiveness and Integrity of the Dove. 7. Now though Prudence is a thing which does consist of three parts, to wit, of Provi∣dence, Caution, and Circumspection, (which though commonly confounded, are very diffe∣rent in themselves;) yet in the Tenor of my Discourse, I shall keep to the stile of our En∣glish Bibles; and so far comply with the po∣pular
usage of the word, (which is apparently Synecdochical,) as to name Circumspection in stead of Prudence. 8. And first, because our Inadvertency ap∣pears to be the very Root, from which the whole Stock of Sin (with all its Fruit and its Branches) doth seem to grow; , See how ye walk circumspectly. 9. Next, because there is such a thing, as an Inconsiderate Circumspection, for want of a necessary regard both to the manner, and me∣thod, and measure of it; See therefore that ye walk circumspectly, , not as Fools, but as wise: , walk in wise∣dom, Colos. 4. 5. And as your Speech, so your Behaviour is to be season'd also with Salt, v. 6. Ye must behave your selves exactly betwixt your Scylla and your Charybdis; Corruption of Soul upon the one side, and Destruction of Body on the other. But still the first and chie∣fest heed is to be taken of the former; that the better part may be in safety, whatever Disasters befall the worse. 10. And then in the last place, because the worse the Times are, by so much the better and the more circumspect men ought to be; There∣fore it follows in the Text, ,
Redeem, or buy out the Season. For it is not , the Time at large, but precisely , the Nick of Time. And so the meaning of it must be, Be ye sober, and vigilant, and watch at all opportunities; use such Providence, and Caution, and Circumspection, as to fly from Sin on the one hand, and causeless Suffering on the other. 11. This I think may suffice for an explica∣tion of the Text; and by this a man may easily discern the Links, which will make up the Chain of my whole Design. 12. For first, considering how we are plac'd as so many Sheep amongst Wolves, we must walk for That reason with Circumspection. And then, because there are Errours on either hand, as well on the Right, as on the Left; we must therefore walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise. And this we must do in a threefold respect; to wit, of Things, and Persons, and Opportunities: of evil Things, of evil Persons, yea of all the very Occasions and Appearances of evil. Our walking is to be circumspect in respect of All Persons; and as of all other persons, so especially of our selves. It must be in respect both of our Enemies, and our Friends; and as of all other Friends, so especially of those
who pretend a Friendship unto our Souls. And this must be, as at all times, so more especially in These. Our days being likely to be as evill at least in one sense, as the Days in my Text are said to be evill in another. § 1. Before I can orderly come to speak of Circumspection in Hypothesi, as it stands in relation to This or That Station or State of Men, (which to do will be the work of another Text,) I must consider it in Thesi, or in the gross. And this the rather, as well because it lies first in the order of Nature; as because Heedfulness in the General should be as well known to be strictly necessary, as That Triumvirate of our Enemies (The World, the Flesh, and the Devil,) is universally acknowledged to be Deceitfull. And how deceitfull These are, one may con∣jecture even by This; That there was hardly ever any such Golden age, as had not its portion of Iron in it. For no sooner had God Almighty imprinted his Image upon the Creature, than his Competitor or Rival began to ingrave his Super∣scription. No sooner had the true Coin receiv'd its Stamp from God's Mint, but straight the Tempter turn'd Althymist to embase the Metall. There was a Serpent even in Paradise; (or else our first Parents had not so soon been kept out
with a flaming Sword;) and a stumbling-block in Heaven; (for else so great an Host of An∣gels had not faln headlong into Hell:) Yea the blessed Conversation of Christ Himself was no such Amulet or Preservative, no such con∣quering Prophylactick against the Contagion of this Disease,Mar. 14. 68, 69, &c. but that there was a Peter to deny, yea and a Judas to betray him.Gen. 3. 22, 23. And if these things are so,2 Pet. 2. 4. That S. Peter himself, the first and chief of the Apostles, was not all his life safe in a state of Grace; Nor the Protoplast for a day in a state of Innocence; No nor Lucifer for a week in a state of Glory; Lord! how fitly may any Monitor say That to us, which our Apostle thought needfull (not onely usefull) to his Ephesians, , See how ye walk circumspectly? If 'tis as true in things spiritual, as it is thought in things temporal, That the one half of the world is deceiv'd and cheated by the other; and that if there are no more than an Hundred Sects, Ninety and Nine of That hundred must needs be sick of some Imposture; (unless Christ can be divided, or the Truth of Religion be more than One;) If in our hovering condition 'twixt Grace and Na∣ture, we are placed in the Confines of two im∣placable Enemies,Rom. 7. 23. the Law in our Members, and
the Law in our Minds, whereof the one is still warring against the other; And if the Author of this Caveat against Supineness and Noncha∣lance, though the great Doctor of the Gentiles, and also a Vessel of God's Election, was yet so brought into Captivity to the Law of Sin, (as the 7th. to the Romans is very commonly under∣stood, though perhaps not so happily as might be wish'd,) that he was forc'd to break forth into That tragical Ecphonesis, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this Death! O then what a Necessity must needs be incumbent upon us, that we repeat this holy Caveat, and reinforce it on one another, ,Jam. 2. 10. & ch. 3. 2. See how ye walk circumspectly? If in many things we offend all, and He who offen∣deth but in one Point, is someway guilty of all the rest;Matth. 12. 36. If an account is to be render'd of every idle word spoken, and sure much more of every wicked one;Matth. 19. 17. & ch. 7. 14. If none shall enter into life but He that keepeth the Commandments, and life does dwell in That City,Luk. 13. 24. to which the Gate is as streit, as the way narrow; insomuch that of the Many who seek to enter into life, many shall miss it for all their seeking;Rev. 2. 7, 17. If onely He that overcometh shall have the privilege to tast of the hidden Manna,1. Pet. 4. 18. so as the righteous man
himself shall be scarcely sav'd; and all for want of being heedfull both of the way he treads in, and in the ordering of his steps, and as to the sureness of his footing; Methinks we need no other Sermon, than the constant repetition of this one Text, (at least 'twere well if This Text were call'd to mind at every Sermon,) , See how ye walk circumspectly. If S. John thought fit to preach no other Sermon to the Convert Eusebius speaks of, than the Psalmist's Resolution ofPsal. 39. 1. taking heed unto his ways, which made his Convert not sollicitous to be enrich'd with more Lessons, whilst he found that That One was sufficient of itself to employ him wholly; If we live in an Age of so much fallacy and Deceit, and yet for all that of so much Heedlesness and Security, that no abundance of Caution can be too much; It follows then that This Caveat cannot be thought upon too much, or inculcated too warmly, or unexcusably offend in the Repetition, but that we have such prurient Ears as cannot forsooth be pleas'd without great variety, and such ca∣pricious understandings as will not easily be quieted with Truth and Plainness; but must have Altitudes and Depths for their Enter∣tainment.
§ 2. All our Sins and our Miseries seem to have enter'd into the World at this one Door, even the want of That Heed which is here in∣joyn'd. Other Defects may be as fibres, but This is sure the Main Root, (as I said before,) from which the whole Stock of Mischief (with all its Fruits, and its Branches,) does clearly grow. 'Twas meerly for want of Circumspec∣tion, that our first Parents fell; and still 'tis for want of Circumspection, that all their Poste∣rity is ever stumbling. 'Tis but for want of Circumspection, that many Professors are so blind as to be led by the blind, till both the Lea∣ders and the Followers fall all together into the Ditch. In the whole Body of Christianity, Cir∣cumspection may fitly be call'd the Eye. Now as our Eyes are put in our Heads to direct our Feet; and as good be quite blind, as be always winking: so Circumspection in our Hearts is to guard our Actions; and as good be none at all, as unwary Christians. For what with those powerfull Impellents which Satan useth from without, and those bewitching Allectives where∣with he charms us from within, we are so smoothly drawn aside with great contentedness into some dangers, and so vehemently dragg'd with equall reluctance into others, that we do
not onely (like Janus) stand in need of four Eyes, but (like Argus) to be Eyes all over. And just as the Builders of the second Temple at Jerusalem were so encompassed with Ene∣mies on every side, (the Chaldaeans before, and the Philistins behind, the Moabites on the right hand, and the Edomites on the left,) that they were taught by their Necessity to hold a Sword in the one hand, for the defending of the Work∣manship which they advanced with the other; Even so we Christians, who are dignified with the Title of, 1 Cor. 3. 9. Fellow-Labourers with God, whilst we are building up our selves in the most holy Faith,Mar. 16. 20. and building up our selves into Temples too,1 Cor. 3. 16, 17. (for Temples we are of the Holy Ghost,) must have one Eye upon our Enemy, as well as another upon our work; still looking upward towards God, but withall downward towards our Temp∣ter; still looking foreward towards Vertue, but withall backward towards Vice. We must not onely have an Eye unto the right and left hand of our Spiritual Poyse (like a man walking upon a Pope,) but like a Thief at high Noon, just in the Act of his purloyning, must look exactly quite round about us. § 3. And the reason of This is extremely evident. For if we onely look upwards, we
shall be easily apt to stumble, like Mother Eve; who, whilst she fixt her whole Aspect upon the goodness of the End, did overlook the manifold Evill which lay concealed in the Means. So praeproperous was the Haste which she made to∣wards Knowledge, that she left Obedience be∣hind her back. Or if we onely look forewards to shun a Praecipice, we may at that very in∣stant be attacqu'd behind us with a Wolf. Just as Judas was so intent upon the Money lying before him, that he was blind to the Despair which dogg'd him closely at the heels. And we may guess by That Threat of God Almighty to the Serpent,Gen. 3. 15. [It shall bruise thy Head, and thou shalt bruise his heel,] that commonly the Devil does come behind us; and loves to sur∣prise us in a part the farthest distant from our Eyes; that is to say, at such a time, as in which we are remotest from Christian Prudence. Or if we look onely upon the left hand for the avoiding of a Shelve, we may be our Negli∣gence of the right be swallow'd up of a Quick∣sand. Like some Pretenders to Reformation, who taking heed of Superstition, but nothing else, are so much the apter to grow profane; Taking heed but of one extreme, they run into the other, which is many times the worse too;
and to prevent an Inconvenience incur a Mis∣chief. Thus we see how it concerns us on eve∣ry side, not to look upwards onely, or down∣wards, not onely backwards, or forewards, not to the right hand onely, or to the left, but at the same point of Time to be both provident, and cautious, and even circumspect in the let∣ter, which [à circumspiciendo] is to carry our Eyes quite round about us. § 4. Nor must we be onely looking round, but be always looking. The word is , See; But See we cannot, whilst we are sleeping. And by our Saviour's Admonition, we are to watch, as well as pray, lest we enter into Temp∣tation. So S. Peter to all in General, who are concern'd for their own Safety, does recom∣mend a strict Vigilance, as no less requisite than Sobriety; and that for this reason, because the Devil is still awake, whilst we are sleeping. Be sober,1 Pet. 5. 8. be vigilant, because your Adversary the Devil goeth about as a roaring Lion, (and that by Night as well as by Day,) seeking whom he may devour. Whom resist stedfast in the Faith. So that in our Christian Warfare, besides the manning of our Works, we need our Scouts, and our Countermines. We must besiege our very Besiegers; And as that Sophister, The World,
does surround us with Fallacy, so must we the World with Circumspection. § 5. Nor does the Prudence of a Christian end onely Here. For Circumspection is to be us'd both in the manner, and in the method, and especially in the measure of being circumspect. It being obvious to infer from the following Words,Eph. 5. 15. [See that ye walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise,] that there is in the World a kind of accurate folly, an inconside∣rate Circumspection, a capricious sort of Wariness, of which we are also to beware. Such as is lying all Night out of Doors, to be sure that our Houses shall not fall upon our heads: De∣stroying Vineyards, to prevent Drunkenness: Pulling down Discipline and the Hierarchy, to shun the Tyranny of a Pope: Distrusting the Fathers of the Primitive Church, because of Antichrist's being at work in the Apostles own Times: Making the Laws and Law-givers conform themselves to Nonconformity, for fear the Church should want a Breadth whereby to support her Superstructure: Eating of nothing but Nuts and Shell-fish, for fear the Cook should be a Sloven. There are some uneasie Souls, who seem at least to be incumber'd with so incomparable a Niceness, that under colour of
respect to the Word of God, they take The Scrip∣ture to be the Rule, I do not say of the most weighty, (for so it is,) but even of their tri∣vial'st and slightest Actions; looking on every thing as Sinfull, to which the Plain Word of God does not immediately direct them. From which fundamental Mistake it is, that They dare not call it Wednesday, but the Fourth day of the Week; nor Nine of the Clock, but the Third hour of the Day. A Surplice or a Sacrament must not be mention'd, because there are not such words in all the Scriptures; no more a Sacrament, than a Surplice. And by the very same reason, (as our judicious Mr. Hooker does well observe,) If a Master commands his Ser∣vant but to take up a Straw, the Servant shall not be obliged in point of conscience to obey, untill his Master has found a Text for that one particular. For though the Scripture saith to Servants, Obey your Masters in All things; yet That Precept is but General, and Dolus latet in Generalibus, There are very few Generals which have not a fallacy lurking in them. Now by such a way of arguing, or at least by one as good, if Pontius Pilate was not a Saint, be∣cause his Name is in the Creed; at least the Scribes and the Pharisees must pass for very
good men, because they have their Names writ in the Book of life. But for the men who thus argue, and are circumspect in their walking, not as wise men, but fools, we can in cha∣rity call them no worse than Hypochondriacs in religion; men whose Souls are directed by the Infirmities of their Bodies; and are fitter for the Pity than Indignation of their Superiours, because the Distempers of their spleen may be sincerely thought by Them to be the Scruples of their Conscience. Thus the jealous Mithridates stood in such fear of being poison'd, that even his Meals were all Antidote; and so his Body in tract of time became a walking Pharmaco∣poeia. This indeed is a great, but an heedless Caution. Such as does cross and confute the Proverb, because abundance of this is hurtfull. Some heed therefore is to be taken, not to be heedless and imprudent in the extravagant ex∣cess of our taking heed; and that we do not deceive our selves with too immoderate a fear of our being deceiv'd. § 6. But This is certainly a Caution, to which a small portion of Rhetorick will be sufficient to persuade us. So unapt we are to erre on the farther side of This Duty, that our usual fault is, we are too much behither it. Our
greatest danger commonly is our opinion that there is none; and we are most likely to be unsafe, by our too great aptness to be secure. Indeed in matters of little moment, concerning the Body, or the Purse, we need no Sermons against Security, or excitations to Circumspec∣tion. Very few there are that travell in times of danger, without a Pistol, or a Sword; or that in places of infection will walk the streets without an Amulet. Few Families go to bed, till they have made fast their Doors; and in the morning when they arise, their first care is to shut out Nakedness and Hunger. So that if it were a Sin to be in Poverty, or a scanda∣lous matter to suffer Pain, there would be no∣thing so difficult, as not to abound in this Duty of Circumspection. But, alas! we do not consider (heedless Creatures as we are) how it fares with our Souls, as with so many Ships, where∣in the very least Crevices (if undiscover'd) are too sufficient to drown us all. And yet how partially we prefer the care of our Bodies and Estates, before the Care and Concernment we ought to have of and for our Souls, we may conjecture by the Practice of the Physician, and the Lawyer, above That of the Divine. For one Scruple in the Conscience, how many are there
in the stomach? How many Empiricks are sought to, for here and there a single Confessor? and how many reall Patients are in all places to be met with, for one true Penitent? Be there never so slight an Ʋlcer in any part of the Body, we straight desire the grim Artist to use his Corrosive and his Probe; perhaps his Lance, and his Caustick too. But be the Soul never so ulcerous, we are content either with none, or a palliate Cure. So again it is in the other Instance; That though we have little or no sol∣licitude about the making of our Calling and E∣lection sure, (which in my Text is expressed by walking circumspectly, as Wise, and not as Fools,) nor trouble our heads with an Inquiry, what shall become of us hereafter; what kind of In∣terest we may have in the Bloud of Christ; what kind of Title we can pretend to the inheriting of a Kingdom, a joyfull Aeternity in Reversion, and how we shall plead it at the Assizes which will one day be held in the Court of Heaven; Yet be there never so small a flaw in any Title to an Estate, Lord! how sedulous we are to have the matter made up? How many Coun∣sellors are consulted, and set on work, for one Casuist? How many Cases are try'd in Law, for one in Conscience? I will not call it the
universall, but usuall Custom, that when Luke the good Physician has little hope of our Bodies, we send for Gamaliel the able Lawyer, to take care of our Estates. And (That being done,) Then for Barnabas the Divine, (who is a Son of Comfort too,) to make provision for our Ae∣ternity. § 7. Thus we see the most of men have Cir∣cumspection very sufficient; but 'tis sufficiently misapply'd too. And in the Misapplication lies all the Mischief. Just as the Pharisee in the Parable was very free of his Confessions; But he apply'd them to his Vertues, and not his Sins. He made confession of his righteousness, to wit, his fasting twice a week, and paying Tithes to a Pin's-worth of Mint and Cummin; He very ambitiously confess'd that he thought him∣self holier than other men, (for which he gave God thanks too, and not himself:) But of his manifold impieties we do not hear a word from him. So the greatest numbers of men are very circumspect, and wary: But they are wary of their Duties, as of dangerous things; things which probably will betray them to the dis∣friendship of the world; (esteeming Him an im∣prudent man, who dares adventure on what is strait, when the Times are crooked; and to
stand his old Ground, when new is temporally safer, and more in vogue too.) Men are wary of loving Enemies, or doing good to such as hate them; very wary how they part with a sinfull Pleasure, or send a bill of divorce to a beloved Passion. Extremely heedfull they are and cau∣tious, how they fall from a station of wealth and honour; how they beat down their Bodies, and bring their Flesh into subjection; how they cru∣cifie the world unto themselves, and themselves unto the world: (as if there were nothing more ridiculous than That primitive Criterion, by which a Christian was distinguish'd from Jew and Gentile; nor any thing more to be avoi∣ded by one of Quality and Parts, than such a seriousness of life, and such a tenderness of Con∣science, as may expose him to the Censure of his being little more than a well-bred Quaker.) And as 'tis commonly observ'd of the Lace∣daemonians, that they stated the guilt of Stealth, not so much in the Act, as the Apprehension, and therefore reckon'd it a Sin, not to steal, but to be caught: So the greatest heed taken by the Majority of Professors, is not so really to be innocent, as not to be censur'd for being guilty. As if, their Prayer were like That of the famous Hypocrite in the Poet,
—Pulchra Laverna, Da mihi fallere, da justum sanctúmque videri, Noctem peccatis, & fraudibus objice Nubem. O my Goddess, give me the Grace to seem as religious as the best, and to be as deceitfull as may be possible. The greatest Mischief to be avoided in most mens judgments, (if yet their Judg∣ments may be judged of by their Practice,) is not the ocular Sin, (I mean the Eye full of A∣dultery,) but the auricular Confession; Not the Protestant's Impiety, but the Popery of making it known. Now such as These should be exhorted, not so much to increase, as to direct their Cau∣tion; not so much to make it greater, as wiser and better than heretofore; to change the Ob∣ject and the End of their Circumspection; that what is now a meerly Carnal, may suddainly pass into a spiritual and Christian Prudence. For this will be to walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise. § 8. And for the bringing this about with the greater Ease, we must be circumspect Walkers in two general respects: In respect of the Per∣sons with whom we are conversant, and in re∣spect of the Rules by which we are to be direc∣ted. I therefore say in respect of Persons, (by way of distinction from all other objects,) be∣cause
our Days cannot be evill, but as we our selves are such: and therefore by the evill Days in which it is our Lot to live, must needs be meant the Evill men of the Days we live in. And our Walking is to be circumspect, as in respect even of all men, so of Those more especially to whom we bear the greatest kindness. (But This is a Point I must refer to another subject of Discourse.) The Rules by which we are to walk, not as fools, but as wise, are especially these two; Conscience, and Discretion. And for the better using of These, we must warily occurr to two grand Fallacies, whereby the greatest part of Men are wont to prevaricate with Them∣selves. § 9. Some are so thick of understanding, as to measure their Conscience by their Confidence; their being lustily perswaded a thing is lawfull, or unlawfull. Esteeming all without Sin which is said or done without Scruple; and all things sinfull of which a scruple may be made. Neither discerning any difference betwixt a Conscience which is tender, and misinform'd, nor yet be∣twixt a meer numness, and Peace of Conscience. Such were our Regicides here in England, who, how scrupulous soever in things indifferent, were not scrupulous at all in the point of Murther;
But sturdily pleaded at the Bar, that they be∣liev'd they had a right to try, and execute their King; and that they did Both in the In∣tegrity of their hearts; it was no more than their Consciences did dictate to them; their Con∣sciences were satisfied in what they did; and by consequence they would do it, were it for ever to be done. Meaning still by the word Con∣science, the strength and sturdiness of their Opi∣nion; which might indeed be call'd Witchcraft, as well as Conscience; (I mean with an equal impropriety, and an easier pardon to the word.) Thus it was with the Conspirators of our Gun∣powder-Treason, and with the two infamous Mur∣therers of Henry the Third and the Fourth of France, who taking That for their Conscience which was indeed but their Caprice, made no doubt but their Murthers were Meritorious. And thus it was for some time with furious Saul, the Blasphemer and Persecutor of Christ; who grew so mad, and transported, with giddy zeal without knowledge, (as himself confessed free∣ly against himself from after the time of his Conversion,) that he thought it his Duty to be destructive of whatsoever was call'd Christian. Like Them of whom our Saviour tells us, who thought (forsooth) they were bound in Con∣science
to execute Murther on the Apostles, be∣cause it was, in Their Judgments, to do God Ser∣vice. Where by the way we may observe, how much 'tis every man's duty to fear himself, and to suspect his own Judgment in divers cases. § 10. Now the way to walk circumspectly not as fools, but as wise, and to free our selves from That Fallacy, which is so generally swallow'd by other men, is first to consider what Con∣science is, (a thing the most talk'd of, but the least commonly understood, of any principle or faculty to be imagin'd,) and after That to be carefull how we walk by that Rule. For whilst the Rule itself is false, the Circumspection must needs be foolish, and can onely serve to make us the more disorderly Walkers. Con∣science indeed is the Rule of Action; But to be sturdily perswaded a thing is lawfull or unlaw∣full, is not at any time the Rule, and not at all times the work of Conscience. For Conscience is not a Perswasion, but Knowledge rather; Nor is it any kind of knowledge, but knowledge com∣pared with a Rule; (as  in the Greek, and Conscientia in the Latin, do Both import:) And yet how many of those men who pass for Instructers of the Ignorant, and Eyes to the Blind, are wont to use the word Conscience (before the
people, and to themselves,) by that dangerous Catachresis I just now mention'd? But before I say fully what Conscience is, I proceed to shew what it is not. I say, it is not a being so fully perswaded in our minds, as not to have any regret or scruple; to be void of all Doubt, or haesitation; for we know the Sear'd Atheist has none of That. And when our Saviour Christ said, The time cometh that whosoever killeth you, shall verily think he does God Service, he did not mean, they shall be conscionable Murtherers, or Persecutors of Men in the fear of God, and so shall break the Commandment in the Integrity of their Hearts; (for That had been to say, They shall be innocently guilty, which had flatly imply'd a contradiction in Adjecto.) But his meaning was clearly This, that some mens hearts shall be so hardned through the Deceit∣fulness of Sin, as to mistake the very worst for the best of actions. Their Ʋnderstandings shall be so dark, and their Souls so benighted with their customary impieties, as to grope after Mur∣ther instead of Sacrifice. Just like them of whom we read in the fift of Esa, (lately match'd with the Readers and Admirers of the Levia∣than,) who had so lost the distinction of right and wrong, as to put evill for good, and good for
evill, bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter, dark∣ness for light, and light for darkness. The Custom of Sin had so pav'd their Palates, as that they had utterly lost their Tast. Now it is not a satis∣fied, but seared Conscience, which is not startl'd at such impieties. As many silly mens Con∣sciences are too full of scruples, not because they are tender, but ill-instructed; so many wicked mens Consciences are void of Scruples, not because they are clear, but callous; and so must every thing be that is cauteriz'd. Yea give me leave to say farther, Many desperate Malefactors have mounted the Gibbet without regret, not so much because they had no scruples in their Consciences, as rather because they had no Consciences to be scrupl'd; since one that's sear'd with an hot Iron (to use the figure of our Apostle) is in effect none at all. § 11. For (to shew briefly what it is, ha∣ving shew'd largely what it is not,) A Man's Conscience is his Knowledge of what he has done, or not done, which the known Law of God (writ∣ten within him, or without him,) has either com∣manded, or not commanded; and so by conse∣quence 'tis a Witness either for him, or against him, after the measure that he has done, or has omitted to do his Duty. From whence it fol∣lows
unavoidably, That as Conscience properly so call'd is the Rule of Action, so the known Law of God is the Rule of Conscience. And from hence again it follows as unavoidably as before, That for any man to say he is bound in Conscience, (as we know who did in the worst of times,) not onely to covet his Neighbour's goods, but at once to kill, and to take possession, (the thing with which the holy Prophet upbraided Ahab,) is as much as to say in directer Terms, That he thinks it his Duty to be a Devill. And so much for the first Fallacy, by which a Multitude of men are led indeed to walk cir∣cumspectly, but as Fools, and not as Wise, be∣cause against the true Notion and Rule of Con∣science. § 12. And as some do thus foolishly offend against Conscience, so do others against Discre∣tion. For many Professors are very willing to be in possession of the End of their Christianity, who yet are very unwilling to use the Means. They would with all their hearts embrace the Service of Christ, but not abstain from those things with which his Service is inconsistent. De∣sirous they are to do the thing that is good; but they cannot abide to depart from evill. Or if they have a woulding to cease from That too,
yet they are fond of the Occasions which still do tend and lead towards it. There is nothing in the world either more serviceable to Satan, or more pernicious and destructive to the Kingdom of Christ, (which he would gladly set up in the Souls of men,) than That most pleasant, but kil∣ling Fallacy, which the far greatest part of men are wont to impose upon themselves, [That they need not scruple at the doing whatever is lawfull to be done, and has not any thing in it which can be properly call'd Sin.] A fallacy the apter to be swallow'd down glibly, (and that by good Logicians too,) because it delights whom it in∣dangers; and as it finds men dispos'd (yea greedily willing) to be abus'd, so it makes them well-pleas'd with the hurt it does them; as be∣ing suitable and compliant with all the Appetites of the Flesh. When men are tempted to do a thing which is not formally unlawfull, as being no where forbidden by God or Man, they will not be at the pains to meditate about the Ten∣dency and Byass of such a thing. For it would rob them of the pleasure they take in Sin, if they should patiently admit but of this one Con∣sideration, (which is commonly distastfull and irksom to them,) That there was hardly ever any unlawfull thing, which did not arise from
the Admission of something or other that was lawfull. Yea that sometimes the greatest and damning'st Sins have taken Rise from the least and most contemptible Occasions. I shall at once make it plain and usefull too by some examples; and that especially out of Good will unto the younger, and more illiterate, and less con∣sidering part of Those that shall chance to read me. § 13. No doubt 'twas lawfull enough for Eve, at least to look upon the fruit which was forbidden, (for God forbad her onely to eat it;) And as lawfull for her it was, to lend the Ser∣pent an empty hearing; (that is to say, upon condition she did not give him her Assent too:) But how much happier had it been, if, like Ʋ∣lysses in the Odysses, she had stopt her very ears against the Voice of That Charmer, and had not suffer'd her self to look? For her Eye and her Ear became the Panders to her Palate, and then her Palate betray'd her Heart. Holy men have This property,Greg. Mag. Dial. l. 4. c. 11. fol. 37. (says Gregory the Great,) Quòd ut semper ab illicitis longè sint, à se plerumque etiam licita abscindunt; That they may still be far enough from doing any thing unlawfull, they abstain from many things which are lawfull too. Certainly Job could be no such
Ideot, as to think it a thing unlawfull for a man to look upon a Maid, who yet did covenant not to do it, not onely with his Heart, but with his Eyes too. Nor may we think it was for nothing, that S. Paul so solemnly did distinguish betwixt things lawfull, and things expedient: clearly in∣timating unto us, that there are very many things to be left undone, not because they are unlaw∣full, but onely because they are unfit; not be∣cause they are actuall Sins, but because they ea∣sily may become so; not because they are vi∣tious, but dangerous things. And it belongs to Circumspection or Christian Prudence, to mind the Counsells of Scripture, as well as Precepts: as,Prov. 5. 8. not to approach the very Door of an Harlot's House;Jude 23. to hate the very Garment spotted of the flesh;Psal. 1. 1. and not to stand in the way of Sinners. We may not be Haunters of the Tavern and other places of Debauch, because there are some who come out sober; But rather of the two we must beware of such Places, because there are others who come out drunk. For 'tis a mocking of God, and a reproaching of our selves too, to run without warrant upon Temptation, and at the same time to pray, Deliver us from evill. We know that many most tender Parents correct their Children, not onely for doing what is
morally evill, but meerly for coming in Harm's way; for not being so Circumspect, as to be afraid before they are hurt. And though no doubt it is barely lawfull, for a man to walk upon a Praecipice, or to stand on a Pinnacle of the Temple; yet whosoever dares do it deserves a Rod. We cannot say it was unlawfull for Herodias to dance, or for Herod sitting by to behold her motions; But yet Herodias and He∣rod were both deservedly to be blam'd, because if She had not danc'd, nor He beheld her, she had not so easily (as she did) stoln his heart out of his Bosom, and Then the Innocent Bap∣tist had kept his Head upon his Shoulders. Will any man say it was unlawfull, for the women of Israel to hold up their chins, or set one foot be∣fore another? But yet God smote them with Isa. 3. 16, 17. scabbed heads, because they minced their steps as they went along, and because they walked with stretched-out Necks. It was not certainly unlawfull for Mother Monicha, (the famous Mo∣ther of S. Augustin,) to drink a cup or two of Wine now and then with her Neighbours; But yet by little and little practice grew into a Custom; and Custom justled out Judgment; and so she grew out of Permission, into Delight; an arrant Wine-bibber at last, and vulgarly known so to be;
sadly purchasing unto her self the odious Title of Meribibula. Which, without more Examples, may serve to teach us, with what kind of Cir∣cumspection we ought to walk, to save our selves as from the Mixture, so from the Neighbourhood of evill. § 14. And being thus far secur'd from the two grand Fallacies of which I spake, with which there is hardly any thing commoner than for Christians to couzen and cheat Themselves; We have found the way to walk circumspectly by the Rules of Conscience, and of Discretion; or (as our Apostle does here express it) not as Fools, but as Wise. And truly upon a supposal, that as many as have heard, have also minded what I have spoken, I think I have spoken at least enough of the praevious part of my Design, which was onely to discourse of Circumspection in Thesi. To consider it in Hypothesi, 'twill properly belong to another Text, and must therefore be deferr'd till another Time.
OF CIRCUMSPECTION In HYPOTHESI. MATTH. 24. 4. Take heed that no man deceive you. § 1. THE words in general are theNon primis verbis respon∣det ad ea de quibus fuerat interrogatus; sed illud pri∣mum admo∣net, quod in∣primis fuerat observandum, nè imposturis hominum ab∣ducamur à fide. Clarius in locum. Preface of our Saviour's Answer to his Di∣sciples. Their Question was, what the Signs of his Coming should be, (v. 3.) Which Coming of his having a double Signification, either the end of the Age, (as the Greek imports,) or else the end of the World, (as we commonly read in our English Bibles,) This Inquiry of the Disciples may have in proportion a double Prospect. The first and more immediate on the Destruction of the Jews; the second and more remote on the Day of Judgment. And 'tis possible that the
Prognosticks our Saviour gives them may be equally appliable to Both acceptions of his Coming; as well to the Scepter's departing from Judah, which in the Prophecy of Jacob should be when Shiloh was fully come, as to the End of All things, when Christ shall come with his Holy Angels, to judge the Secrets of all mens Hearts. I have so very good Authority for Both these Notions, that I am not very willing to leave out either, although I cannot but in Judgment prefer the first: and that as for many other rea∣sons,V. Tertull. de Praescript. adversus Hae∣res. cap. 45. (too many, and too long to be here in∣serted,) so more particularly for one, in which the words of This Text are more particularly concern'd. For I observe Three Periods or Parts of Time, pointed at by our Saviour in several parts of this Chapter: in the first of which he gives warning of bare Deceivers, (v. 5.) in the second of false Prophets, (v. 11.) in the third of false Christs, (v. 24.) such as would set forth themselves in so plausible a manner, with so bewitching a Parade, and such astoni∣shing advantages of Signs and Wonders, as to deceive (if it were possible) the very Elect, had not our Saviour countermin'd them with an , Behold, I have told you before
they come, (v. 25.) and with a  in my Text, Take heed that no man deceive you. § 2. Now if to satisfie the Desire and Cu∣riosity of the Inquisitive, I may examin and give account, who the Deceivers, and the false Prophets, and the false Christs were by Name, whom our Lord in this Text may seem in parti∣cular to intend or allude unto; The first I find wasOrigen contra Cels. l. 2. Act. 8. 10. Simon Magus,Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 12. & l. 3. c. 20. & l. 4. c. 6. who call'd Himself The Power of God; and Helena, his Harlot, A piece of Deity,A Claudio Cas. honora∣tus, à multis quasi Deus glorificatus esse dicitur. Docuit se esse qui inter Ju∣daeos quasi Fi∣lius apparue∣rit, in Sama∣ria quasi Pa∣ter descende∣rit, & in re∣liquis genti∣bus quasi Sp. Sanctus ad∣ventaverit. Helenam pri∣mam ejus  fuisse dixit, & ge∣nerâsse Ange∣los & Po∣testates per quas Mun∣dum hunc factum esse ait. Iren. l. 1. c. 20. flown forsooth from His Bosom. He was a very bewitching Sorcerer, in great Esteem with the Emperour Claudius, and worshipt by many as a God. Nor would he be thought to be onely one, but every Person in the Trinity; The Father in Samaria, The Son in Judaea, The Holy Ghost among the Gentiles. Yet This was That Simon who is said to have believed, and by the Sacrament of Baptism had been admitted into the Church. Act. 8. 13. Such another was Dositheus, who call'd himself The very Christ. A third was Menander, who would needs have been thought The common Saviour of the world. A fourth was Barchochebas, who preached up himself as The Messias that was to come, and whom the Jews were Followers of, as of I know not what Star dropt down from Heaven. These
were. Polycarp. ad Philippens. p. 20. 1 Joh. 4. 3. properly false Christs. Then for Decei∣vers and false Prophets, who are alluded to in the Text, I shall but name some of the Chief. One was Theudas in the Time of Claudius, who pre∣tended to separate the Waters of Jordan, as Moses Those of the Red Sea.Euseb. l. 2. c. 20. Aegyptius was another in the Time of Nero, who (with 30000 Followers) was by Felix cut off at the Mount of Olives.Iren. l. 1. c. 25. & l. 3. c. 3. A third was Ebion, who contended that Jesus Christ was an arrant Man, the off∣spring of Joseph as well as Mary.Euseb. l. 3. c. 23. A fourth was Cerinthus, who taught his Followers to expect a Thousand years of Sensuality, which (forsooth) were to commence from after the general Resurrection. (The like to which was said of Papias, who had been Scholar to S. John.) A fift was the Sect of the Nicolaitans, who ex∣horted their Disciples to the promiscuous use of Wives.Iren. l. 1. c. 1. &c. 24. A sixt was Carpocrates, and all his Gnosticks, (forEpiph. Haer. 20. Nicolaus bred some, andHieron. lib. de Script. Ec∣cles. Augustin. Haer. 6. Va∣lentinus bred others,) who commended Ʋnclean∣ness, as one great Requisite to Man's Redemption. (meaning his being freed from his Confinement to The Body.) A seventh wasEuseb. l. 4. c. 7. & l. 6. c. 28. Basilides, who held it lawfull in Times of Triall, to re∣nounce the Doctrin of the Gospel, and did set up in Aegypt an open School of this Heresie:
which was afterwards espoused by theEuseb. ibid. Iren. 1. c. 1. 22. 23. Hel∣cheseitae. An eighth was Saturninus, who did the like to this in Syria. And though some of these did flourish after the sacking of Jeru∣salem, yet the Jews received Massacres even after that time of their Desolation. Witness That in the Days of Hadrian, whereof Barchochebas was the occasion. For God it seems had design'd them to such an absolute , such a Consumption of the whole, that even their Ruins were to be levell'd, and their Graves buried. They were prohibited by Hadrian,Judaeis nec Advena∣rum jure Ter∣ram patriam saltem vesti∣gio salutare conceditur. Tertull. in Apol. c. 21. p. 45. to do so much as to look on their Native Country. Yea Jerusalem was decree'd to be called Aelia, and its Name to be blotted out from the Common Register of Time. So that All those Deceivers I just now mention'd,Euseb. l. 4. c. 6. were either the Harbin∣gers, or the Attendants, of That so matchless a Devastation; and did literally fulfill this fa∣mous Prediction of our Lord, in the 5th. the 11th. and 24th. verses of this Chapter. § 3. All which being premis'd by way of general Explication, may serve to guide our Attentions into Three Subjects of Discourse. First, an Heedfulness, and Prudence, to which our Saviour thought fit to exhort his first Fol∣lowers; the Exhortation as it were reaching,
through Them, to Ʋs. , See, or Take heed. Secondly, the Danger, or Ground of fear, which more particularly calls for this Christian Prudence. To wit, the Multitude of Deceivers gone abroad into the World; which by their Subtilty, and their Number, will be so likely to prevail, that there is no little need of our greatest Care, , lest any Man deceive us. Lastly, the Time is very observable, wherein the use of this Care will be most in Season: and this we may gather from the Context to be be∣fore a Destruction of Church and State. For Imposture and Deceit will be Then most rife, and therefore the Prudence of a Christian will be Then most needfull. The first Observable of the Three I have insisted upon at large on another Text; where∣on I shew'd the strict necessity of circumspect Walking in the Generall, in respect of evil Things, and all that have Tendency unto evil. It now remains that I proceed to the second Observable I propos'd; and so to consider Circumspection or Christian Prudence, as relating in Particular to the Deceitfulness of Persons. Nor can it be severely imputed to me, if still I continue to deal in Caveats. For, § 4. If ever there were an Errour to be com∣mended
out of a Pulpit, it is the right-handed Errour of too much Caution. And if ever there can be any, This is certainly the Time, when no abundance of Caution can be too much. When perhaps the very greatest a man can use, may prove the very least he shall stand in need of. At least I take This to be a satisfactory reason, why having spoken enough already of Christian Prudence in Thesi, I am led by the love of Me∣thod to consider it also in Hypothesi; as it stands in relation to this or that Station and State of Men. For as Charity is the greatest of Christian Vertues, so (in a secular Consideration) 'tis the most dangerous, and ensnaring, and the most difficult to be managed of all our Duties; because it has This peculiar to it, that it thin∣keth no evill; but beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things. (1 Cor. 13. 5, 7.) I will not say it is the weakness or fault of Charity to be Credu∣lous; But yet exposing its owners to many Risques, and Inconveniences, it stands in need of great Prudence to keep it safe. The Dis∣ciples therefore did very wisely,Act. 9. 26. in being afraid and suspicious of Paul himself, till Barnabas gave him a Testimonial,ver. 27, 29. that by his preaching boldly at Damascus, and by his disputing against
the Graecians, he prov'd himself an unfeigned Convert: as if the repentance of an Enemy were never to be trusted untill 'tis try'd; nor any other Triall could be sufficient, but That of bringing forth fruits meet for repentance. Our Blessed Saviour himself would not entrust him∣self with some who believed in him;Joh. 2. 23, 24. because he knew their Belief was such, as would not bear any stress in a time of Triall. Seeing the Mi∣racles which he did, they believ'd in his Name: but he knew that they were not Temptation-proof; that they would not hold out at his Crucifixion. How much more might his Apostles be distrust∣full of Believers, who knew them not? And yet so unguarded was their Simplicity, (I mean the Simplicity of the heart, not of the head, or the understanding; as opposed onely to knavery, and not to knowledge;) that they made their own Innocence the usual measure of other mens. Hence it was that their Master did call themMatth. 10. 16. Sheep; because they knew not, till he had told them, that they were going out as Sheep in the midst of Wolves. And the more he had observ'd they were unapt to be suspicious, by so much the rather did he exhort them to use the wisedom of the Serpent, whereby to set a constant Guard upon the Innocence of the
Dove. For as Wisedom isJam. 3. 15. devillish, without Simplicity, so This, without Wisedom, is never safe. It is the property of the one, not to do any Injury, and the benefit of the other, is not to suffer it. Indeed as Fear is oppos'd to For∣titude, it is a childish unmanlike Passion; still betraying those succours which reason offereth.Wisd. 17. 12. Again, as Fear is oppos'd to Faith, it is an heathenish and carnal Passion; That that made so many Compliers in the evil days pass'd, with the Spirit which Then was working in the pro∣sperous Children of Disobedience.Eph. 2. 2. But as Fear is oppos'd to Folly, (I mean Imprudence, and want of Heed,) it is at once a very generous and Christian Thing. There being no true Faith, no nor any true Fortitude, which has not a mixture of such a Fear. As Fear is opposite to Reliance and Trust in God, it is indeed a great Duty to laugh at Danger: But as 'tis opposite to Rashness and a defect of Circum∣spection, it is as much a man's duty to provide against danger by timely fear. For the same Spirit that saith by the Royal Priest,Matth. 10. 28. Fear not them that can kill the body, does also say by the Royal Preacher,Prov. 28. 14. Happy is the man that feareth always. All which being compared with the Importance of my Text; and the
evill of those days, which in the Context are spoken of, being duly compar'd with these I speak in, (for in truth the whole Chapter which lies before us may very well serve for an English Mirroir, wherein our Modern Deceivers may partly see how they look;) I think I may say (without impertinence) to the most prudent Congregation, what our Saviour esteemed need∣full, not onely pertinent to his Disciples, , See, or take heed: and , Take heed ye be not deceived: and , Take heed that no man deceive you. § 5. That thus the Emphasis is to be put, I am confirm'd in my opinion from other words of our Lord to his 12 Apostles, when being about to send them abroad to an inhospitable world, he did not speak in this manner, (which yet he might very well have done,) Beware of those foolish and hurtfull Lusts, which drown the Soul in misery and perdition. Nor did he choose to say Thus, (which he might very well have done too,) Beware of the Inticements of worldly Great∣ness, of Riches, and Pleasure, and Reputation. He did not say, (with S. Paul,) Beware of Dogs; Not yet, (with S. Peter,) Beware of Devils: But (as a greater Mischief than either,) Beware of
Men. (Matth. 10. 17.) For as Deceitfulness, and Fraud, and all the dire effects thereof, do give us a very true Character of the Greater World; so Man, being a little world, is a little world of Deceits too. The falsest Crocodile in Aegypt is not Hypocrite enough to become his Embleme. The reason is, because the best things debaucht are the most transcendent evils. Those Angels that fell from as high as Heaven, could not therefore fall less, than as low as Hell. And so Angelical was the Nature of Man undeprav'd, by injoying a Rectitude both of Intellect and Will, that he admitted not of a middle betwixt a Devil, and a Saint. So that Man's being the worst on this side Hell, as well as the best of God's Creatures on this side Heaven, does help to ad∣just and reconcile the seeming contradictory Pro∣verbs, . Polyb. Hist. l. 1. & Le∣gat. 122. . Plato de Legibus l. 6. . Homo Homini Deus, and Homo Homini Diabolus. Man to Man is a kind of God, and Man to Man is an arrant Devil. All the rest of our Fellow-creatures are very innocent Neigh∣bours; Nay, whensoever we have occasion, they are our most obedient and faithfull Servants. But Man to Man (for the greatest part) is either a very fierce Enemy, and so the worst of Wild Beasts; or else a very false Friend, the worst of Tame ones.
§ 6. So far therefore as we are men, I think our first and greatest head is to be taken for our selves against our selves. Not for this Reason onely, because we love our selves most, and so are most apt to deceive our selves; (the Devil commonly using us, as the Empress Agrippina her husband Claudius, whilst she poyson'd That Dish, with which she knew he was most delighted, and on which he was likely to make the plenti∣fullest Meal;) But withall because the Soul, like the Eye of Man, is least of all able to see itself. &c. Diod. Sic. l. 20. p. 778. And this I think the best Moral, (though I know there is another,) of Diodorus his My∣thology concerning Lamia, who did put on her Eyes, when she went abroad; but always coming home, put them up into her pocket. We are blind to the greatest Beam, if it be in our own Eye, though we can spy the least Mote in ano∣ther man's. Nor is it onely the Eye, but the Heart of man also (if we believe the Prophet Jeremy) is deceitfull above all things.Jer. 17. 9. And this is that which makes him his own worst cheat; whilst either he falls without a Tempter, like Lucifer in heaven; or else (like Peter upon earth) he is endanger'd by a temptation from the meer Confidence of his safety. Amongst a Thousand which might be given, I cannot name
a fitter Instance of Self-Deceiving, than that of Eldavid the Fanatick in Rabbi Mosche Ben Maiemon:Vid. Bux∣torph. The∣saur. Lingu. Hebr. qui historiam re∣censet inte∣gram ex libro Shevet Je∣huda. who was so very sincere a Cheat in the couzenage of himself, and did so seriously believe he was the Prodromus of the Messias, that he offer'd to be try'd by a Decollation, and died a Martyr to his Delusions. So much 'tis every man's duty to fear Himself, and to suspect his own Phantasie, or Imagination, which he takes to be his judgment in divers cases. § 7. Next and immediately after our selves, we must be circumspect and wise in respect of one another. And as of other men in generall, (for this very reason that they are Men,) so of Those in special manner whom we have most of all trusted, and most obliged; who have mingl'd their Projects and Prayers with us; who have eaten of our bread, and as it were lain in our very Bosoms; who are apt to hate us for the favours they are not able to requite, and for exceeding their Gratitude, will not allow us their Humanity. Of such ill-natur'd Crea∣tures we read in Tacitus, quibus beneficia eo∣usque laeta, dum videntur exolvi posse; sed ubi antevenêre, pro gratiâ odium redditur. Little Curtesies and good turns they take very well, and are thankfull for: But when a Munificence
is excessive, and far beyond their possibility ei∣ther to recompense, or deserve, Then they onely love the benefits, but perfectly hate the Bene∣factor, and wish Him Dead, because (accor∣ding to that of Aristotle, ,) as often as he sees them, he makes them blush. Now 'tis very sound arguing from the Act to the Aptitude; such Things there may be in these our days, because there were such in the days we read of. And special heed is to be taken that we be not deceived by such as These; be∣cause by Courage and easie Caution a man may be saved from his Enemies; But God alone can keep him safe from his dearest Friends. Thence said God by the Prophet Jeremy,Jer. 9. 4, 5, 6. Take ye heed every one of his Neighbour, and trust ye not in any Brother: for every Brother will utterly sup∣plant; and every Neighbour will walk with slan∣ders; their habitation is in the midst of Deceit. So said Jesus the Son of Sirach,Ecclus. 6. 13. Separate thy self from thine Enemies, and take heed of thy Friends: Julius Caesar was more endanger'd from Brutus, and Cassius, his Bosom Friends, than from Antony, and Cato, his open Enemies. Pom∣pey the Great could never hurt him with all his Armies, because he was a brave and a generous Enemy. But his Friends were such Flayls, as
against which there was no Defense. Even the Serpent himself was not more treacherous to Eve, than Eve was unto her Husband, and her Hus∣band to his posterity. For although she derived Her Body from His, and so might seem in some regard to have been his own Daughter, before his Wife; (as it were joyn'd to him in Wedlock by a kind of lawfull Incest;) yet no sooner had that Woman received Life from out his Side, than she (in a lamentable Requitall) returned Death into his Bowells. David did not complain,Psal. 55. 12, 13, 14. That an open Enemy had disho∣nour'd him, or that an Adversary had magnify'd himself against him: for (said he) I could have born the one, and have hid my self from the other. But his Cordolium and his out-cry was against his Companion, and his Guide, with whom he took sweet Counsell,Psal. 41. 9. and walked with as with a Friend in the House of God. I wish it may prove a very groundless and weak Sug∣gestion, that both our Jesuites, and their Journy∣men, (passing commonly under the name of fanatick Protestants,) are by much the most innocent, because they are , (as Aristotle words it) the most undisguised and barefac'd Enemies, at once to the Monarchy and Church of England. Such as declare them∣selves
inConser Bu∣chananum, & Junium Brutum, cum Catalogo Scriptorum apud Is. Ca∣saub. Epist. ad Fronto∣nem Ducae∣um. praeser∣tim p. 11, 12, 14. print for the Deposing of our Kings, and the Disposing of their Kingdoms. In this respect the more innocent, that by professing themselves implacable and ungainable Antago∣nists, they give us an Helmet before they strike. We know the Thirtieth of January stands as execrably black in our English Calendar, as the Fift of November has ever done. Which proves the Truth of what was written byBeatum il∣lum, qui non vidit mala Patriae quae parant duo genera homi∣num, Jesuitae , & . Deus misereatur Ecclesiae suae. Casaub. E∣pist. 116. Confer etiam Thuani l. 54. A D. 1572. cum ejusdem l. 17. A. D. 1556. & l. 18. A. D. 1557. Isaac Casaubon to Heinsius before our days, (and when the days were less evil than we have liv'd in,) that we have Jesuited Protestants, as well as Pa∣pists; equally Haters of the Government of Church and State here in England; equally poy∣son'd with an Opinion, that the worst of all Murthers is the most highly meritorious; equally Practicers and Patrons of That Hildebrandine Divinity, which has cost so many Monarchs their Lives and Fortunes. I say, 'twere safer than now it is, if all our Enemies were such, ut professa prodant odia vindictae locum; that by knowing our utmost Danger, we might Timely stand upon our Guard. Were I at leisure to rifle Story, I could name several Hundreds, besides the Em∣perour Darius, and Charles the first of these Realms, who were betray'd by those most, in whom they most trusted: and whilst they thought
the best way to make men Loyall, was not to doubt of their being such, most unhappily have died by their Credulity. It is indeed a very generous and Princely Errour, (as being the Errour of a Great and a Candid Soul,) not at all to be capable of Fears and Jealousies; and rather to run the greatest Hazards, than either to fear, or to be fear'd. But yet the oftener I reflect upon what was once said by a Duke of Florence, [That He reckon'd All Subjects, who were Principl'd by the Jesuits, would rebell if they could, and therefore (said he) for mine, let them do it if they can;] And comparing there∣with the several Caveats of our Lord, Be wise as Serpents, Beware of Men; And considering that Distrustfulness is the chief Wisedom of the Ser∣pent, as well as a necessary Safeguard to the Sim∣plicity of the Dove; Lastly, the less I have been able to free my self from an opinion, that in the Wariness of the Prince the People's Interest and Safety does chiefly stand, (for sure it is our greatest Interest, not to be able to be damn'd for our Disobedience, and, by a con∣sequence unavoidable, not to be able to Dis∣obey the Lord of Hosts in his Vicegerents,) the more I think there is place for an Epichar∣mus, to bring That Motto to Remembrance,
[, that is,] forget not to be Distrust∣full. § 8. And as of all other friends, so above all beware of Them, who pretend a Friendship unto the Soul. For there is no Devil to the white one. That Serpent is the most deadly, which covers over his malice with the seeming simplicity of a Dove.Matth. 7. 15. A Wolf is ever most Rave∣nous, when cloath'd in sheep-skin. Nor is there any such dangerous Highway-Thief, as he who follows that trade in the Reverend Habit of a Priest. There are no Jugglers in the world to be compar'd with false Teachers; those Spi∣ritual purloyners, who commit a kind of Bur∣glary upon mens Souls, and even plunder their very Consciences; who first steal into their Heads, and carry away from thence their true Opinions in point of faith; then creep into their Hearts, and steal away from thence their right Affec∣tions in point of practice. Such as these here∣tofore were Nestorius, Photinus, and Apollinaris. All three very learned and frequent Preachers,Vincent. Li∣rin. cap. 17, 18, 19. of eminent wit, and elocution, highly approved by the Clergy, as well as admired by all the people, untill infected with an Itch to be the Authors of so many Sects, or the Heads of so many Factions, they polluted all their Excel∣lencies
with the Leprosie of Errour; and of three great Shepherds became three Dogs, whose constant business was nothing else, but to be barking and snarling against the Truth. Pho∣tinus (even with vehemence) against the Trinity of the Godhead; Nestorius against the Ʋnity of our Saviour's Person; and lastly, Apollinaris against the Duality of his Nature. § 9. From whose examples we may learn, not onely to beware of such as creep into Houses,2 Tim. 3. 6. and there lead captive those Silly women, who again do lead captive their Silly men; But of such as domineer in their factious pulpits, and like the great Red Dragon in the Revelation,Rev. 12. 3. do draw after their Tail, perhaps a whole third part of the Stars of Heaven. (I cannot be thought to speak of fixt, but of erratick and wandring Stars.) The common fallacies of the world do onely couzen the peoples senses, and so impose upon their Reason. But these at first dash do even bewitch their very reason, and so beguile them of their Religion. A spiritual Cheat, or false Teacher, is so incomparably hurtfull; (espe∣cially when his false and seditious Doctrin is such as easily runs out at his fingers ends,) that Lucifer himself, to become such, did first of all turn Devil. For as if his Devilship were
his Qualification, He was first an Apostate, and then a Preacher. The forbidden Tree was his Text, forbidden Knowledge was his Doctrin, Hor∣rid Rebellion was his Ʋse, and so he concluded with just Damnation. § 10. Now we shall find such Impostors to have been still very rife, whether we look into the Jewish, or Christian Church. In the Jewish it is observable, that for one Elijah, (that man of God,) the Prophets of Baal were four hundred and fifty.1 Kin. 18. 22. For one Mi∣caiah,Ch. 22. v. 6, 8. who prophesied Truth, four hundred there were that dawb'd with untemper'd Morter. The ways of Apostasy in Israel were chiefly two. The first was the way of Jeroboam, who ador'd the true God, but in the similitude of a Calf; nor that at Jerusalem, but Dan and Bethel. In that lay his Heresie, in this his Schism. The se∣cond way was the way of Ahab; who besides the publick worship, common to him with Jero∣boam, did farther worship his Baalims or God∣lings also. Now there was never any Apostasy, no nor Idolatry in Israel; in which their False Prophets had not still a great hand. No nor any false Prophets who prophesied Lies, but they pretended to derive them from the mouth of Truth. The work of Satan still was done
in Jehovah's name. An example of which we have 1 King. 22. where though Ahab's lying Prophets were Prophets of Baal, yet still they usher'd in their falsehoods with a [Thus saith the Lord.] Come we hastily from the Jewish to the Chri∣stian Church, which we shall find to have been infested, from her first2 Thess. 2. 7. Infancy and Childhood, with such Deceivers. A Simon Magus was found at Rome, to resist the doctrins of S. Peter; An Apollo∣nius also at Ephesus, to check the preachings of S. John. Besides Menander, and Cerinthus, Barcho∣chebas, and Dositheus, Carpocrates, and Ebion, Sa∣turninus, and Basilides, and the most venemous Crew as well of Gnosticks, as Nicholaitans, (where∣of the greatest part did flourish in the Apostles own times, and all pretended to be Reformers,) there were not wanting amongst the Heathen, who did endeavour the setting up a New Messias of their own; and that by craftily diverting the clearest prophecies of the Old Testament, from that natural Aspect which they all fasten upon the New.V. Justin Mart. . p. 70, &c. Justin Martyr in his Paraenesis to the Em∣perour Antonine, does make this appear by an Induction of particulars. That famous pro∣phecy (for example) of dying Jacob, [The Scepter shall not depart from Judah till Shiloh
come, binding his Asse's Colt unto the choice Vine, and washing his Cloaths in the blood of Grapes, Gen. 49. 11.] which is so manifestly fulfilled in Jesus Christ the Son of God, The Heathen Greeks apply'd to Bacchus, their Son of Ju∣piter; not onely because his Rites were solem∣nized with an Ass, and because he was wor∣shipped as the God of the Vintage; but because he was feign'd to have been torn in pieces, to have suffer'd many things, and to have enter'd into Glory. So what is spoken by the Prophets of our Saviour's riding into Jerusalem upon an Ass, (Zech. 9. 9.) They apply to Bellerophon (another Son of their Jupiter) riding to Heaven upon Pegasus, a winged Horse. And that prae∣diction of Isaias concerning a Virgin's bringing forth, (Isa. 7. 14.) They will needs apply to Dance in the Brazen Tower; where having care∣fully been sequestred from the Society of men, and yet for all that grown big of Perseus, she got the fabulous repute of a Mother-Maid. So that passage of the Psalmist, [He rejoyced as a Giant to run his course, Psal. 19. 5.] Those Idolatrous Greeks apply to Hercules, whom they affirm to have ran through all the habitable world. And those distinct praedictions of the Prophet Esa touching our Saviour's healing
Virtue over all manner of Diseases, they apply to Aesculapius, their God of Physick. Not to be endless in particulars, All the Prophecies of our Messias, excepting that of his Crucifixion, (which their Poets could never parallel in all their fabu∣lous Sons of Jupiter,) have by the wicked In∣geny of Deceivers, been profanely misapply'd to the bolstering up of their Idolatries, and that by having been wrested from those Completions they all do find in our Blessed Saviour. Inso∣much as without, and within the Church, both under the Law, and under the Gospel, This has ever been a pertinent, if not a necessary Caveat, Be wise as Serpents; Beware of Men; or , Take ye heed that no man deceive you. § 11. We stand in need of This Caveat, in respect of All Persons without exception: not onely of the worst, but the Best of men. For as the worst may deceive us by their very good Words, so may the Best of men too (though without any design, and even before they are aware,) by their evil Deeds. To begin with the worst, let us first of all at∣tend unto that Caveat of S. Paul to his Ephe∣sians,Eph. 5. 6. Let no man deceive you with vain words. A Caveat extended to many things of great mo∣ment, however expressed by our Apostle in the
stile of vain words. He does not mean by vain words, such as are but unprofitable and imperti∣nent to the Hearers; such as are to no end, and purpose: but such as are filthy as well as foo∣lish; and withall such as are false, or fallacious words. Such as blind a man's Judgment; such as pervert his Understanding; such as impose upon his Reason; such as mislead him from the true Faith; and even couzen him of his Reli∣gion. In all these respects, though in the last above all, S. Paul is carefull that his Ephesians be not deceiv'd with vain words. They who call foolish or filthy Talking, by the plausible names of Facetiousness, or Drollery, Ʋr∣banity, or Burlesque, are the first fort of such as do deceive with vain words. These are called by the Greeks , and by the Latines Ridicularii, in French and English, Drolls, and Railleurs; such as think it a mark of Wit, never to speak a serious word, but to turn all into Ridicule. By foolish tal∣king and jesting, (two words for one thing) is meant such insipid and unsavory discourse, as has not in it any Salt either of Charity or of Prudence to make it usefull. 'Tis true that Aristotle does reckon  (which is here S. Paul's word) a Semivertue in Conversation. But being usually coupled with Scurrility, or Obscoeneness, or some
degree of Profanation, (for mala sunt vicina bo∣nis,) it is prohibited, and condemn'd, and heavily censur'd by our Apostle, as inconsistent with the seriousness and the gravity of a Christian, whose Conversation should be in heaven, and his Joy in the Holy Ghost; not in jesting, and buffonery. Mor∣tification and Repentance and Amendment of life should be His Business; and Praising God his Recreation. The Study and Contemplation both of the Wisedom, and the Will, and the Word of God, should be his Labour, and his Diver∣tisement, his daily Exercise and Delight. To them that place their present happiness in the contrary to This, in sparing nothing to break a Jest, neither the holy Word of God, nor the good Names of Men, nor the modest Ears of Women, but sacrifice all considerations to Sport and Laughter, as to the Idol they most adore, To Them our Lord's Denuntiation belongs of right, Wo be to Them that laugh, for they shall mourn and weep. As for such things as These, impious Jests to cause laughter, and filthy Tal∣king, (v. 4.) let no man deceive us, (saith S. Paul,) as if they were altogether Venial, and such as easily consist with a Christian state: For even because of These things,ver. 6. (as arrant Trifles and Peccadilloes, as by too many they may be
thought,) the wrath of God cometh upon the chil∣dren of Disobedience, either in This, or the World to come. Again, Let no man deceive us with vain words, that is, with false ones (saith Estius,) or with fallacious ones (saith Menochius.) And so the Caveat is extensible to All the Deceitfulnesses of Men, who with the Sophistry of words, or the words of man's Wisedom, (which is the wise∣dom of the Flesh,) seek to impose upon the Consciences and minds of those they speak to. As in calling vitious Fear by the Name of Pru∣dence; in calling Avarice, Frugality; Luxury, Nobleness; Lightness, Affability; Ambition, Greatness of Soul; Sheepishness, Humility; In∣sultation, Courage; and devilish Envy, Hatred of Evil. For now and then a great Vice does so Ape-out Vertue, and several Vertues in some degrees do so border upon Vice, that for want of due Heed to the vain words of men, many mistake them for one another. Let no man therefore deceive us (as many will, unless we stand upon our Guard,) by giving vain Sub∣tilty the name of Wisedom; and Cruelty the name of Corrective Justice; by calling Rashness, Re∣solution; and Giddiness, Zeal: Let no man lead us into Intemperance, under the stile of
Goodfellowship; nor seek to lessen the guilt of Wantonness, by its being intitl'd a Trick of youth; nor withdraw our Obedience to publick Parents, in pretense of Sacrifice to God; no nor our Sacrifice to God, (when That is due,) because Obedience indeed is better. Let no man persuade us to leave undone the smallest Duties, under colour of our doing the weightier mat∣ters of the Law; nor wilfully to admit of a lesser Sin, in a sophistical Pretense of avoiding greater. For That saying of Aristotle, , that of two Evils the least is to be chosen, is not meant of two Moral, but of two Physical, or civil Evils. 'Tis true when two Evils are Both of Punishment, or when of any two Evils, the one is of Sin, and the other of Affliction, Reason prompts us to choose the lesser. But of two moral Evils, or of two for∣mal Sins, Religion bids us choose neither: But rather suffer the greatest evil, than submit to do the least. § 12. Should I adventure to reflect upon all sorts of Men of this first rank, of whom an heed is to be taken in this last Age, (though this at first was my Design,) I should heedlesly ingage in a new Sea of matter, and wear out the Pa∣tience of all that hear me. I shall therefore
choose to spend the little Remainder of my time, in giving notice of two or three of the most plausible Deceivers, which seem to have had the chiefest hand in all the Miseries of the late Times. For till the Errours they have sown, and sometimes planted, be rooted out of the people's Minds, I cannot imagin how it is possible to keep our Peace any longer, than whilst the persons so imbued want Power to break it. § 13. Take we heed then in the next place of such Deceivers, as sow the seeds of Discontent in their credulous Congregations, by feeding the People with Apprehensions, fears, and jea∣lousies, of Superstition, and Popery, and impo∣sitions upon Religion by the Commandments of Men. This has been a sore Evil under the Sun, (ever since the Days of Queen Elizabeth,) by fictitious and pretended, to make a Broad way for real Popery. When a Protestant resolves to espouse a Schism, a Separation from the most per∣fect of Protestant Churches in the World, He must accuse her either of Popery, or of Papistical In∣clinations, for fear of being found out by all, to drive a Trade of Animosities, either for Re∣venge, or for filthy Lucre; or for fear of being known to be Satan's chief Journy-man, in being
passionately amorous of breeding Hatreds, and a Lover of Schism as it is Schism. Neither Christ nor his Apostles were used otherwise or worse than the Church of England, whose Accusations were adapted to their Enemies Ends, which were onely to make them odious, and thorowly fitted for De∣struction; as far from Truth, or Probability, as Truth can possibly be from Falshood. Nor could it sure be more impossible, that Christ himself, blessed for ever, should be a Conjurer, or a Glutton, (who yet was accused of being Both,) than that His Spouse the Church of England should be Popishly affected, whose first Refor∣mers were put to Death for resisting Popery, and whose Sons at this day are the Sole Persons that keep it out, and whose Communion is detested by none so much as the Popish Party, who are not wont to hate men for their kind affections. A man would think that all Protestants should unite themselves with us, because the Romanists will not. A man would think that no Protestant should separate from us, because the Romanists all do. A man would think our common Ene∣mies should make us Friends. But when the Primitive Christians were to be baited, and torn in pieces, 'twas but suitable for them to be put in Bears Skins too. And 'tis as suitable for
our Church to be very well cloath'd with the worst of Calumnies, by such as aim at her Ruin, and are resolv'd on her Condemnation. The many Divisions and Subdivisions of our Sectaries in England cannot be easily reckon'd up, they are so numerous; (for there are hardly more Divisions amongst the Romanists themselves.) Every Sect is desirous to have the new-modelling or new-moulding of our Church: and there is not one of them but has as much pretense for it, as any other; if not an equal right, yet an equal want of right to be our Reformers. They be∣ing equally void of; and as equally Dissenters from all Authority; abounding All equally in a preference of their own to Superiour Judg∣ments; equal Admirers of Themselves; and as equally contemptuous of other men. There is not an Anabaptist, or Quaker, not an Adamite, or a Behemist, no nor any other Sectary of what∣soever Denomination, but thinks it hard, and takes it ill, we are not All of Their Opinion, and do not conform to Their way of Worship. Now what a Monster would our Church be, if every one of these Sects had the shaping of her? and how much worse would our Babel be, than That which they call The Whore of Babylon? What then is to be done, or to be said in this
case of our present Breaches? They that are over us in Authority must tell us what is to be done; But what is fittest to be said I suppose is This: That such of our Englishmen as own themselves Protestants, and yet divide from the Church of England, do contribute a great deal more to∣wards the bringing in of Popery, than all the Emissaries of Rome could have done without them. And if ever we live to see the Abomi∣nation of Desolation, standing as heretofore in our holy Places, it will enter in at That, and at no other Door, than what our Schisms and Sepa∣rations have open'd to it. Nothing but our Divisions can bring in Popery; and I had almost said too, that Nothing but our Ʋnion can keep it out. But united we cannot be, (whilst they that have divided from us are so strangely subdivided among themselves,) unless it be by All Parties, from every part of the Circumfe∣rence, concentring themselves in the Church of England. And this the proudest of them may do, not onely without a Blush, but with the greatest honour and reputation to be imagin'd. For what (I pray) is the Church of England, but a most Renowned and National Church? A National Church the most peaceably and the most regularly reformed of All the Churches.
The chief Reformed Church of Christendom, which has publickly been Establish'd by Law, and Canon. The onely Protestant Church in Europe, which has been able as well as willing to protect other Churches in their Distresses. In a word, The Church of England has ever con∣quer'd, and confuted, and (if her fugitive Chil∣dren do not unnaturally betray her,) will ever keep us all safe from the Church of Rome. § 14. Take we heed in the Third place of such Deceivers, as would have it thought a mark of the most reform'd, to preach up an Exemption from human Laws, (such especially as relate to the externals of Religion,) and so a Licentiousness of Life, for Christian Liberty; ever pressing their Hearers to stand fast in it,Gal. 5. 1. that is, to be obstinate and sturdy Rebells. As if the Liberty of a Christian, wherein the Gala∣tians were bid to stand fast, were not at all a Manumission from the Bondage of Sin, and from the Empire of Satan, and from the Rigor of the Law as 'twas given by Moses, But a freedom from Christ, and Christianity it self. Not onely from the positive, but from the Moral Law of Moses, which is as well the Law of Nature, and the Law of Christ too; and which, he tells us most expresly, He came not to abrogate, but on
the contrary to fulfill; and also , to fill it up. As if the Liberty of a Christian ex∣tended it self even to Libertinism it self; ren∣dring every man free to judge the Laws, and Legislators, and (with a greater force of reason) the learned Judges of the Land: free to regu∣late the Laws by their several Humours, (which by the way is a thing impossible, and flatly im∣plies a Contradiction,) rather than to regulate their several Humours by the Laws; which is not onely possible, but so absolutely necessary, that He who will not do this, (conform his pri∣vate humour to publick Laws,) is fit to live in a Desert, in the Company of Creatures which have no Law at all; not in a Kingdom, or Com∣monwealth, not in a City, or a Church, where Human Laws (under God's) are the Life of Liberty, and Propriety, nor onely of Livelihood, but Life it self. Whosoever has been protected from any injuries of men by the Laws in force, must needs confirm, by his Experience, the Truth of what I now say: That such a Subject as will no longer allow the Laws, than the Laws allow him in his being Lawless, or no longer than they are pleasing and usefull to him, (as when they avenge him upon his Enemies, defend him in his Liberty, and assert him in his Estate,)
deserves not those Benefits of Propriety and Safety the Laws afford him. The Laws (I say) not onely under which, but by which he lives. 'Tis very plain, that such Laws de∣serve but ill from all others, if they do not de∣serve from Him an uniformity in his Obedience. Where human Laws command That which God does no where forbid, and vice versâ, where they forbid what God does no where command, Nothing is plainer in all the Scriptures, than that The Ordinances of Men are also the Or∣dinances of God:Rom. 13. 1, 2. and to submit our selves to Them,1 Pet. 2. 13. not of necessity, but of choise, not so much for fear of wrath, as for Conscience sake, is no small part of our Christian Li∣berty, wherewith Christ has made us free. Gal. 5. 1. § 15. Take we heed in the fourth place of such Deceivers, as would beguile us into a faith, apt to make us unfaithfull in all our ways; a faith that all things coming to pass were antecedently unavoidable; and that by consequence when we have sinn'd, we have onely done That, which we could never have prevented the doing of: and this by the force of a most absolute irrespective irreversible De∣cree, which did eternally so determin both the
End, and the Means, as to necessitate our Im∣pieties as well as Punishments. So that if we are Elected, all our Vices cannot hurt us; and if we are not, all our Vertues cannot avail us. So again, if we are Reprobates, we cannot re∣pent although we would; and if we are not, we must repent, do what we can; and by consequence, as we were born, so we may live without care. Take we heed of being cou∣zen'd by such false Logick, as may help us either merrily or despairingly to Hell, by ma∣king us careless of our Actions, and neglectfull of our End. By way of Antidote to the Ve∣nom lying hid in this Doctrin, we must so think of God, as becomes his Godhead. We must think nothing of God, which is dishonou∣rable in Men. We must believe nothing of Him, which we would not be very willing to have believed of our selves. And we must so speak of God in the Ears of Men, as to beget in them a love and a reverence of him. And this we shall be sure to do, if we speak of his Promises and his Threats as we find them in Scripture to be General, and by consequence Conditional; of his Soveraignty, as Just; and of his Mercy, as extensive to all his Works; of his Will, as Wisedom; sincere, and uniform, not
repugnant to it self, whether as signi, or bene∣placiti, reveal'd, or secret; of his Decrees from all Aeternity, in proportion to the Rule by which they are executed in Time; exclusive of his be∣ing a Respecter of Persons, and inclusive of his dealing with All according to their Deeds; of Faith, as dead, without Works; of Repentance, as false, without Amendment; of Justification, as in Time, not (as say the Antinomians) from all Aeternity. For hence 'tis logically inferr'd by some of Eminence in the world, (who would not be thought to be Antinomians,) that their Sins were forgiven before committed; and that Repentance does not praecede, but follow Pardon. A Doctrin as dangerous as any other that can be nam'd; and which does not adorn, but dis∣grace the Gospel, (as far as Some at least are thought to be Preachers of it,) which S. Peter on the contrary thought good to preach in This Order; Repent, and be Converted, that your Sins may be blotted out. Clearly intimating unto us, that a blotting out of Sins can never follow, unless Repentance and Conversion do go before. They that teach otherwise, are apt to beget a Disbelief, or (which is worse) an ill Opinion of the Almighty. Take we heed therefore that we be not deceived by such as These.
§ 16. Again take we heed of those Idol-Shep∣herds,Zech. 11. 17. (to use the phrase of the Prophet Zecha∣ry,) whose left Eye at least is sharp enough sigh∣ted, but onely their right Eye is full of darkness. They have human Learning enough, enough and too much of worldly Wisedom, but have no Di∣vine light whereby to guide it. Such are they of whom I spake in the later part of my Last Discourse; who call their Confidence or Caprice by the name of Conscience, and teach the people under their charge, as 'twere to regulate their Lives by that crooked Rule. I do the rather speak twice of this grand Fallacy, because I take it to be That, of which we can never be told enough. For till men are catechiz'd in the point of Conscience, made to know its true nature, and the signification of its Name, (if I may speak mine own judgment with due submission to my Superiours,) they will not onely go securely, but even greedily to Destruction. Be their Sins ne∣ver so many, and in weight never so great, yet if they can get themselves to think that they are conscionably committed, (as Clement did, and Ravilliac, and many more nearer Home,) they will reckon upon a Saintship, from nothing else but the absence of lesser Sins than they delight in, and doat upon. They will imagin they have
made their Election sure, or rather that they have made themselves sure of their Election, (as they love to mistake the Text,) even by such a kind of partial and painted innocence, as (being seriously consider'd) is common to them with the Devil; who is not a Swearer, or a Drunkard, or a Com∣mitter of Adultery, and yet he is not the less a Devil. But such Professors not considering, that Spiritual Pride with her two Daughters, Sacrilege, and Rebellion, are Sins more antient than Hell itself, make no doubt but Those things will not onely accompany, but (as the Angels did Lazarus) will carry them up into Abra∣ham's Bosom. If we consider by what Impie∣ties some Bigots have expected to merit Bliss, and what others have understood by their fol∣lowing Providence, and Conscience, and by their being over-acted to do the Work of the Lord, (for so they cant it,) we cannot but say the greatest Mercy which can be shewn to such Cri∣minals, is to make them less nocent (if not in∣nocent) unavoidably. Which being not to be effected by congruous Grace, because it is not irresistible, should by consequence be effected by that which is; that if they will not choose the Glory, they may be mercifully compell'd to injoy the benefit of their Obedience; and that
however they may perish by other Crimes, they may yet be disenabl'd to damn themselves by their Rebellions. § 17. Lastly, take we the greatest heed, of being led into The Errour that 'tis impossible for us to Erre, whilst we believe as we are bid by the Church of Rome, which deceives the most in∣curably, by getting her Children to believe, she is divinely undeceivable. Take away This, and all her other Impositions will fall to ruin of Themselves. But by the Help of This Errour, All the rest must needs be swallow'd, how gross soever. To wit, That the 2 Books of Maccabees (and All the rest of the Apocrypha) are as much the Word of God, as the 5 Books of Moses, or any other: at least since the Canons of the Council at Trent, to whose Authority (forsooth) The Holy Scriptures owe Theirs. That in the Sa∣crament of the Lord's Supper, it is the Interest and the Duty of every Christian to be a Canibal; even materially and grosly to eat and drink the Flesh and Bloud of The Man Christ Jesus. That the single Bishop of Rome is the Ʋniversal Pastor, Head, and Monarch, over the whole Catholick Church, both Diffusive, and Representative, though in an absolute Contradiction to Four famous Councils, (which with the Papalins
themselves do pass for General,) to wit, of Pisa, Constance, Basil, and Siena. Not to in∣sist on those other Councils, of Chalcedon, Con∣stantinople, Antioch, and Africa. That there must be an Infallible Judge of Controversies on Earth, over and above the Word of God; Though they who say it are not agreed, who the Judge of them should be:See the two short Discourses of Mr. Dod∣well, espe∣cially the First, and the excellent Praeface to it. whether the Diffusive, or Represen∣tative, or (That which They call) the Virtual Church Catholick, or Their Principium Ʋnita∣tis, (as they call the Bishop of Rome,) who proudly Lords it over them All. That though nothing is to be added to The Apostles own Creed, consisting of but 12 Articles, (Each Apostle casting in One, as Ruffinus tells us,) yet the 12 more at least, thereto added by Pius Quartus and the Council of Trent, are to be sworn to, and Believed, as of equal Necessity to Life Aeternal. To sum up all in a word, No Contradiction can be so gross, no Absurdity so great, as not to be readily entertained by Those Jesuited Bigots, who have beforehand devou∣red and swallow'd down without chewing That Breeding Blasphemy and Falshood,Thesis pro∣pugnanda in Aulâ Colle∣gii Claromon∣tani, die 12. Decembris A. D. 1661. See the plea of Monsieur Talon Advo∣cat General against This Thesis, in the New Haeresie of Jesuitism, p. 242, 243. and of the same Book, p. 3. & 4. That the Pope is as Infallible as Jesus Christ, as often as he speaks ex Cathedrâ, even without a General Council, not in Questions onely of Right, but in
those of Fact also. Let no man therefore de∣ceive us with his pretended Infallibility, more than with his being God, or wholly Impeccable upon Earth. For He who cannot be deceiv'd, can as little Sin; they are Attributes peculiar to God alone. § 18. But now 'tis time that I proceed to the second general Member of Sub-Division, by which a Caveat was enter'd against Deceipts of all sorts, as well of the best, as the worst of Men. For As heed is to be taken that no evil man deceive us by good Appearances and Praetenses; so there is use of as great heed, that no good man deceive us (against his will) by the evil Example of his Miscarriage. There being at least as much danger of the one, as of the other. If we allow our selves to Ab exemplo & simili tot sunt experi∣menta falla∣ciarum, quòt hominum ca∣pita: dum quilibet asse∣qui vult quemlibet, dum exemplo dicit se vi∣vere talium, quos approbat Ecclesia & canonizat, &c. Gerson Tract. 8. de custodiâ An∣gelorum par∣titio 3. super Magnificat. think we may safely do, what some very good People have done be∣fore us, the consequence of it will be This, that we shall imitate the worst in the best of Men, and leave the best to be Their peculiar. And there∣fore here 'tis very fit for our observation, that 'twas not said by our Saviour (Matth. 10. 17.) , beware of Men, that is of Some men, (Those of the Consistories or Sane∣drim amongst the Jews, who yet are aimed at
in especial manner,) But with an article prae∣fixt, , beware of Men, that is, of all men in general, not excepting the very best. For let Erasmus and Vatablus say what they will, the praefixing of the article seems to import the whole species; as Tostatus and Casaubon at least do judge. Let us not say therefore withNon credi∣bile est Sa∣ram foemi∣nam sanctissi∣mam id fac∣turum fuisse, nisi licitum esse scivisset. Bellarm. lib. de Matrimo∣nio cap. 2. Bellarmin, that so good a Wo∣man as Sarah had never prompted her Husband to lie with Hagar, if she had not well known it to have been lawfull. No nor yet with aAugustin. in Gen. Quaest. 26. & contra Faustum Manich. l. 22. c. 23. grea∣ter man, that Abram might dissemble and tell a lie to save his life. Nor think the better of A∣dultery or wilfull Murther, for being committed even by David after a state of Regeneration. Nor look upon Incest itself as venial, because 'twas acted even by Lot, who in the holy Scrip∣ture is stiled Righteous. Nor imagin it does the rather consist with Wisedom to be Idolatrous, for that Solomon Himself did worship Idols, who is renowned for his Wisedom throughout the World. Nor be so illogical as to conclude in the behalf of Polygamy, because so honest a man as Jacob had two Wives at once, and is no where reproved in all the Scripture. Nor may we give an ear to Them who do excuse the worst Impieties of all such men as have been Regenerate, by im∣puting
them wholly to the infirmity of the flesh, and not as well to the filthiness of the Spirit. Some there are who are serious in the use of such Logick, (be it spoken to the disgrace of their wit and learning,) though it is patcht up of nothing but one gross Fallacy, à benè divisis ad malè conjuncta. Many things are very false in a compound sense, which being divided are very true; and many are true being compounded, which in sensu diviso are very false. David was holy, and committed wilfull Murther in con∣junction with Adultery; But it was not com∣mitted by holy David. (for This would imply a Contradiction in adjecto.) He was holy be∣fore, and holy after, but in a state of Ʋnholiness and Condemnation whilst he lay snoring in his impieties (as he did for some months) without repentance. So Solomon was wise, and a Wor∣shipper of Idols; But he was not Then wise, when he stood guilty of Idol-Worship. Solomon and Solomon were just as different, as Peter in the Hall, and behind the Door: or as the Book of Kings, and the Book of Ecclesiastes. When That impiety was committed, it was by Solo∣mon the Fool, who recover'd not his Wisedom till he repented; that is to say, till he amended, and chang'd his life, till he became a new Crea∣ture,
and brought forth fruits meet for Repen∣tance. § 19. And if heed is to be taken that no good man deceive us, we may not sure neglect Him who has nothing of good but in bare appea∣rance. If the former may deceive us by the ex∣ample of his Sin, well may the later deceive us too by the lying sanctity of his life. Then let not any man deceive us by any means.2 Thess. 2. 3. Neither by giving smooth Speeches, nor by wearing rough Garments;Zech. 13. 4. Neither by using Foxes words,Eph. 5. 6. nor by having Sheeps Cloathing;Matth. 7. 15. Neither by Spirit, nor by Letter. Not by the current of his Prosperity, not by the reddiness of his Pray∣ing, not by the commonness of his Preaching, not by the plausible Demureness (called the God∣liness) of his Practice. For the Devil were but a Dunce, in case he could not fish (whilst he is angling after Souls) with more Baits than These; and too contemptible a Mimick, if a∣mongst all his cunning Actings he could not personate a Saint. § 20. But this is not All which does pro∣perly belong to a Christian's Caution. We must not onely take heed that no man deceive us, but as great heed is to be taken that we our selves deceive no man, and (more than That) that
we undeceive others who are deceiv'd. We must contend for the Faith, and we must do it also with earnestness, (as S. Jude exhorts us all in the 4th. verse of his Epistle,) not onely be in the right our selves, but labour to bring into the way of Truth all such as have erred and are de∣ceiv'd. We must labour by our Arguments, as well as Prayers, to strengthen them that al∣ready stand, to comfort and help the weak-hearted, to lift up the hands that hang down, and the feeble Knees, to raise up such as we know are fallen, and by any means possible to Tread down Satan under all our feet. § 21. We see there is Danger on every side, both within us, and without us, both in solitude, and in company, whether our Company does consist either of evil, or good men, we had need have our Eyes and our Wits about us. We have need of it at all times, but above all in such as These, to which our Lord does here allude in the Text and Context which lies before us. And This would lead me, if I would follow, to the Third particular in the Division; to wit, the Time, or Occasion, wherein the use of this Care will be most in season. But This I confess is such a difficult and such a slippery kind of Doctrin, as of which I had rather make a very
private use, than run the publick risque of an Application. For in such an Auditory as This, (consisting of All that is Great and Prudent,) for Me to adventure to make a Search into Those particulars, out of which our publick dangers are most arising, were to discourse concerning Tacticks to such as Hannibal and Scipio; or to Demetrius the Poliorketick concerning the Ta∣king of a Town. And therefore leaving to men of Counsel their proper Business, which is to sit at the Helm of Church and State, and wisely to provide for the Good of Both; I keep my self within the Modesty which is expected from a Divine. Abruptly concluding my present Ser∣mon, just as S. Peter his first Epistle, with a ,1 Pet. 5. 8, 9, 10, 11. Be sober, be vigilant; because your Adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion wal∣keth about, seeking whom he may devour; whom resist stedfast in the Faith. And the God of all Grace who hath called us to his aeternal glory by Christ Jesus, make you perfect, stablish, streng∣then, settle you. To him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.
OF FEAR As Necessary to FAITH, IN THE Well-ordering of our LIVES. 1 COR. 10. 12. Wherefore let him who thinketh that he stands, take heed lest he fall. § 1. A Caveat evermore in season, and of necessity to be press'd, and that upon every sort of Persons of all Conditions and De∣grees, and this in what sense soever we please to take it. It has its value even in That wherein the A∣postle never meant it, and which (to say Truth) was much below his Consideration, to
wit, as apply'd to any secular or worldly Sta∣tion. For had we the leisure to make reflec∣tion upon all Times and Places, as far as Histo∣rians have brought them to us, we should find the observation to be as general, as it is whol∣som, That the greatest Things and Persons, (the greatest Monarchies with their Monarchs, the greatest States-men as well as States,) have Then been nearest to a Downfall, when they have been in all appearance the most establish'd. How many are there in the world in whom Ex∣tremities have concenter'd? And as the two Globes of Heaven and Earth do mutually touch in a single Point, so there is nothing more fre∣quent, than for Conditions of as great Distance as the Nadir and the Zenith to meet in one and the same Man. Nebuchadnezzar the most ex∣alted, and the most abject in all Assyria. A∣pries the best provided, and the most destitute thing in Aegypt. Polycrates the fortunatest and the unfortunatest man of Samos: Deified one day, and crucified the next. Polydorus the most belov'd, and the most hated of Lacedaemonians. Periander the very wisest, and most besotted of the Corinthians. Sejanus the most admir'd, and most contemptible man in Rome. Diony∣sius the fiercest Tyrant, and tamest Paedogogue
in Greece. Therefore the Apophthegm of Solon was not so witty, as it was true, That no man's happiness can be certain before his Death.Diog. Laert. l. 1. And 'twas for this reason onely, that Cleobis and Bi∣ton were praeferr'd before Croesus in point of Bliss, that They were dead, and died well; where∣as He, with his Prosperities, was yet but li∣ving; And neither knew how he should End, nor what Evenements might befall him 'twixt This and That. My Text had therefore been very pertinent and of moment, had it exhorted to nothing better, than human Prudence; or provided for nothing more than an outward Safety. § 2. But as nothing can profit a man to pur∣pose,Prov. 11. 4. which cannot profit him at all in the day of Wrath, so no Prudence can be sufficient, but That by which a man stands in the Evil day.Eph. 6. 13. Not in the day of Temptation onely, But in the hour of Death, and the Day of Judgment. Nor can we pronounce of our Condition, as it is spiritual and aeternal, but by beginning our Accompt from our later End. Which because without Prophecy we cannot do, (as Jeremy did by Zedekiah,)Prov. 28. 14. therefore happy is the man that feareth always, as Salomon by his experience was taught himself to teach others. Prosperity
is one thing, and Happiness quite another. We may be sure, whilst we live, that we are more or less prosperous; But whether more or less happy, we must live and die too to assure our selves. Death alone is That Point, in which the Terrestrial and Coelestial Globes meet, if they meet at all. And as the Tree falleth, just so it lyeth. S. Paul himself, whilst yet a Passenger, and not within sight of his Journy's End, (whilst he was yet but in the Valley, far enough from having ascended unto the Top of Mount Nebo, from whence he might have seen his Crown of righteousness,) was so afraid to loose his Station, and to fall from his own sted∣fastness,2 Pet. 3. 17. (which S. Peter provides against too) that he did beat down his Body, and carefully bring it into subjection, and all for this mo∣mentous,1 Cor. 9. 27. though modest reason, lest whilst he preached unto others, He himself might become a Castaway. And being as carefull of other Mens, as of his own aeternal Interest, he did as tender∣ly admonish them as he had done his own Soul. Giving this Caveat to all in general, though written in special to his Corinthians, Let him who thinketh that he stands, take heed lest he fall. § 3. In which words we have Three things
observable. First, a tacit Dissuasive from carnal Confidence and Security. Next an ex∣plicit Exhortation to Christian Prudence. Last∣ly, the Reason of Both at once from a great Danger on the one side, and in consequence of That, from as great a Necessity on the other The Danger is not so trivial, as That of falling with holy Job, from an high Pitch of Wealth to the Depth of Poverty; or with the brave A¦ristomenes, from a Pinnacle of Glory into the Gulph of Lacedaemon; Nor is the Danger no more affrighting, than That of falling with Je∣remy into Jonathan's Dungeon, or with Daniel into the Den of the hungry Lions. But here the Danger is of falling from Light to Dark∣ness; from an high pitch of Grace, the Favour of God, into a Bottomless Asphaltites of Fire un∣quenchable. Some there were who did not think there could be any such Danger, to them that stood as They did (or as they thought they did at least) in a state of Grace. Such were the Gnosticks alluded to in several verses before my Text. But 'tis below S. Paul's Reason, and inconsistent with his Sincerity, to write of Danger where there is None; or to forewarn us of a Mischief which cannot possibly come to pass. In bidding us look unto our footing, he
takes it for granted that we are liable to a Fall. And accordingly 'tis the sense of our common Mother the Church of England, (in the 16th. of her 39 Articles,) That after we have recei∣ved the Holy Ghost, we may depart from Grace given, and fall into Sin, though by the Grace of God too we may rise again. Now the greater our Danger is by carnal confidence and security, the greater need we stand in of a Christian Pru∣dence. And This, though but One, is such a Cardinal vertue, that 'tis really a Guardian to all the rest. Especially as consisting of those three parts, Providence, Caution, and Circum∣spection, without which it is impossible (as nicely distinguish'd by theAquin. 22. q. 48. c. & 22. q. 49. art. 6, 7, 8. School-men) for Christian Prudence to be complete. For first of all we must have Providence, to cast about for such means as are conducing unto our End. Next we must have Circumspection, whereby to attend to every Circumstance wherewith the Means are to be cloath'd. Last of all we must have Caution, for the avoiding of those Impedi∣ments, which may otherwise hinder our Course of vertue, and unhappily interrupt us in bring∣ing the Means unto the End. § 4. Now to These three parts of a Christian Prudence, there are three sorts of men who are
here exhorted; either directly in the Text, or in its relation to the Context. First, consider we the Text in its meer lite∣ral importance, , Let him who seems to himself to stand, and that as fixt as an Anti∣nomian, even by Grace irresistible; by having been justified from Aeternity; by having had all his Sins forgiven, so long before they were com∣mitted; or by being not able to Sin at all; so as in His imagination he cannot possibly depart from the Living God;Heb. 3. 12. (which yet the Epistle to the Hebrews does bid him take heed of;) who seems to himself to stand so firmly, as that he cannot fall a little, much less totally; much less fi∣nally from Grace; Let Him, (I say) as well as others, take heed lest he fall. Next, consider we the Text as it looks back upon the Context, (from the first Verse unto the eleventh,) and thereby acquaints us with its more rational importance. Let him, (who does not only seem to himself to stand, but) who stands in good earnest by ghostly strength; by having had his feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel;Eph. 6. 15. by having been cleansed from his Sins in the Bloud of Christ, and in the Baptism of Tears, which arise from the Spring of sincere Repentance; Let him not think it a thing be∣low
him, to take great heed, that he do not fall. For the Israelites from the first to the tenth verse of this Chapter, were all in Covenant with God; did all partake of those priviledges which he vouchsafed them as his Children; were all bap∣tized unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea; did all injoy the same Miracles; were fed with Manna sent down from Heaven; refresh'd with Water out of Horeb, gushing forth from a dry and a barren Rock; They mystically tasted of Christ Himself, (v. 4.) But yet as firmly as they stood, we find their feet slipt. For first they stagger'd in the Faith; Then they stumbl'd into Idolatry; Next they fell in the Wilderness, (all excepting two persons,) and were destroy'd of the Destroyer, (v. 5. and 10.) All which things (saith our Apostle) happen'd to them for Ensamples, and are written for our instruc∣tion on whom the ends of the world are come, (v. 11.) From whence He rationally draws This signal Corollary and Caveat, (for we see 'tis Both at once, and is accordingly brought in with the Causal Wherefore,) Let him who thin∣keth that he stands take heed lest he fall. Yet one step farther. Let him who stands faster than other men who do truly stand, almost as fast in reality, as the Gnosticks in the Con∣text
did in their proud Imagination; as fast as David and S. Peter in their high pitch of Grace; as fast as Adam in That of Innocence; or as the bright Morning Stars in That of Glory; Let him (I say) as well as others, yea let him above others take heed lest he fall. The reason is, because His Fall, if he falls, must needs be the greater and less excusable, the higher and fir∣mer his Station is, and the greater his Ability to stand his Ground. The Angels that fell from as high as Heaven, and that without a Tempter too, even for this very reason (as I ob∣served once before) could not fall less than as low as Hell; and so Their Fall was without Re∣covery. For when God was in Christ reconci∣ling the World unto himself, he did not take upon him the Nature of Angels, whereby to give the faln Regiment a Capability of rising, (however Origen and his Disciples would have given it had they been able,) and that for the reason I just now hinted. Whereas the lapsed Man Adam, newly taken out of the Earth, and whose Foundation was in the Dust, had both the Sub∣tilty of a Tempter, and the Strength of a Tempta∣tion, and (together with his Innocence) a Frailty of Nature; all which did excuse him at least à Tanto; whereby he became the properer
object of God's Compassion as well as Justice, and so the more fit for a Restauration. From whence I humbly conceive I may infer with good Logick, that by how much the firmer our footing is, by so much the greater, and not the lesser, our heed ought to be that we do not fall. I have hitherto shew'd the Meaning and the Cohaerence of the Text, and how 'tis necessary for all, of all Conditions and Degrees, by whichsoever of its handles men please to hold it. And I have laid out the several matters to be meditated upon in its Prosecution. § 5. But being seriously desirous to speak as usefully as I can, and that within the Time al∣low'd, I am to take and give notice of three sorts of Libertines in these our days, who ei∣ther have wilfully transcrib'd, or else have stum∣bl'd accidentally upon some of the worst of Hae∣resies in the Primitive Times; and are as dange∣rous to others, as destructive to Themselves. Some are of opinion, that if Vessels of Election, theyManichaeus electos suos, quos inter a∣nimas Pla∣tonis in coe∣lestibus col∣lecat, dicit omni carere peccato, nec si velint, peccare posse. Hieron. ad Ctesiph. ad∣versus Pelag. Tom. 2. p. 252. cannot Sin do what they can. They are placed in such a state of Impeccability, that on a supposal of their willingness, they are not able to do amiss. And This expresly was the Haeresie of The infamous Manichaeus, as S. Jerome tells Ctesiphon; adding also that Priscilian was a
Bird of that Feather. Others are of opinion, that though they can commit Sin, God cannot see it in his Elect. And This expresly was the Haeresie of Marcus, who taught the poor and rich Women whom he debauch'd and made His, that they might fearlesly and freely be as volup∣tuous as they pleas'd,. Epi∣phan. Hae∣res 34. ex Iren. l. 1. c. 8. & 9. p. 72. Hom. Iliad. 5. because by vertue of their Redemption they were , at once inapprehensible and invisible to the Judge. Just as Homer feign'd Pallas to have cover'd her self with Pluto's Helmet, that so she might not be seen by Mars. (A Privilege as sensless, as That which was allow'd to the Ring of Gyges.) There is a Third sort of Thinkers, who say that God can see Sin, but cannot punish it in his Elect, or impute it to them; and that they are so sure-footed, that though they slip never so grosly, or stumble never so often, yet for all That they can never fall, not only not finally, but but not so much as for a Time. And This ex∣presly was the Haeresie of Jovinian,Hieronymus adversus Jo∣vinianum l. 2. Tom. 2. p. 69. &c. (which S. Je∣rome in a whole Book has very effectually con∣futed,) that They who once have been regene∣rate in the Laver of Baptism, cannot be tempted by the Devil, so as to cease being regenerate. We have the Sum of all Three (and the Sequel too) in the one Valentinian Haeresie, which
was one of the first, and the worst of all; as the holy Father and Martyr Irenaeus shews it at large. What the Malignity of it is, and to how deep a degree of Wickedness 'tis apt at least in its nature to betray them that own it, They Themselves have best told us by This Similitude, , &c. Iren. l. 1. p. 26. That as a Mass of pure Gold in the foulest Dirt does not lose so much as its beauty, much less its nature, but still retains the whole goodness and worth of Gold; so let the Saints, that is Them∣selves, lie and wallow whilst they will in the Mire of Sins, and in those Sins especially whereof the Scripture saith plainly, that they who do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, yet they cannot thereby lose their spirituality and perfection.Gal. 5. 21. They cannot cease from being Bran∣ches of That true Vine,1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. into which they were once ingrafted. § 6. Now that other mens Dangers may be employ'd to keep us safe, and that other mens real Miseries may be improv'd to our being Happy, we must convince our selves throughly of the Truth of this Doctrin, which in my Text is most clearly and unavoidably imply'd; To wit, that He who now stands in a Christian State, of Repentance, and Conversion, and a blotting out of Sins, (which is Justification,) may possibly
fall into a dangerous yea and a damnable Con∣dition, unless he takes such strict heed, as our blessed Apostle does here injoyn. And here I cannot but be sorry, that so clear a Text as This should stand in need of any Sermon to give it Evidence. That our Apostle's Exhortation should be so little argumentative in some mens minds, that we must light up our Candles to shew his Sun. I much admire that those Liber∣tines, who think they stand in no need of this holy Caveat, are not sufficiently convinc'd by their own Experience, that since their having been regenerate in the Sacrament of Baptism, which is (no less than Circumcision) aRom. 4. 11. Seal of the righteousness of Faith, they have faln into deadly and wasting Sins. Lord! how ma∣ny Sons and Daughters of our one Common Mother, the Church of England, have renounced the very Baptism, by which alone they were Chri∣stianiz'd, have abandon'd the House of Prayer, and in it the Lord's Table, and on it the outward Sign of invisible Grace? have fallen away before our faces into the scandalous commissions of Schism and Haeresie? have turn'd apostates from the Faith which was once deliver'd unto the Saints? have indulgently marched on in the ways of Corah, in the Sins of Sacrilege, and Re∣bellion,
and still are snoring in the Impieties of being heady,Jude 8. high-minded, Despisers of Dominion, and Evil speakers of Dignities,Rom. 13. 1, 2. ever Opposers of Authority ordain'd by God, which is to be a worse Thing than a Common Drunkard? § 7. How many Examples are there in Scri∣pture of final Apostasie from Grace, or from a State of Regeneration, enough to dit the widest Mouth of the daring'st Gnostick? How many of God's peculiar people under the Law, did fall away from their acknowledgment of the onely true God, into the worst of all Sins, which is Idolatry, and into the worst of all Idolatries, which is the worshipping of Devils, and into the worst of that worst too, not by offering their Sheep and Oxen,Psal. 106. 37. but their own Sons, and their own Daughters unto Devils?Isa. 1. 21, 22, 23. which compare with Hos. 4. 1, 2, 6. How did the faithfull City become an Harlot? how did her Silver be∣come arrant Dross? She was once full of Judg∣ment; Righteousness lodged in her, but now Murtherers. Be astonished, O ye Heavens, at this, and be horribly afraid, (as God himself spake by the Prophet Jeremy,)Jerem. 2. 12, 13. for my People have committed two evils, forsaken me the foun∣tain of living waters, and bewn them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns which hold no water.17. Hast thou not procured this unto thy self, in that thou hast
forsaken the Lord thy God?21. I had planted thee a noble Vine, wholly a right seed; How then art thou turned into the degenerate Plant of a strange Vine unto me? Nor is it onely under the Legal, but under the Gospel Dispensation, that many begin to build well on a good foundation,Luk. 14. 30. but do not finish. ManyGal. 3. 3. end in the flesh, who be∣gan in the Spirit; and Many areMatth. 20. 16. called, but few are chosen. Many are sanctified, but few are sav'd. Many are justified for a time, but very few in comparison do persevere unto the End. That saying of our Saviour Matth. 24. 12, 13. [The love of many shall wax cold, but he that indureth unto the end shall be saved,] S. Paul reflecting on,Matth. 24. 12, 13. has explained Thus: That some in the later times shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and doc∣trines of Devils:1 Tim. 4. 1. speaking lyes in hypocrisie, ha∣ving their Conscience seared with an hot iron. There the word in the Original is very obser∣vable: They shall depart (saith the English,) ) (saith the Greek,) They shall aposta∣tize from the Faith of Christ. A very evident opposition unto final perseverance, in Both those Places; and 'tis as evident that the Apostasie there prophesied of, is from a State of Sanctifi∣cation. For the Love waxing cold, and the
Faith departed from, (That expressed by our Saviour, and This by our Apostle,) are the same in both Texts, in which they ought to have per∣sever'd. So again in the first Chapter of the same Epistle to Timothy, S. Paul exhorts him to hold fast faith,1 Tim. 1. 19, 20. and a good Conscience, which some (says He) having put away, concerning Faith have made shipwrack. That This was justifying Faith which was thus put away, and suffer'd shipwrack, may appear by two reasons clearly arising out of the Text: First, because it was That, to the holding fast of which S. Paul does there exhort Timothy; next, because it was That, which was attended with a good Con∣science.Joh. 15. 6. If a man (saith our Saviour) abide not in Me, he is cast forth as a Branch, and is withered, and cast into the Fire: clearly spo∣ken of a Reprobate who had formerly been in Christ, but abideth not in him, and was there∣fore cast forth as a wither'd branch. A Text to which our Apostle in probability does allude, where he tells us of certain Branches broken off,Rom. 11. 17, & 20. from The Olive Tree, though once partakers of the Root and Fatness of it; and broken off they were for their unbelief. From whence he exhorts his Believing Romans to beware, lest they who now stand by Faith, do also fall into infidelity;
and They be also broken off, who are grafted in. There are that hear the word of God,Matth. 13. 20, 21. and re∣ceive it with Joy, and indure for a while in that good Course, and yet in time of Persecution they are offended and fall away, saith our blessed Lord.1 Tim. 6. 10. Some have erred from the Faith through the Love of money, saith S. Paul to his Son Ti∣mothy; and in the Eighteenth of S. Matthew, the Servant forgiven, v. 32. was yet condemn'd, v. 35. The same is signified by the Parable of an unclean Spirit cast out by Repentance,Matth. 12. 44. or re∣generation, and re-entring by a Relapse into the House of a man's Heart well swept and garnish'd, and that with 7 Devils, worse (if possible) than himself, so as the Person he repossesseth is worse than ever. Which very Parable of our Saviour S. Peter seems to point at in the plainest terms; whilst he tells us of some,2 Pet. 2. 20, 21, 22. so intangled and over∣come by those pollutions of the world which before they had escap'd, as that their later end was very much worse then their beginning. Again 'tis said by the same Apostle, in the Chapter going before,2 Pet. 1. 9. that He who lacketh those things by which he is to make his Election sure, has for∣gotten that he was purged from his old Sins, that is to say, that he was regenerate. § 8. Whosoever is not satisfied with what I
have hitherto alledg'd out of holy writ, let him tell me what he thinks of That unpardonable Sin,Matth. 12. 31, 32. The Sin against the Holy Ghost. Let him say whether that Sin can ever be possibly com∣mitted, unless by one who was once enlightned, and had tasted of the heavenly Gift,Heb. 6. 4, 5. had been made a partaker of the Holy Ghost, and of the good word of God, and the powers of the World to come. Let him weigh the fourth Verse, and compare it with the Sixth of the Sixth Chapter to the Hebrews, and Both together with the Com∣ment of learned Calvin thereupon, if he will not trust That of our most learned Dr. Ham∣mond. Let him consider if 'tis not possible for such a man to fall away who is so enlightned; and if 'tis not impossible for such a man falling away from such a Station and State of Grace, to be renew'd again unto repentance. But above all let him consider the  in the sixth verse of That Chapter, which signifies ex∣presly a second regeneration, and every second implies a first. The Apostle does not say bare∣ly, it is impossible to renew them (if such as they fall away,) but that 'tis impossible to re∣new them again; clearly intimating unto us these two Illations: First, that a man may so fall from a State of Grace, as not to be able to
rise again; Next, that the Grace he falls from was such as gave him a Salvability; or such as by which he was in a State of Regeneration. § 9. Being about to carry my proof from Ʋniversals to Individuals, I shall not instance in Saul, with S. Cyprian and S. Austin; much less in Ahab, with S. Jerom and S. Chrysostom; much less yet in Cain and Esau; nor yet in A∣lexander, and Demas, Philetus, and Hymenaeus, Phygellus and Hermogenes,2 Tim. 2. 17. who were Deserters of Christ in his Apostles,2 Tim. 4. 10. Wasters of Conscience,2 Tim. 1. 15. and Shipwrackers of Faith; I shall not instance in Do∣rotheus who fell away to serve Idols at Thessalo∣nica; nor yet in Nicolaus, who, though one of the seven Deacons, was yet the Author of that old Haeresie which carries the Name of The Ni∣colaitans; much less shall I instance in the most excellent of the Haeresiarchs, Nestorius, Photinus, Apollinaris, and Pelagius; (for these last may be the subjects of great Dispute; and whatsoever may be true in the Judgment of Faith, yet the Judgment of Charity forbids me to affirm that These did finally fall away:) But of Judas I suppose there is no Dispute. For He was chosen by Christ as one of the Twelve select Apostles, Joh. 6. 70. and is said to have been given by God the Father to God The Son,
whose word he kept for some time, Joh. 17. 6. and was justified by Faith, v. 8. prayed for by Christ, not as one of the World, but as His pecu∣liar, v. 9. He confess'd and taught Christ, and did Miracles in his Name, Matth. 10. 5, 7, 8. He was one of Christ's Sheep, v. 16. had been grafted into Christ, Joh. 15. 2. notwithstanding all which, he did not onely fall from, but be∣tray his Master, hang'd himself as a man Lost, and is call'd by our Lord expresly, , The Son of Perdition. § 10. I would not here be so mistaken, as if I meant that God's Elect can fall away finally from Grace. I am so very far from That, that I affirm it to be impossible, and to imply a Con∣tradiction. For They and They onely are God's Elect, who do finally persevere in a Christian Course; who being delivered out of the hands of their Enemies, do not onely serve God in ho∣liness and righteousness, (for so do many that are called, and are not chosen,) but they serve him in Both together All the days of their Lives; as Zachary goes on in his Benedictus. We must therefore so distinguish in our Discourse of this subject between The Regenerate and The Elect, as still to carry in our minds as well their Diffe∣rence as their Agreement. In This they agree,
that all The Elect are still Regenerate; In This they differ, that all The Regenerate are not Elect. The former may and do often, the later cannot fall finally from Grace. Concerning the for∣mer, and Them alone, all the Scriptures I have urged and argued from must be understood. For the later are onely They, who doMatth. 24. 13. indure unto the End. Onely They that overcome, and so are said to have a right to the Tree of life.Rev. 21. 7. & 22. 14. The Elect are onely They,2 Pet. 1. 10. that can finally never fall; for if they could, they could not have been e∣lected to life eternal. And yet even of These I am to say in the se∣cond place, that they fall totally, and for a Time, many of them, and of the Best too. Not onely Solomon, and Aaron, and David himself in the Old Testament, but all the Apostles in the New, and S. Peter above them all, are uncon∣trouble Examples of This sad Truth; if Idola∣try, and Adultery, and wilfull Murther, if Ly∣ing, and Cursing, and wilfull Perjury, and a repeated abjuration of Jesus Christ, are Sins in∣consistent with saving Grace, and the inhabita∣tion of God the Holy Ghost. 'Tis true indeed that The Elect who fall away for a time into Deadly Sins, and so by consequence, whilst im∣penitent, into a State of Damnation, cannot
possibly die 'till they have repented; because they have This Seal upon them, The Lord know∣eth them that are His. But This which is offer'd as an Answer to what I say, is an irrefragable Argument to evince the Truth of it. For if Da∣vid (for example) could not die till he repen∣ted, it is for this reason onely, that he could not be sav'd without Repentance; and that before he repented, he was in a State of Condemnation. Saving Grace and Impenitence cannot simul & semel be in one and the same Man. 'Tis the Condition of the great and precious promises in the Gospel, and in effect the whole Covenant 'twixt God and Man, that all shall be saved with repentance,2 Chron. 15. 1, 2. and None without it. Hear ye me, Asa, and all Judah, and Benjamin, (said The Spirit of God by Azariah,) The Lord is with you, whilst ye be with Him; and if ye seek him, he will be found of you; but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. So again by The Prophet Ezekiel,Ezek. 33. 18. When the righteous turneth from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, he shall even die thereby:ver. 15. and if the wicked walk in the Statutes of life, he shall surely live. Pro∣mises and Threats are both alike conditional, not onely under the Law, but as expresly under the Gospel. It is the saying of Christ himself, Who∣soever
shall confess me before men,Luk. 12. 8, 9. Him shall the Son of man also confess before the Angels of God. But he that denieth me before men, shall be de∣nied before the Angels of God. 'Tis S. Paul's to the Christians who were at Rome in his days, that God will render to every man according to his works.Rom. 2. 6, 7, &c. To them who seek for Glory by con∣tinuance in well-doing, aeternal life: But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the Truth, Indignation and Wrath. And again, If ye live after the flesh,Ch. 8. v. 13. ye shall die: but if ye through the Spirit do mortifie the deeds of the body ye shall live. And yet more plainly to our purpose,Col. 1. 21, 23. in his Epistle to the Colossians, You who were Enemies in your minds by wicked works hath he reconcil'd, if ye continue in the faith grounded and setled, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel which ye have heard. And in like manner to the Corinthians,1 Cor. 15. 1, 2. Ye are saved by the Gospel, if ye hold fast or keep in me∣mory what I preached unto you, unless ye have believ'd in vain. The Epistle to the Hebrews is very full to this purpose,Heb. 3. 6, 14. We are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our Con∣fidence stedfast unto the end. Whose House we are, if we hold fast the Confidence and the rejoy∣cing of the hope firm unto the End.Heb. 10. 38, & 39. Now the Just
shall live by Faith. But if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. Plainly intimating in This, what is taken for granted in the very next verse, that from the same kind of Faith by which it is said the Just shall live, there were some in the best of Times who drew back unto Perdition. Heb. 10. 39. § 11. What now is the Advantage we are to make of all This? and what the Lesson, which all these Scriptures are apt to teach us? Truly the lesson is plainly This: That if the End of our Prayers, if the End of our Hopes, the End of all our Endeavours is but Conditional, and All the Promises of the Gospel are made unto us with an [If we do so and so,] we must not now boast of our being Christians, as the Hebrews once did of their being Israelities. We must not glory in our being the younger Brethren or Members of Jesus Christ, as They in their being the Seed of Abraham. We must not pride it in the Church, as They did commonly in the Tem∣ple. Nor insult over the Jews, as They did foo∣lishly over the Gentiles. For if God spared not Them who were the natural Branches,Rom. 11. 18, We must also take heed,19, lest he also spare not us. If They were broken off for their unbelief,20, and we by Faith are grafted in, the proper use we are to
make of the observation,21, is that we boast not against the Branches; that we be not high-minded, but rather fear;22, for we bear not the Root, but the Root us. We must consider both the Good∣ness, and Severity of God, and the Grounds of Both: on them that fell, Severity; but towards us, Goodness; with an If we continue in his Good∣ness. Otherwise we shall be broken off too; and They shall be grafted in again,23. if they do not still abide in their unbelief. We cannot reasonably desire a clearer State of this matter, than in That whole Passage of the Eleventh Chapter to the Romans. And therefore seeing it is imploy'd by our blessed Lord,Matth. 5. 13. that even The Salt of the Earth may lose its Savour, and become good for nothing, but to be utterly cast out, and trodden under foot;Joh. 15. 5, 6. that a Branch of the true Vine may lose its Verdure, and become good for nothing, but to be cast into the Fire; I thought it good (as S. Peter2 Pet. 1. 12, 13, 15. & ch. 3. v. 1, 2. speaks) to put you in mind of these things, although ye know them already, and are established in the Truth. And still I think it good (with the same S. Peter) to press the giving all diligence for the making of our calling and election sure.2 Pet. 1. 10. I think it good (with S. Pe∣ter) to say,Ch. 3. v. 17. Beware, lest ye also being led away with the Error of the Wicked, fall from your own
stedfastness. If God was so provoked by the Children of Israel, (to whom the Conditional Promise was made) that he swore in his Wrath,Heb. 3. 11. they should not enter into his Rest, because they fail'd of the Condition on which the promise was made; Then I may sure without Praesum∣ption draw the very same Ʋse from That tremen∣dous matter of Fact, which the Inspired Writer makes in the very next Verse,ver. 12, Take heed, Bre∣thren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God. But exhort one another daily whilst it is call'd,13. To Day, lest any of you be hardened through the de∣ceiptfulness of Sin.Heb. 4. 1. And again, Let us fear (saith the same Apostle) lest a Promise being left us of entring into his Rest, any of you should seem to come short of it, or , to come be∣hind it. I may sure without arrogance ex∣hort the Best of my Hearers, much more my self, and all other Christians of my low Class, that They and We receive not the Grace of God in vain.2 Cor. 6. 1. That They and We do look diligently,Heb. 12. 15. lest any man fail of the Grace of God; or lest any fall from it, as it is in the Margin, and is sufficiently imported by . § 12. The Sum and Upshot of all is This:
There is in many a Seed of Grace,Mar. 4. 3, 4, &c. to verse 21. which does never bring forth the fruit of Glory. For as The Spirit of Truth makes none Infallible upon Earth, so The Spirit of Holiness makes none im∣peccable, none incapable of falling into any Deadly Sin, or a Sin unto Death. The reason is, because the workings of The Spirit are onely congruous, and sufficient upon voluntary Agents, never compulsive, and irresistible. From whence it follows that The Degrees of Grace and Truth in several persons, are not at all from God's Omnipotence as it is such, or from his over-ruling Providence as over-ruling, (for Then there could not be possibly such a variety of Degrees; All persons Then must have been equally good, and onely good in perfection;) But partly from the different Dispositions, and Behaviours, and Negotiations of the Subjects with the Talents of Grace committed to them, (which some are for Luk. 19. 16, 20. imploying, and some for wrapping in aLuk. 19. 16, 20. Nepkin, as our Lord in his Parable was pleas'd to make it plain to us,) and partly from the Measures of The Spirit's Communication: which to some, is much more; to others, less; to none, irre∣sistable; to all, sufficient. How very many there are that fall from that Faith and Patience, which in Job were two Rocks, which nothing
was strong enough to shake, much less to shatter, (and yet the Grace of God in Him was never co∣gent,) but being wellCol. 2. 7. rooted, and very well cultivated besides, by daily exercises of Piety, and all good Works,2 Thess. 1. 3. grew up exceedingly in his Soul, and did not wither; I say, how many there are that fall from their several Graces, that idly waste, and mispend, or wilfull squander a∣way their Talents, I have hazarded your pa∣tience in making it plainer than there was need; by which excess if I have err'd, I am the rather to be forgiven, because it has proceeded from the sincerity of my Desire, to beget in such as stand, a taking great heed that they do not fall. And that our Adversary The Devil may never find Ʋs, as the Messengers of the Danites found Them of Laish,Judg. 18. 7, 27. dwelling careless, and secure, after the manner of the Zidonians, and void of Business; Let it be our prime Business, from this day forewards and for ever, not onely to watch and pray lest we enter into Temptation, but to reflect on the chief Ends, and the chief Objects of the Caution commended to us. The chiefest Ends of it are the Glory of God, and our own Sal∣vation. Its chiefest Objects are the Evils of Sin and Punishment; the Work itself, and the Wages of it. But in calling these The Chief, I do imply
there are many more. Even as many as there are Dangers wherewith we are every day beset; and whereof in this Text we are advised to take heed. § 13. We have but one way to stand, But to fall, a Thousand. Fall we may by our Ene∣mies, which (without and within us) are not easily to be numbred. Those within us, in our Bosom, are still the worst, because the nearest, and least suspected; and then most hurtfull, when most Belov'd. The worst without us are our Advancements to Wealth and Honour, be∣cause they are apter than any other, first to lift up our heads, then to trip up our heeles, and to throw us down. Many stand, when at the lowest, stout and stedfast in the Faith, (as S. Peter speaks,) who being drunk with Prosperity, do quickly stagger. And then how easily do they fall, Even at every little thrust of Applause, or Plenty? Yea we may fall, without a Thrust, by the bare Treachery of the Ground upon which we stand. Some Parts of it being too slippery, and some too high, and very dangerous are the blocks which are laid in others. Now 'tis plain the more slippery the places are we stand in, by so much the apter we are to fall. And 'tis as evi∣dent, that the higher our Stations are, by so
much the greater our fall will be. But what the stumbling-blocks are which are laid in our way by some false Teachers, (besides those few already mention'd) and at which if we stumble, 'twill be impossible not to fall, deserves a larger Examination than can be made at this Time, and perhaps a more Polemical than can belong to this Place. In the mean time 'tis certain, that in proportion to the dangers there are of falling, the general Caveat of my Text does extend it self. Take we heed lest we fall for want of any of those things, which are conducible to our Station and state of Grace. Either for want of that Knowledge of things Essential to Religion, which is requir'd; or for want of that Zeal which is according unto Knowledge; or for want of that Consideration we ought to have, of what we know well enough does concern us neerly; or for want of that Distrust in our selves and o∣thers, to which the wise Epicharmus does well excite us. Take we heed we do not fall for want of carrying still about us a fear of falling. A fear both of our Natural, and of our adventitious Frailty. A fear of Him who alone holds us up, and when he will can throw us down. A fear of God, as he is just, but above all, as he is mercifull. Because there is mercy with thee, O
Lord,Psal. 130. 4. Therefore (saith David) shalt thou be feared. For the abusing of his mercy does more than any other baseness, incense his Justice. A Fear of falling from his grace, and by conse∣quence out of his favour, and by consequence into his wrath and his sore displeasure. § 14. Amidst our several ways of falling, we have but one to stand firm, however diversly expressed in holy Writ. I mean the congruous Assistance of God's free Grace, and our own working together with it. All the use S. Peter makes of his Apostasie from Christ for a little time, is to put in a Caveat for Himself and Us too,2 Pet. 3. 17, 18. not to fall from our own stedfastness; and the effectual way to That, is to grow in Grace, as he there exhorts us; Not to content our selves with this, that we are not any thing worse than we use to be, but to be constantly advancing from strength to strength, and to be carefull that our last days may be our best too. All the use S. Paul makes of the Doctrine he had taught of a Resurrection,1 Cor. 15. 58. is to be stedfast, and unmove∣able; and the effectual way to that, is always to abound in the work of the Lord.Eph. 6. 11. So again we may infer from his Epistle to the Ephesians, The onely way for us Impotent and Silly men, to be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil, is to
put upon our selves the whole Armour of God. To be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might. Implying a full Trust in God, and as full a Distrustfulness of our selves. A putting our selves out of our own, into his Protection. Which yet we cannot till convinced of this great truth, that in our selves, as of our selves there dwelleth no good thing. No not so much as Inclination to any thing that is Good. No not so much as Aversation from any thing that is Evil. That our Destruction [if it happens] is of our selves; But all our sufficiency of him alone, who stiles himself by way of Eminence, the All-sufficient. And hereunto we are to add this most pertinent supplication, (which must be fervent and without ceasing,) that he will be pleas'd to work in us both to will and to do of his good plea∣sure,Phil. 3. 13. that so (having him for our. 2 Cor. 6. 1. Coadjutor in the language of our Apostle) we may work out our Salvation with fear and trembling. And that at the final consummation of all our days, he may crown his own Gifts and Graces in us. Which God of his Mercy dispose us for, for the Glory of his Name, and for the worthiness of his Son. To whom with the Father, in the unity of the Spirit, be Glory and Thanksgiving for ever and ever. Amen.
OF PEACE AND HOLINESS UNITED, As aequally required to Our SALVATION. HEB. 12. 14. Follow Peace with all Men, and Holi∣ness, without which no Man shall see the Lord. § 1. AS there are but two Ends at which our Studies are to be levell'd, (let our Parts and our Learning be what they will,) to wit, a Rectitude in our Knowledge, and an
Exactness in our Religion; (the first of which is still subservient and has a Tendency to the se∣cond;) so there are but Two things in which This Second does chiefly stand; to wit, a Recti∣tude of Faith, and the Truth of Practice. The Former does consist in the Belief of two Things too,2 Cor. 5. 19. to wit, That God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself,Heb. 11. 6. And, as such,  the Re∣warder of Them that diligently seek him. The Later lies chiefly in two Things more; Our helping the fatherless in their Affliction,Jam. 1. 27. and the keeping of ourselves unspotted from the World. Nor can we doubt whether in These consists the substance of our Religion, because besides that out of These our several Duties may be deduc'd by the light of Reason, we have Authority also of Scripture (to wit, S. Paul and S. James) to assure us of it. Then why should we compass Sea and Land to meet with Catechists, and Prea∣chers, and Commentators, and School-Divines, a world of Fathers, and of Councils, and Eccle∣siastical Historians, and an hundred other In∣struments for the completing of a Christian, (however necessary they are for the accom∣plishment of a Divine) whilst Christianity in it self is a thing so easie, and may easily be held in so little Room? Had it been suffer'd
to abide within its primitive Simplicity, in but few and plain Precepts for Life and Practice, as well as in few and plain Aphorisms for Faith and Doctrin; the Yoke of Christ had still been easie, and his Burthen had still been light, and little Children had still been qualified for a Dis∣cipleship under Christ, which yet is now made too difficult for some of the subtil'st and the learnedst of all our Jesuiticall and Sorbon Doctors. Nothing has certainly been so mis∣chievous to the true Body of Religion, as the making so many Mysteries where God was pleas'd to have so few; vexing the Articles of our Faith with curious Quaestions, and Dis∣putes, and a large Catalogue of Additions, (as for example in the Creed of PopeVid. Laërt. Cherub. Bullar. Tom. 2. p. 129. Pius Quar∣tus,) most obstructive to the Ʋnity and Peace of Christians. So that by accident at least, and through the Lust of her several Lovers, (I mean the Avarice of some, and the Pride of others,) the charming Beauty of Religion has contribu∣ted too much to the Ruin of her. She having been courted as unhappily, as Plutarch's fair Arisloclea; who was so plucked at by the Ri∣valry of Calisthenes and Strato, and by the Par∣tizans of them Both;. Plut. . p. 772. Id quod acci∣dit Actaeoni Melissi filio, qui . Id. ibid. that (to their shame and sorrow too,) She lost her Life in the Contention.
§ 2. Now considering how much 'tis easier to have an Excellence in the Knowledge, than in the Exercise or Practice of Christianity, And that without our Indeavours of living up to such Knowledge, All our learning will but light us into the Territories of Darkness; Little or Nothing will be got by our most plausible At∣tainments, besides the Meagre Satisfaction of going learnedly to Hell, and the Priviledge to be beaten with many stripes, whilst the more ig∣norant Transgressor must be contented with a few; I cannot think of a fitter Text for the gi∣ving advantage to my Design of setting up the most Ʋsefull and Real learning, in the place of That learning wherewith the Devil is oft adorn'd, (to use the words of S. Jerome touching the Ex∣cellence of Pelagius,) than this important Ex∣hortative of our learned Author to the Hebrews; recommending to them the Study of Peace and Holiness, as That on which there dependeth (as it is followed, or despis'd,) an unspeakable Pro∣portion of Bliss, or Misery. These are the Sci∣ences, and the Arts, which will make us wise unto Salvation. We are to ballance all our Knowledge with these two Weights, whereby to preserve it from puffing up. These are to take up our Meditations; on These our Souls are to
be fixt. These are the Beauties we are to court, with the greatest Love. These the Riches we are to covet, with greatest Avarice. These the Dignities to be sought for, not onely with the greatest, but best Ambition. And therefore every thing else being laid aside, (at least with a comparative, though not an absolute Neglect,) we are to give our selves wholly to the Study of These Two; Following Peace with all men, and Holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. § 3. Though the Text at first Hearing may seem as easie as it is short, yet there is hardly any thing in it, which stands not in need of an Explication; And The English Translation is so much harder than the Original, as that we cannot reach the One, without recourse unto the other. Follow Peace, saith the English. Pur∣sue it earnestly, saith the Greek. It is not every kind of Following will serve the Turn; for 'tis not , sequimini, but , persequimini, and we know, The word  has a remark∣able Importance, implying Industry, and Ea∣gerness, in seeking That that we desire. , hunt after Peace. , run apace after Holiness. As if the Apostle should have said, that Peace and Holiness are things to be conten∣ded for and Courted, with great Ambition. We
must not follow them so, as to come behind them; but rather so as to overtake them. So as the Racer follows the Prize; or so as the Hound fol∣lows the Hare; or so as the man of Contention does greedily follow a suit in Law; or so as S. Paul does elsewhere urge us to follow after Charity. For each of these is Imported by the emphatical word , implying zeal in our Christian Duties, and Perseverance unto the End. § 4. After the Nature of the Act, consider the latitude of the Object. Which though ex∣press'd by a Contraction into these two Bran∣ches, Peace, and Holiness; yet like a Couple of great Arms, they do imbrace the whole Deca∣logue, by the large extent of their signification. For by Peace is meant Charity, in which all Justice is folded up; And thence is said by S. Paul to be the fulfilling of the Law, (taken There is an extended, as Here it is in a stinted sense,) because according to the Rule amongst moral Philosophers, [,] Justice is a , (as the Eastern Fathers do call the Book of Ecclesiasti∣cus;) a comprehensive kind of Pandect of all manner of Duties. For as S. John, in his first Epistle, has reduced all Vices to these three
Heads, The Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life; so S. Paul, speak∣ing to Titus, compriseth all Vertues in this Tri∣chotomy, Living soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World. Now to live righteously what is it, but to do justice▪ unto our Neighbours? What, to live soberly, but to be just unto our selves? (not to abuse our own Persons by any Intemperance or Debauch?) And what, to live Godly, but to deal justly with God himself? (not to rob him of the service, nor to defraud him of the honour that's due unto him?) The first is included in the word Peace, (taken here as it is in a stinted sense,) the second and the third in the word Purification. I say, Purifi∣cation, because 'tis literally the English▪ of the Word , which in our English Transla∣tion is render'd Holiness. § 5. And this deserves to be the Subject of a third Consideration. For it is not , Peace and Purity, which notes the Habit of being Clean; But 'tis , Peace and Purification,, which notes the conti∣nued Act of cleansing. Betwixt which two, there is not onely a very great, but an usefull Difference. For hence we learn that whilst we live, we must evermore be on the mending hand.
Must never look upon our selves as good enough to serve turn. But as a Pot of boyling water is ever casting up a Foam, until it is purged of all its Filth; so we must daily be casting out some∣what or other which is amiss; ever busie in the work of our Reformation; ever mending, and purging, and purifying our selves. Seeing 'tis said by S. John,1 Joh. 3. 3. that he who hath this hope in him, purifieth himself even as God is pure. We must not content our selves (for shame) with a stunted Piety, with the Reproach of being Dwarfs in the School of Christ; But grow in Grace (as the Apostle speaks:) Nor must we ever leave growing, until we come to a perfect man. And thus to Peace we are to add Purifi∣cation. For they are not joyn'd with a Dis∣junctive, (it is not follow Peace or Holiness) as if the one were sufficient without the other; But These Ʋnitedly are the things, which must be prosecuted, and follow'd, with Zeal, and Fervour. § 6. And then in the fourth place, there is great Reason for it. Because if either of these is wanting, , No man living shall see the Lord. Let his Parts, or Acquisitions, be what they can be; Let his Principles, or his Party, let his Person, or Profession, be what
they will; Let him be born of Godly Parents, let him be carefully brought up within the Bo∣som of the Church, let him be Papist, or Puritan, or in the middle of each Extreme, A sober Pro∣testant; let his pretensions be what they will to Regeneration, or Election; yet unless he follows Peace, and Peace with All Men, and Purifica∣tion as well as Peace, and unless he follows Both with Faith and Patience unto the End, He is a Man of impurer Eyes, then can ever be admitted to see the Lord. § 8. Thus We see what is meant by peace and holiness, and as well for what reason, as after what sort we must follow both. There are three other Things which will deserve an Explication, but That will best of all be made by way of An∣swer to three Objections. For a Conquering Truth is much more glorious, than a Truth un∣examin'd, or unattempted with opposition. § 9. First it may easily be doubted, whether 'tis Possible, or Safe, to have Peace with All men. For some are such Enemies unto Peace, that when we speak to them thereof, they make them ready to Battle; and Peace with such does seem impossi∣ble. And Impossibilium nulla est obligatio. It cannot be necessary to do, what is Impossible to be done. Others are always at war with God by
their Impieties,Rom. 1. 30. they are , Inven∣tors of evil Things; nay , Haters of God; and Peace with such does seem unsafe. For may we be at Peace with them, who will not be at Peace with God? These are They that in Scripture are call'd The World. And know ye not (saith S. James) that the Friendship of the world is Enmity with God?Jam. 4. 4. These are they that in Scripture are call'd the Wicked. And there is no Peace saith my God to the wicked. (Isa. 57. 21.) Which though spoken in another, may yet be apply'd in this sense also. When men are scandalously wicked,2 Joh. 11. an Apostle forbids us to eat or drink with them; or to receive them into our houses; or to bid them God-speed. And as this was the Precept of that Apostle, so accor∣ding unto this he fram'd his Practice. For with the Heretick Cerinthus he would not be in the same Bath. The Heathen Poet Horace was thus affected in his Vetabo sub iisdem sit trabibus, Fra∣gilemque meeum solvat phaselum. So said Mo∣ses to the Royalists touching the Rebels which then arose against Him and Aaron; Depart from the Tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs. Besides that as much as in us lies, we ought to be affected like God himself; and so by a necessary consequence we are to hate those
that hate Him, because they are such as are ha∣ted by Him. (For so the word  does very naturally import, although it is not ob∣serv'd in our English Bibles.) And therefore by this the Prophet David seeks to prove his Affection to God Almighty; Do not I hate them▪ O Lord, that hate Thee? yea I hate them right sore. Or (as the New Translation hath it) yea I hate them with a perfect hatred. Why then saith our Apostle, Follow Peace even with All men, not excepting the Worst of all? § 10. We see the Objection is very specious▪ But strike one Text against another, (as a flint against steel,) and there will leap from both to∣gether both Fire and Light too. The Answer to it is to be taken from Rom. 12. 18. and thence forwards unto the end. If it is possible, as much as in you lies, live peaceably with all men. He does not peremptorily say, live peaceably with all men at all adventure, let the Case be what it will. But , if it is possible, and , as much as in you lies. Whereby 'tis evi∣dently imply'd, that in diverse hard cases it is Impossible, it does not lie in our power to be at Peace with all the world. All that God requires of us, is to imploy our poor utmost in order to it. Whilst we hate the Malefactor, we must
have charity for the Man; so as to pity his be∣ing sick of habitual Sin, and supplicate God for his Amendment. Follow Peace we must with Them, who fly as fast as we can follow it. And to the end we may attain it, we must endeavour at least to win them by all good means. Such as is the not avenging our selves, but giving place unto wrath; feeding our Enemies when they are hungry, and when they are thirsty giving them Drink. For by so doing, we shall heap (saith the Apostle) Coals of Fire upon their Heads. Not that this can be spoken of any mischievous kind of charity; For it is meant of nothing else but the Fire of Love. And Love is fitly compar'd to Fire, because it has both a purging and melting Faculty in its Nature. The Metaphor is taken from the custom of the Foun∣der, who when he cannot melt his Metal by putting Coals of Fire under it, does heap some Fire upon it too. So we must heap the Fire of Love upon our Enemies Heads, not to consume them in their Impenitence, but to melt them into Repentance and change of Life. At once to pu∣rifie the Dross, and to mollifie the hardness, with which their hearts are affected towards us. But if at last our Malacticks are us'd in vain, we must then indeed proceed to the severer Me∣thods
of Charity, which is Charity never the less for being attended with severity. A Rod being ordain'd for the Back of Fools, who will not be wrought upon at all by the Spirit of Meekness. (1 Cor. 4. ult.) When men are the worse for being pardon'd, and even corrupt themselves with Goodness, we must not be so over-cruel, as to punish them with Impunity. For God in great Mercy hath given us Magistrates, to be his Ministers of wrath, and his Executers of vengeance. Nor are they liable unto any more noxious failing, than that of bearing the Sword in vain. Hereon is founded both the Lawful∣ness, and the Necessity also of War upon some Occasions, as being That without which Peace it self cannot be kept. The Law of Nature, and of Nations, That of Moses, and of Christ, and the best mens Examples permit it to us. As it were easie to evince, were This a Time or Place for it. And what I say of the Civil, is just as true of the Spiritual Sword. The highest Act of Christian charity that can be shown to the ob∣durate, is to deliver them up to Satan for the Destruction of the Flesh; because it is to this wholesom end, That their Spirits may be sav'd in the Day of the Lord Jesus. (1 Cor. 5. 5.) Thus we see what is meant by Peace with All
men; how far forth it is extended, and how it admits of a Limitation. § 11. Another Objection may be rais'd from the Pronoun [Which] because it is in the Greek, not , but , and so may seem to relate rather to Holiness, than to Peace. As if our Duty to∣wards God were a great Requisite to Salvation; but not our Duty towards our Neighbour. Where∣as in Truth the very discharge of our Duty to∣wards our Neighbour, is one of the great and main Duties we owe to God. Peace and Holi∣ness are such Twin-Sisters, as are not like the Tindaridae, or Twins of Leda, who (after the manner of two Buckets, whereof the one is go∣ing up, and the other down,) did take their Turns in Heaven, and Hell; But like the Twins of Hippocrates, or the two Friends in Valerius, who neither could live, nor die asunder. He that follows not Peace, does fly from Holiness; or follows it onely to drive it from him. Why then saith our Apostle, not , without which Things, nor , without which Peace, but , without which Holiness, no man living shall see the Lord? § 12. The Answer is, that the word , is of an aequivocal signification; as being equally of the Masculine, and Neuter Gender. But
some there are in the world of eminent Learn∣ing and Reputation, who taking it up by the wrong handle, have unhappily fastened upon a wrong signification, and so have set up Holiness to the prejudice of Peace. Meerly for want of consideration, That the Relative [Which] in this place is the Neuter Gender, and hath not any single word for its Antecedent, but the whole Clause going before. It is not in a divided sense, , without which Holiness, but in sensu composito, , without which Following of Peace and Holiness united. Whereby we are given to un∣derstand, That there cannot be such a Thing as a Godly Rebel, or Holy Boutifeu, because the Subject excludes the Adjunct. To say that such or such a Man is a most conscionable Schis∣matick, or a religious exciter unto Sedition, (whilst he fights away his Conscience to win its Liberty, and sacrifices Peaces to pretended Holi∣ness,) is to affirm both Parts of a Contradiction. He that is of an unpeaceable, must needs be of an unholy Spirit. For as Peace without Holi∣ness is but Adherence unto a Faction; so Holi∣ness without Peace is but Hypocrisie. They that are so superstitious as to strain at Gnats, (such as the Authorized Rites of Cross and Surpliss,)
whilst they are also so prophane as to swallow Ca∣mels, (such as are the crying Sins of Schism, and Sacrilege,) cannot well be call'd Followers, but onely Persecuters of Peace, (and that in∣deed is one Sense of the word .) Nor can we say they are Possessors, but onely Personators of Holiness. I am not willing to be so rigid, and do heartily wish it were false to say, That they are really nothing else but the Apes of Sa∣tan; who is Then at his worst the Prince of Dark∣ness, when he transforms himself the most into an Angel of Light. So said our Saviour, and so S. Paul. And from both we may infer, That of all the Hypocrites in the world, the Devil himself is the most Demure; and by being such indeed, is the more a Devil. Thus we see what is meant by the Relative [Which] in this Place, and what use we are to make of its Ante∣cedent. § 13. But what may last of all be meant by seeing the Lord in this Text,Object. 3. that our Apostle should set it down as the greatest Recompence of Reward, to such as are Followers of Peace and Holiness? When Moses desired to see the Lord, and therefore earnestly pray'd that God would shew him his Glory;Exod. 33. 18. The very Mercy of God's Answer did consist in the Reason of his Denial.
Thou canst not see my Face;ver. 20. for there is no man shall see me and live. And therefore Gideon himself, although a mighty man of Valour, (as God himself is pleas'd to call him) a man as stout as the steel with which his Proverbial Sword was temper'd, was yet exceedingly a∣fraid,Judg. 6. 22. as soon as he perceiv'd he had seen an Angel of the Lord. And so it was with good reason that Manoah said unto his Wife,Judg. 13. 22. We shall surely Die, because we have seen God. And if these things are so, that we cannot see God, without the danger of sudden Death; It may seem a sad thing for a man to be a Follower of Peace and Holiness, because by that means he shall see the Lord. But § 14. The Answer to this is extreamly ob∣vious.Answer. It being no more than to distinguish betwixt the Eyes of our vile, and of our glori∣fied Bodies. If we behold him with the first, we shall find him indeed a consuming Fire. But when we shall see him with the second, we shall find him nothing less than a quickening Light. Here our Eyes are so carnal, that it very much hurts us to see the Sun, unless we see him in his Reflexion, or at least through the veil of some Diaphanous Body. And if the Brightness of the Sun is enough to strike the Beholder Blind;
How can we safely gaze on Him, to whom the Sun is but a Shadow? Yet after the Time of Re∣stitution, when what is sown in weakness shall be raised again in power; Then our Life will con∣sist in the sight of God. We then shall see him as he is, no longer darkly as in a Glass, but face to face; and that with infinite Pleasure, as well as Ease. And this alone is that Vision, which is alluded to in the Text. Without an earnest Prosecution of Peace and Holiness in conjunction, no one shall be qualified to live by seeing, what here he cannot see and live. None shall enter within the Veil, or be made a partaker of the Beatifick Vision. None shall wait on his Throne in whose presence is Life, and where there are Pleasures for evermore. § 15. Thus in the Suit of the Explication, we have (before we are aware) a full Division of the Text. And not so only, but also practical Re∣flections on all its parts. First, We have seen a single Act of great Mo∣ment. And Secondly, How 'tis fixt on a dou∣ble Object. The double Object is Peace and Ho∣liness, which, according to the Scope of the word , (shewing the Energie, and the Force of the single Act,) are to be Prosecuted and follow'd with Zeal and Fervour.
Next to the Act, and the Object, which are suf∣ficiently express'd, we have their absolute Ne∣cessity very significantly imply'd. For these are set as the Condition, on which alone we arrive at Bliss.Matth. 5. 8. It is for none to see God, but the pure in heart. And therefore this is a cogent Rea∣son, for the fastening of the Act on the Double Object. For the Intensiveness of the one, and the Extensiveness of the other. § 16. But now because it is impossible, that men should eagerly pursue their Christian Du∣ties, whilst they believe them to be needless, or gainless Things; Things which rob them of their happiness in this present World, and without which they may be happy in That to come: We must possess our selves more fully than we have hitherto done, not onely with the Nature of Peace and Holiness, but more especially (and in the first place) with their absolute Necessity to life aeternal; whereof unless we throughly convince our selves, we cannot hope (with any reason) to ingage our Resolutions to follow Both. § 17. First, For the word Peace, it is that that comprehends our whole Duty towards our Neighbour, and as well to our Enemies, as to our Friends. For how can we follow Peace
with All men in so earnest a manner as the word does import, unless we labour, by for∣giveness, to overcome evil with good, (Rom. 12. ult.) much more must we render unto every man his Due, Tribute to whom Tribute, Custom to whom Custom, Honour to whom Honour, Fear to whom Fear, (Rom. 13. 7.) and so by analogy of Proportion, Service to vvhom Service, Love to vvhom Love, no injury to vvhom no injury is due. (For every Injury is breach of Peace.) We must owe no man any thing, but to love one another, Rom. 13. 8. And therefore injure him vve must not, no not so much as in desire. This is to follow Peace indeed, when we do not one∣ly not give a Cause, but not so much as an occa∣sion of just offence. When we keep not onely our Hands, but even our Heads and our Hearts from picking and stealing. When we do not commit Adultery, no not so much as with our Eyes. When we do no Murther, no not so much as in our wishes. When we dishonour not our Parents (whether private or publick, Eccle∣siastical, or Civil,) not not so much as in our Wills. This is, as much as in us lies, to make an eager Prosecution of Peace with all men. Which comprehends our whole Obedience to the Se∣cond Table of the Law.
§. 18. Secondly, As Peace does grasp the whole Duty of Man to Man, so we may say also of Holiness, that 'tis the whole immediate Duty of Man to God. Which more especially con∣sisteth in these three Things:Vid. Catech. Card. Richi. In preserving our Loyalty, in exhibiting our Reverence, and last∣ly, in rendring our Active Service. The first, hath respect unto our Thoughts, the second, unto our Words, the third, unto our Actions. First, for Loyalty, That (we know) is a ver∣tue, by which a Servant does acknowledge no Master but his own, holds no Intelligence with his Enemies, admits no Rival in his Affections, but ever honours him, and owns him, and ad∣heres to him alone against all Pretenders. And This is that which is commanded in the two first Precepts of the Decalogue. Thou shalt have no God but me. Thou shalt not make any graven Images, to bow down to them, or worship them. This is holiness in Thought. Which however 'tis Necessary, is not enough; And therefore to this we must add our Reverence. That we know to be a vertue which is equally compounded of Love and Fear, and by which an Inferiour does speak with Awe, concerning any one above him whom he does honour or ad∣mire. And this is that which is commanded in
the third Precept of the Decalogue. Thou shalt not lift up the name of thy God in vain. Thou shalt not onely not use it falsly, but not so much as upon trivial and slight Occasions. This is holiness in Word. Which, however it is Ne∣cessary, is not enough neither. And therefore to this there must be added our active Service. That (we know) is an execution of what our Master gives us in charge. And (as an ac∣knowledgment of Supremacy, as well as of Main∣tenance, and Protection,) a setting aside our own business, that we may wholly attend upon our Master's. And this is that which is com∣manded in the fourth Precept of the Decalogue, Remember that you keep holy the Sabbath Day. Six days are allowed thee to do thine own busi∣ness; but the seventh is set apart, in the se∣venth thou shalt do no manner of Work. No manner of work which is thine own, but all manner of work which is thy Master's. Not onely acts of Sacrifice, (such as our Duties in the Church,) but works of Justice, and Mercy too. For these indeed are the things, in which especially consisteth the Sanctification of a Sab∣bath, and are call'd by our Saviour the weigh∣tier matters of the Law. This is holiness in action. And so we see the three things, where∣in
our holiness is to consist; which compre∣hends our whole obedience to the first Table of the Law. § 19. I have the rather been thus plain in shewing the Latitude and the Nature of these Grand Duties, that the exactness of our Know∣ledge may be our Directory to Practice. It being necessary to know what it is necessary to practise, Holiness towards God, and Peace with all men. For whilst we are told by our Apostle, that without these two, there will be no seeing of God, we are as good as assur'd by God himself, that These precisely are the Terms on which Salvation is to be had. Insomuch that if either of these is wanting, there's no escaping the Pains of Hell, nor any attaining the Joys of Heaven. And therefore after their Nature, I am to speak of their Necessity, their absolute Necessity to Life eternal. § 20. And first, Observe how other Scrip∣tures do hold conformity with This. Without these two, we cannot possibly make our Calling and Election sure. Not the first, For we have boldness to enter into the Holiest by the Blood of Jesus, that we may draw near with a pure Heart, having our Hearts sprinkled from an evil Con∣science. (Heb. 10. 19. 22.) Nor yet the second,
For God hath chosen us in his Son, that we should be Holy, and without Blame. (Eph. 1. 4.) Without these two, our Justification vvill be in vain. For God did therefore Reconcile us when we were Enemies in our Minds by wicked works, that he might present us Holy, and Ʋnblameable, and Ʋnreproveable in his sight. (Colos. 1. 22.) Without these two, vve lose the End, and so do frustrate the Work of our Redemption. For our Lord Jesus Christ gave himself for the Church, that he might present it unto himself a Glorious Church, that it should be Holy, and without Ble∣mish. (Eph. 5. 25. 27.) Without these two, vve lose the Benefit of the Rod, and do partake of That as Bastards, which is intended to us as Sons. For as vve are told by the Apostle, that if we are without chastisement, then are we Ba∣stards, and not Sons; so he presently adds, that God correcteth us for our profit, to make us Par∣takers of his Holiness. (Heb. 12. 10.) In a vvord, Without an earnest prosecution of Peace and Holiness Ʋnited, (for I have shewed that the one cannot subsist vvithout the other,) vve lose the Benefit of Grace, and so evacuate the Means of our Glorification. For we all with open face, behold as in a Glass, the Glory of the Lord, that we may be changed into the same Image, from
Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. (2 Cor. 3. 18.) § 21. Nor have vve onely store of Scripture, but Reason for it. For if Salvation vvere to be had by appearing Righteous unto men, The grea∣test Hypocrites would become the most glorious Saints. If by the stoutness of a Belief, or by a Hope without doubting, None would be happier than the presumptuous, and such as are carnally secure. If by the Latitude of a Knowledge, or by the Rectitude of Opinions, it would be better sure with none than the Lapsed Angels; who are as Knowing, and as Orthodox, as any meer man can be thought to be. Heaven would Then be a kind of Jayl, full of the guiltiest Malefactors. The Error of the Origenists would presently pass into a Truth, and the worst of Devils receive the Benefit of a Redemption. But no man's reason will yield to That. For whosoever does but be∣lieve there is a Heaven and a Hell, must grant that the one is for the Recompence of the Good, and the other for the Punishment of Evil Doers. Which shews the absolute Necessity of Peace and Holiness; being as 'twere the two Eyes, without which it is impossible to see the Lord. § 22. But here withall we are to take an especial Care, that we do not divide the consi∣deration
of their Nature from the consideration f their Necessity; but still consider what it is wherein our holiness is to consist, as well as what it is which depends upon it. For through the want of this Caution, the empty Picture of Ho∣liness is oft mistaken for the Life; there are that think themselves Holy, when indeed they are Hypocritical, and many hope to be sav'd for their being Cheats. There were Professors a∣mongst the Jews, who were indeed very punc∣tual in the worship of God, and thence conclu∣ded they were The Godly; but 'twas a worship which consisted in the outward washing of Cups and Platters, in external Rites and legal Cere∣monies, (which were but shadows of things to come,) in spreading forth their hands, and ma∣king Prayers for a pretense, in fasting often to ap∣pear Righteous unto men, in keeping Sabbaths and new Moons, in building the Tombs of the Prophets, and adorning the Sepulchers of the righteous; when all the while they neglected the weightier matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith. They did so pull the Motes out of other mens Eyes, as not at all to see the Beams in their own. They did so strain at Gnats, as to swallow Camels; for they devou∣red even Orphans and Widows Houses, (Camels
Those with a witness) and were partakers with their Fathers in the blood of the Prophets, and so were far from being Followers of Peace and Holiness, unless as Worldlings follow their Traf∣fick for filthy Lucre; dealing as Hucksters in Religion, and Trading in Godliness, as 'tis an Instrument onely of Gain. For they were call'd by our Saviour, (even then when at the Top of their painted holiness,) not onely Serpents, and Vipers, but Brands of Hell too, such as could not escape Damnation: (Matth. 23. 33.) Nor are there wanting amongst us Christians, who are religiously carefull to sprinkle themselves with holy-water, to say a chapletfull of Ave Maries, to visit the Sepulchers of the Saints, to cross their Foreheads and their Breasts, and to salute ye every Morning in nomine Domini. Nay some there are amongst us Protestants (for 'tis fit we should be just in our Observations,) who place a great deal of vertue in an exact coming to Church, in daily reading so many Chapters, in lifting up to heaven both hands and eyes, in walking softly, and looking sadly, and hanging down the head now and then like a Bull-rush; and so we may say they have attain'd to an hand∣som Outside of Religion, that they are well∣fashion'd Christians, as addressing themselves
to God with a Civil Carriage, (such as well behav'd Enemies do seldom fail of,) But so far from being Followers of Peace and Holiness, that they want the very Body, much more the Soul of Christianity, whilst they will rather sow the Seeds of the most execrable Rebellion, than com∣ply vvith Superiours in things Indifferent, vvhich cannot but be lawfull, because Indiffe∣rent; and not onely lawfull, but binding too, as soon as the signature of Authority is stamp'd upon Them. Do These men think there is a God, or a Devil, a Corruption of the Body, or Immortality of the Soul, an Hour of Death, or a Day of Judgment, vvho vvill rather break Peace vvith all their Governours, than submit to the use of a Publick Liturgy, vvhich is not onely lawfull, but transcendently good, so long as establish'd by Law and Canon? I vvish that all sorts of men vvho are immediately concerned in vvhat I say, vvould but take this obvious Truth into their serious Consideration; That as there vvere Things under the Law, (such as the Rite of Circumcision, and Forbearing Swines Flesh,) vvhich (however commanded by God himself,) vvere not commanded for being Good, but vvere Therefore onely good, because com∣manded; so things Indifferent under the Gospel,
though they are not commanded for being Ne∣cessary, do yet become Necessary by being com∣manded; and are mediately commanded by God himself, as far as commanded by That Authority, which God hath commanded us to obey. From whence it follows unavoidably, That what may lawfully be done, before commanded; as soon as commanded, cannot lawfully be omitted. For Rebellion against the Second Table, is as bad as Rebellion against the First. And so they can∣not be followers of Peace, or Holiness, who in a meer pretense of Holiness do hinder Peace. An hearty Follower of Peace, willRom. 14. 19. follow the Things that make for Peace. He will not be so much as a Non-conformist; but press with earnestness after Ʋnity, by Ʋniformity in the Church. And if his Conscience hath any Scruples,. Clem. Rom. ad Corinth. Ed. Jun p. 69. arising meer∣ly from the weakness, not from the wilfulness of the man, he will infinitely rather forsake his City, or his Country, than stay in either to its Disturbance. § 23. Such was the pious Exhortation of Clemens Romanus to the Corinthians, which he also made good by his own Example. Who (says he) is there among you of tender Bowels, and Generosity? let him sacrifice (if he is such) his private Interest to the publick. And say,
If I am either the Author or the Fautor of any Difference, I divest my self of All the Wealth and Honour which I injoy, and inflict upon my self, a most gratefull Exile. Now that S. Clemens made good his Exhortation by his Example, I am induced to affirm from this particular Con∣sideration,—. Epiphan. ad∣vers. Car∣pocr. l. 1. Tom. 2. p. 107. That I can find no better way to re∣concile the several Authors who will have Cle∣mens to be the Second and the Fourth Bishop of Rome, than by saying with Epiphanius, (till we can find a better reason,) That Clemens laid down his Bishoprick during the Empire of Ti∣berius, and took it up again in the Time of Nero. The first of which he did freely, and the second by compulsion; but Both in order to the Ʋnity and Peace of Christians. Such was also the publick Spirit of the renowned, &c. Gregor. Pres∣byt. in Vitâ Nazianz. prope finem. Gregory Nazianzen, who gladly threw the Archbishop∣rick of Canstantinople behind his Back, for the composing of the strife that arose about it. God forbid (said he at parting, to all the Prelates there met in the General Council,) that we vvhose Office 'tis to teach and to bring Peace to others, should scandalously break it amongst our selves. Rather let Me forsake my Throne, and be cast out of the City, than not contribute all I can to the publick Peace. .
. Chrysost. in cap. 4. Epist. ad Ephes. Ho∣mil. XI. sub∣finem. Like to this spake S. Chrysostom in one of his Homilies to the People. That if He were thought the Cause or the Occasion of their Divisions, he would recede from his Arch-Bishoprick, and be gon whither they pleas'd; vvould suffer any thing rather than Schism, which he protested he thought a Sin as great and damning even as Heresie; and which rather than administer occasion to, he would strip himself of the Rich and Splendid Preferment which he possess'd. A Charity like That of the Prophet Jonas, who for the quieting of the Tempest, chose to be cast into the Sea: And to preserve a whole Ship, was easily content with a private Ruin. Which Example of S. Chrysostom and other Fathers more Primitive, every honest man will follow in these our Days, if he is ear∣nestly a follower of Peace and Holiness. And this is one of the chiefest Touchstones, where∣by to difference a weak from a wilfull Brother. They who do not , pursue with eagerness the Things which do make for Peace, do not serve God solidly in the Duties of the First and the Second Table, in Piety and Pro∣bity, in Godliness and Honesty, in loving God
with all their Hearts, which is to serve him in Holiness, and their Neighbour as themselves, which is to follow Peace with all men; and so they want the two Hinges, on which the Door of Salvation does chiefly turn, and where∣upon does clearly hang All the Law and the Prophets. § 24. I cannot follow Peace enough, in the Discourse I am upon for the following of it, till I observe how the Prosperity does most especially depend on the Peace of Christians; and also say by what means, as well as by whose Instru∣mentality, we may attain to so much Peace and good Agreement amongst our selves, as may re∣deem some of the Credit which we cannot but have lost by our foul Divisions. There being no greater Stumbling-block, either to Those that are without, or within the Church, than the Multitude of the Sects which are seen amongst us. For whilst 'tis taken by them for granted, (and also confessed by our selves,) that True Religion can be but one; 'tis natural for them to infer, That wheresoever there is Truth, there must be Ʋnity; at least in men of the same Pro∣fession. Whereupon whilst they observe, how the Professors of Christianity do stand divided amongst themselves, and that in point of Opinion,
as well as Practice, they easily slide into a Jea∣lousie, touching the Tenor and the Truth of the whole Profession. Now the way to make Peace, and remove the Scandal, is not to conquer them into orthodoxy by dint of Argument alone; (though That indeed is one of our fittest Wea∣pons;) as vvell because the greater part have not light enough to see a victorious Truth, as because, if they have, they are not humble e∣nough to own they have liv'd in Errour. No, the hopefullest way left, (for ought I am able to apprehend,) is not to mention Those Doc∣trines, vvherein we find by Experience we al∣ways differ; and to insist on those alone, where∣in we find by Experience we all agree. A thing vvhich cannot be brought about by all the Sub∣jects put together, but perhaps with ease enough by the Kings of Christendom; as vvell because they are but few, and therefore the fitter to de∣termin, as because they are Supreme, and of Power to execute. § 25. For it happily falls out, through the Evidence of Truth, and the good Providence of God, That though we differ in Superstructures, yet we agree in the Foundation, and Fundamen∣tals of Christianity. Which Fundamentals, as they areRerum ab∣solutè neces∣sariarum ad salutem, non magnum esse numerum. Re Jacobus arbitratur in suâ Respons. ad tertiam Observat. Perronii Car∣dinalis. Few, and therefore easie to be remem∣ber'd,
so are they also veryEt ferè ex aequo omnibus probantur qui se Christianes dici postulant. Id. ibid. Plain, and there∣fore easily understood; and that by all sorts of People, who are not flatly Fools, or Mad-men. As the wittiest or the most learned cannot need to know more, so the most simple and illiterate cannot easily know less, than what it is to fear God, and to keep his Commandments, which yet does grasp the whole Duty of Man as Man. A∣gain, it is the whole Duty of Man as Christian, to have a practical Knowledge of Jesus Christ, and him Crucified. And as the wisest man li∣ving needs not know any thing more, so the most learned of the Apostles would not know any thing else. Another Summary of Religion, (as to the practical part of it, which is the main,) we have express'd in Three words, both from a Prophet, and an Apostle. A Summary so short, and yet so copious, that as a man the most un∣skilfull cannot easily know less, so the most lear∣ned and subtil Doctor is not bound to practise more, than to do Justice, and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with his God; or to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World. § 26. Now if 'tis granted and agreed by every Sort of Real Christians, That the Creed and the Commandments are comprehensive of the All that is Fundamental, or of Necessity in Re∣ligion,
for Faith, and Practice; and if All un∣der Authority will but allow it to be the privi∣lege of such as are placed in Authority, to judge of the Decency and the Order which S. Paul in the general, and every Nation in particular thinks it a duty to observe in the publick Wor∣ship; (to wit, the Place, and the Time, and the Manner of its performance, which being but Accidents, or Adjuncts, or Externals of Reli∣gion, should not be differ'd about by Them who fully agree in its Essentials;) It will be difficult to imagin, how the Divisions and Se∣parations which are so many, and so wide as we see they are, can be able to escape a most hap∣py Closure. A thing which the Preachers can but press, and the best of the People can but pray for, but the Rulers of the Earth can easily bring into Effect too, if their Endeavours shall be as hearty, as their Authority is divine, and their Power cogent. Which how can they possi∣bly imploy unto a better end or use, than is the binding up the Wounds of a bleeding Saviour, who owns himself to be the Head of That mangl'd Body, whereof the greatest men on Earth are but lofty Members? Now the better to prevail with men of all Ranks, both with Them who are in Authority, and with Them who live un∣der
it, I would present but Two things to their respective Considerations; First, That they who are in Authority ought not to urge the Ac∣cidentals and Externals in Religion, with as much vehemence as they do the Essentials of it; norEcclesia Romana mul∣ta hodie ob∣servat ceu  neces∣saria, quae ve∣tus Ecclesia vix nôrat, certè non ita usurpabat, tanquam pla∣nè essent Ne∣cessaria. Is. Casaub. E∣pist. 710. p. 912. create too many Necessities in the use of things Indifferent, where God himself has crea∣ted none. Next, That the people under Autho∣rity ought not to lessen their Obedience to God in Man, by still pretending their obligation of obeying God rather than Man. An Axiom True indeed at all Times, but yet at those times impertinent, and urged quite out of Season, when God does choose to be obey'd by our obedience to his Vicegerents. Who, if they have any right at all to make positive Laws, must in∣evitably make them of Things Indifferent. § 27. I press the former consideration, with due submission to Authority, and in behalf, (not of wilfull, but) of truly-weak Brethren, be∣cause I conceive the Laws of Men can reach no farther than the Objects of outward Sense; and therefore cannot punish Avarice, Pride, or Malice, though they can and do Invasion, Theft, and Murther; Nor wrong Opinions in Religion, whilst they quietly lye sleeping, or disturb no∣thing more than their Owner's Minds; but
onely as breaking forth of their Mouths, and at last running out at their fingers ends. I know the Sword is apt to terrifie, but not in∣struct; to change a Sectary's Confession, but not his Creed; and therefore the Maladies of the Spirit are to be Spiritually dealt with, to work their Cure. Not by the Gibbet, or the Jayl, but by the force of sound Doctrine, and argumen∣tative Conversation. A man who wanders out of his way for want of light onely, and not So∣briety, (overtaken, not with Drink, but with the Darkness of the Night,) deserves a Lan∣tern for his Direction, a great deal rather than a Rod. He would be thought a strange Orga∣nist who should not scruple to break his Pipes as oft as he finds them out of Tune. Nor could our Magistrates think kindly of God himself, should he recall them with a Thunderbolt, as fast as he sees them going astray. § 28. And as for such reasons as These I press the First Consideration, so I discern as great reasons, (and such as make as much for Peace) to resume the Second. For though Ce∣remonies and Rites are onely Accidents in Reli∣gion, yet Obedience to Authority cannot but pass for an Essential. Because whatever God commands us by his Moses and his Aaron, his
Zerubbabel and his Jeshua, his anointed Lieu∣tenants, both King and Priest, he does as really and as truly, and as authoritatively command us, as what he commands us by a Voice, or an Hand from Heaven. And seeing the same God that saith, Thou shalt not worship a Graven Image, does also say at the same time, as well as in the same Decalogue, Honour thy Father and thy Mother, (whether private or publick, Eccle∣siastical, or Civil,) It is by consequence as Immediate a Sin against God, to shew a con∣tempt of That Authority which God hath com∣manded us to obey, as 'tis to worship a graven Image, or to take God's Name in vain. § 29. Now might I speak without Censure, even by speaking with submission to all Supe∣riours, (as well as to others of more Research and better Discretion than my self,) I would adventure to affirm it as the Conclusion of the whole matter, That when Peace cannot be had by such a reciprocal Self-denial as I have now pleaded for, in Them that are vested with Au∣thority, and in Them that live under it; by Compassion in the former, and by Compliance in the later; by Condescension in the one, and by Submission in the other; but each will have his whole Will, and not admit of a Composition;
nothing but Power Irresistible can succour such as make Laws, against the Violence and In∣cursions of such as are stouter than to Obey them. Nor will a wise man expect to have pro∣tection under the Laws and the Makers of them, any longer than they Both shall be so pro∣tected. § 30. But I return to that Point,The Appli∣cation. from which I have made a very pertinent, because a profita∣ble Digression; nor yet a Digression from my Text, but from the Thread of my Discourse touching the Nature, and the Necessity of Peace and Holiness. Which being both of such Im∣portance, as that our Happiness does depend upon the earnestness of our Pursuit, How can we choose but be perswaded to do a thing which is so Natural, as that a man would think it should be hard not to do it? For find we any thing more Natural, than to be Lovers of our selves, and so to covet those things which we believe to be the most for our own Advantage? A little Rhetorick (one would think) should be suffi∣cient to perswade us to choose our Interest, and so to follow even with earnestness the necessary means of our being Happy. Be we never so illi∣terate, or be we never so perverse, yet through the little which hath been spoken of Peace and
Holiness, (whether as separate, or in conjun∣ction,) we cannot be ignorant of their Nature, or unconvinc'd of their Necessity. § 31. If then in respect of their Common Nature, They are as 'twere the two Armes, which do imbrace the whole Decalogue or Ten Com∣mandments of the Law; we must never flatter our selves that we are Christians good enough, until we find our Obedience to be impartial; that is, as well to the first as to the second Table, and no less to the second than to the first. Nor may we ever give our selves Rest, until we See we have attain'd to this Comparative perfection; I mean a singleness of Heart, and a love of obe∣dience without reserve. Our respect (like that of the Psalmist) must be to All God's Command∣ments, and we must study to live a peaceable and quiet life in All Godliness and Honesty, (1 Tim. 2. 2.) We must not be kinder or more indulgent to one Commandment than to another, (whether byass'd by Custom, or Education;) but rather keep our selves in Awe by chewing on That of the Apostle, Whosoever offends in one point is guilty of All. Jam. 2. 10. Thus we must argue from the Nature of Peace and Holiness. And, after a manner not unlike, we ought to argue from their Necessity.
For if in respect of their Necessity, they are as 'twere the two Hinges, upon which the very Door of Salvation turns; or (if you please) the Two Wings (as S.Bernard in Serm. 4. de Oratione & Jejunio. p. 113. Bernard calls them) wherewith the Soul of a Christian soar's up to Heaven; Lord! how nearly does it concern us, to follow them both as is here requir'd? and to pass the whole Time of our sojourning here in fear? What manner of men ought we to be in the future Course of our Conversation? To follow Holiness and Peace, concerns us as much as Salvation comes to; that is, as much as our Souls are Worth. Fail of these if we dare, un∣less we are so stout, that we dare be damn'd. But yet how many of our Fiduciaries do miss of heaven, meerly by thinking they cannot miss it? because (forsooth) to the Regenerate 'tis a Thing perfectly unavoidable? And what num∣bers of Solifidians do make it difficult to be sav'd, by making it easier than God will have it? by thinking Salvation is to be had at a cheaper Rate, than that of following Peace and Holiness? Now can there be any thing more adviseable, than that other mens mischiefs should keep us safe? and we receive the whole benefit without the least danger of their unhappiness? Mark well the reason which here is urg'd for
the fixing of the Act on the double Object. (I shall but paraphrase the Text in a broader Eng∣lish,) Follow Peace and Holiness, if for no other reason, at least for This, because ye are happy, if ye doe; and damn'd for ever, if ye do not. Less than This we must not preach, and more than this we need not learn. But if This of it self cannot find sufficient Place in our Consideration, yet if we have any the least respect to our Secular Interest and Advantage, as we desire to be free from the Charge and Costliness of Sin, and to thrive by God's Blessing upon All we set our hearts and our hands unto; or if we have any the least respect to our own good Name, and Reputa∣tion, as we desire to leave behind us a fair Re∣port, and to be honourably mention'd by them that dwell round about us; or if we have any the least respect to our inward Quiet and Tran∣quillity, as we desire to have the Peace of a clean∣sed Conscience, which is in Solomon's Accompt a Continual Feast; or if all these together can∣not ingage our Resolutions, yet if to these we add. That which before was hinted, If we have any the least respect to the Righteous Judge of all the World; as we desire to escape from the
Wrath to come, and to enter with an Euge, in∣to the Joy of our Lord, Let us think of these Things when the Sermon's ended. And the God of Peace and Holiness sanctifie us throughly; That the whole of every one of us, both Body, Soul, and Spirit, may be kept blameless unto the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. To Him be Glory for ever and ever. Amen.
OF ABSTAINING FROM ALL APPEARANCE OF EVIL. 1 THESS. 5. 22. Abstain from all Appearance of evil. § 1. IT was the Fancy of a wise, and an ho∣nest Heathen, that all a rational man's Duty might be express'd in two words, , Bear, and Forbear; the first imply∣ing Patience under the evil of Affliction, the se∣cond Abstinence from the evil of Sin. Now in this Precept of our Apostle, we have one of the two Hinges, on which does hang the whole Duty
of man as man. For whatsoever is a man's Duty may be referr'd to two Heads, His Abstain∣ing from evil, and his doing that which is Good. Nay forasmuch as 'tis impossible to abstain from all evil and from all Appearance of it, without the doing of what is Good, and persevering unto the end too; (because the want of Perseverance is Simply evil, and cannot stand with that Ab∣stinence which is from all the very face or Ap∣pearance of it,) I shall not sure be too profuse in Speaking the pithiness of my Text, if I shall say 'tis comprehensive of the whole Duty of a Christian. For if we abstain from unbelief and misbelief of Christ's Gospel, and from all disobedience to Christ's commands, and from the scandalous Appearance both of the one and of the other; we do but barely do as much as my Text requires, and the God whom we serve can exact no more. § 2. In the Discussion of the Words, there are These things to be consider'd. First, The Nature of the Act, which is very Good; it is , Abstain. Next, the Qua∣lity of the Object, and that is evil; it is , Abstain from evil. Thirdly, the very great extent both of the Act and of the Object; it is , abstain from all evil. And
then because the word  is of a double signi∣fication, importing equally the Species, and the Appearance of any Object, here is therefore re∣quir'd a double Abstinence; one from all the kinds of evil, and another from all the occa∣sions of it. That is required as the End, and This as the Medium conducing to it. We must abstain from the Occasions and Opportunities of evil, that so we may be the better able to abstain from the Species and Presence of it. But first of all to the end that our very Absti∣nence may not be Evil, even then when it makes the most goodly shew; we must abstain from the evil of seeming onely to be abstemious; that is to say, from the evil, of being abstemious in Hypocrisie. For the World is too full of those Modern Pharisees, who often violate the Text by its Authority; and so insist upon the Letter, in opposition to the Scope, and the Tenor of it, that they rebell against the Precept by their obedience; and offer violence to the Law in its own defence. For (say They within themselves) it is not said by the Apostle, Abstain from all Evil, but from all Appearance of it; as if he meant not so much to forbid the Sin, as the Scandalous manner of its commission. As if he had thought with Them of Sparta, That the abo∣minable
Thing is not to steal, but to be caught; not the Irregularity, but Notoriety of the Fact. And as if This were either the whole, or the prime Importance of the Text, you shall have many So abstain from all Appearance of evil, as to satisfie themselves in the Injoyment of the evil, because they abstain from the bare Appea∣rance. § 3. Thus the Adulteress in the Proverbs may be said to have abstain'd from the Appea∣rance of evil, because she wiped her Mouth, and look'd demurely, and said that She had done no wickedness. (Prov. 30. 20.) What was want∣ing to her in chastity, She endeavour'd to sup∣ply by the care and caution wherewith She sin'd. As if the Rule were to be taken in this Sense also, De non apparentibus & non existentibus eadem est ratio. I have done no wickedness, because it does not appear that I have done it. My way of Sin has been as close, and as indiscernable, as the way of an Eagle in the Air, or the way of a Ship in the midst of the Sea. (v. 19.) And if there is either no God at all, or else a God that hath no omniscience, or that doth not imploy it on trivial objects, I have abstained from all evil, because from all Appearance of it. Thus the Pharisees of old may be said to have
abstain'd from the Appearance of evil, because however they were guilty of eating up Orphans and Widows houses, yet they did it so devoutly, by their fasting twice a week, and their long Prayers for a pretense, that notwithstanding they were vile in the sight of God, our Saviour tells us,Matth. 23. 28. they appear'd Righteous unto men. And how was that, but by abstaining from the Appea∣rance at least of all unrighteousness? They did Noctem peccatis, & Fraudibus addere Nubem; that is, they Sinn'd out of sight as much as might be; They were circumspect and wary in all their wickedness. If any covetousness or cruelty of more than ordinary size was to be committed, they presently cover'd it with a Corban, and were Deceivers of men in the name of God. Thus the Samaritans heretofore may be said to have abstain'd from the Appearance of evil; because how sinfull soever they were Themselves, they did yet make a Conscience of coming near unto a Sinner. Every Jew was thought sick of a noli me tangere, and was accordingly kept off with a Ne attingas. Stand by thy self, come not near to me, for I am holier than Thou, (Isa. 65. 2, 3, 5.) And thus the rigidest. Ignat. in Ep. ad Magne∣sios. Professors of Grace
and Godliness here at home, have a Conscience so callous, as to suffer them to rebell against their Governours; but yet so delicate, as not to permit them to obey. A Conscience so wide, as to swallow Camels; but yet so streight, as to strein at Gnats. A Conscience so tough, as to bear a Schism; and yet so tender, as to scruple at a Ceremony. They are not Sabbath-breakers, or Swearers, (for those are Sins of no Profit,) nor are they ordinarily drunk with excess of Wine; (for That is both a disgracefull and cost∣ly sin;) but they are Serious and Demure in all their projects, and seek the ruin of a Church in as great Sobriety,M. Catonis verbum est, ad everten∣dam Remp. sobrium ac∣cessisse. Sue∣ton. as Julius Caesar did that of a Commonwealth; Thus affecting to abstain from all Appearance of evil, when they have nothing in them of Good, but in Appearance. Insomuch as I may say, without breach of Charity, that since theAtrociùs sub sancti no∣minis Profes∣sione pecca∣tur. Salv. de Providen. c. 7. Magis dam∣nabilis est ma∣litia, quam Titulus boni∣tatis accusat; & reatus im∣pii est pium Nomen. Id. c. 11. word Godliness was usurp'd to sup∣plant the Thing, a greater Improvement hath been made in the Trade of Knavery and Deceipt, than had been ever known before in any less pre∣tending Times. § 4. This must therefore be the Subject of our first and chief care, that we abuse not our selves, as well as others, by taking That to be Holiness, which is Hypocrisie; That we abstain
in sincerity from the Evil it self, and not from the Sole Appearance of it. Our Second care must be, that in the course of our Abstinence, we be not onely Sincere, but Impartial too. 'Tis not enough that we abstain from This or That single evil, to which perhaps we are not carried by any natural Inclination, or have contracted Averseness to; For it follows in the Text, , abstain from All evil. Our Third care must be, that in the manage∣ment of our Abstinence, we be wise and prudent, as well as impartial and sincere. Which is not onely a very laudable, but (in one respect at least) a very needfull Qualification. For we know 'tis very needfull that we be innocent as Doves; which we can very hardly be, unless we be wise also as Serpents. I mean so wise as to abstain from those Indifferent sorts of Good, which are Incentives, and Occasions, and Intro∣ductories to evil. This we learn from the word , as here 'tis taken by our Translators in its second signification. Abstain not onely from all the Sorts, but (over and above) from all the Appearances of evil. Not onely from the kinds, but Occasions of it. And these I intend shall be the Boundaries of my following Discourse.
§ 5. To shew the Goodness and the Necessity of the first particular of the Three, to wit, our Abstaining from what is evil, I cannot better take my Rise then from this pertinent observa∣tion; That even Abstinence in it self is a consi∣derable Vertue,Sueton. l 2. c. 72, 73, 77. although it be onely from Things Indifferent,Vopisc. in vi∣tâ Taciti Im∣per. p. 414. although it be but from Things, whereof we are permitted a free Injoyment. Au∣gustus Caesar in Suetonius,Xenophon in . lib. 5. p. 441. the Emperour Taci∣tus in Vopiscus,Athenaeus l. 2 c. 6. etiam l. 1. c. 8. the Phliasii in Xenophon, and the Abstemii in Athenaeus, have been deser∣vedly applauded for this one reason.Valer. Max. l. 4. c. 3. And as the Rechabites were commended by God Himself, for not departing from the Will of their Father Jonadab; so was it Jonadab's commendation,Jer. 35. 14. that he commanded his Sons to abstain from Wine, not at all for being evil, but rather dangerously good. Now that Absti∣nence is good, although it is not from things which are simply Evil, seems to be evident even from This (if from no other) reason,Hoc Sancti viri habent proprium▪ quòd ut sem∣per ab illici∣tis longè sint, à se plerum∣que etiam li∣cita abscin∣dunt. Greg. Mag. Dial. l. 4. c. 11. that it enables and prepares us for the great Duty of Self-denial. It is a practice of that Dominion we ought to have over our selves; a prudent Exercise of the Victory which both our Reasons and our Wills should still obtain over our Appe∣tites. For by denying unto our selves some
things lawfull and allow'd, we may attain to a facility of abstaining from the things that are most forbidden. § 6. And this alone would be enough, in case there were not (as there are) any other reasons, why The Church and State too prae∣scribe the Abstinences of Lent. For as the an∣nual observation of Lent it self is (in the Judg∣ment of S. Jerom) of Apostical Institution; so are its Abstinences from Flesh (though a thing Indifferent) no less injoyned in a Reli∣gious than in a Civil Consideration, if toge∣ther with the Quality and Condition of our Meals, we have regard unto the Temper and Measure of them. Nay by the help of a Distinction, our single Abstinence from the Quality may be in both considerations. For what Authority does command upon a civil Accompt onely, the Peo∣ple certainly must obey upon the Accompt of their Religion, if they do regulate their Reli∣gion by the express Word of God, which streight∣ly chargeth them to submit to every Ordinance of Man. (Meaning the Ordinances of Man, which are not opposite or cross to the Laws of God.) To abstract our Abstinence from our ob∣ligedness to obey, (and from the other great End which first I mention'd,) is to abstract at the
same instant the merit of vertue from our Absti∣nence.1 Cor. 8. 8. For Meat commendeth us not to God, (as saith S. Paul to the Corinthians; and every Creature of God is good,1 Tim. 4. 4. if received with Thanks∣giving, (saith He to Timothy:) And though the preference of Fish before the Meat of the Shambles, is so far innocent, and lawfull, as 'tis left to our Christian Liberty; yea so far necessary,Sunt deinde Media, quae quidem nec bona esse nos∣cuntur, nec mala, possunt tamen indif∣ferenter & benè pariter & malè vel prohiberi, vel juberi, sed ma∣lè nullatenus in his à Sub∣ditis obediri. Bernard. in Epist. 7. ad Adam Mo∣nachum. p. 1394. and binding, as 'tis commanded by that Authority which God hath commanded us to obey; yet, abstracted from the Precept of such Authority, it may be Wantonness in one, and in another, Superstition. For Meats are all of such Indifference, if antecedently consi∣der'd, and with the oeconomy of the Gospel, that as, if we1 Cor. 8. 8. eat Flesh, we are not the better, so if we eat none, we are not the worse. Nay a man, by eating Fish, may make provision for the Flesh; especially when he makes it to swim in Wine. He may by Both so fill his Belly, and so fulfill his Appetite,Ex his sunt, jejunare, vi∣gilare, lege∣re, &c. Idem ibidem. as that his Abstinence from Flesh may but conduce to his sensuality; and all his Lenten entertainment prove but a sacri∣fice to his Lust. The most voluptuousDe Philo∣xeno Cythe∣rio. Apicio, aliisque, con∣sule Athe∣naeum, l. 1. c. 6. Apo∣lausticks, in the Accompt of Athenaeus, be∣came infamous for nothing more, than their passionate Doatages upon Fish. Nor could the
very learned An∣thippus Co∣micus apud Athenaeum, l. 9. c. 15. p. 404. Cook, in the old Comoedian, pro∣vide the Amorous young men a more strong In∣centive. From whence it follows that to keep Lent, as 'tis a Time of Mortification, is not so carefully to abstain from the Kind and Quality of our Meals, as from the over-great Richness and Fulness of them. So that the due keeping of Lent, in point of eating and drinking, con∣sisteth wholly or chiefly in these two Things; to wit, our Abstinence from the kind, which is forbid by Man's Law; and our Abstinence from the measure, which is forbidden also by God's. Each of These is a Duty, however different they are in degree of Merit. For that the later is the greatest, and most important, may appear by the great Difference betwixt the reasons of the goodness which lies in Both. For our Ab∣stinence from Flesh, is onely good because com∣manded; whereas our Abstinence from evil, is onely commanded because 'tis good. There the goodness is accidental, but here 'tis natural. There 'tis nothing but the Consequent, here the Cause of the Commandment. There 'tis ca∣pable of ceasing by Dispensations even from Men; whereas here the matter of it is indispen∣sable even by God. § 7. This must therefore be our first and
our greatest Care, that we abstain from those things that are simply evil; and this in a double Opposition to two sorts of men, who divide a great part of the world between them; such as are Hypocrites on the Right hand, and Antihy∣pocrites on the Left. Touching the former of the two I shall say the less, the more I have spoken of them before, in my Introduction. Adding onely that They abstain from the Appearance of evil, as broken Tradesmen from the semblance or perfect Beg∣gary.. Gregor. Nys¦sen. de Pro∣fess. Christ. The nearer they are to the State of Bank∣rupts, they have their Artifices and Tricks where∣by to seem so much the Richer. Or as Anti∣pater had his outside all clad in Black, not be∣cause (as he pretended) it was the old Mace∣donian habit, but to conceal his whole Inside, as lin'd with Purple. We must not therefore follow Them, who cry aloud against the Sins they imbrace in silence, and abstain in such wise from all Appearance of evil, as to abstain from no evil but in Appearance. We must not so apprehend or mistake the Text, as if 'twere meant by S. Paul for an Exhortative to Hypo∣crisie; not so properly to abstain from the Evil it self, as from the shew, and shadow of it. No, the Text is to be held by a safer Handle; and
our Argument is to run thus, à minori ad majus. If 'tis our Duty to abstain from all Appearance of Evil, how much more is it our Duty, to abstain from all evil? The former Abstinence is a Ver∣tue, whensoever this later does either attend, or go before it; whereas for want of this later, the former Abstinence is a Sin. § 8. Yet not so great a Sin as Theirs, who in avoidance of Hypocrisie, do boldly rush into the greater, and worse extreme. Who being a∣sham'd of seeming piously and religiously ad∣dicted, (as a thing not becoming their Youth, or Quality,)Isa. 3. 9. do therefore proclaim their Sin as Sodom,2 Sam. 16. 22. and commit it (with Absolon) on the House Top. Not onely abstaining from all that's good, but from all Appearance of it. As if to be thought a godly man, were the greatest un∣happiness in the World, and therefore to be shun'd with the greatest Care. I shall exem∣plify what I say but in Three particulars. First, how many may we observe who easily enter into Duels, (and are asham'd not to do so) with such as speak to the Dishonour of a most despi∣cable Mistriss, and yet will stand unconcern'd, when more is done to the Reproach of their Master Christ? Men so stout, that they dare be damn'd; and yet so eminent for their cowar∣dize,
that they dare not be patient of putting up the least wrong. Men of such poor and such sordid Spirits, as to dread the very thoughts and the words of Men, however senseless of the hatred and wrath of God. Men of such strange Pusillanimity, that they dare not indure the Contempt of this World, which God himself is contemn'd by, and yet is silent. A downright speculative Atheist, who denies and derides the God that made him, or a practical Atheist who dares do both in his Conversation, may walk the streets very securely without a weapon; has never a challenge sent to him for having affron∣ted the Lord of Glory; who yet for any the least affront which he should dare to have done to an handsom Idol, had straight been summon'd into the Field, there to make satisfaction in Tears of Blood. Again, how many in our Pro∣testant Reformed World, do seem to take as great a Pride, and make as open a Profession of being eminent Apolausticks, as that voluptuous sort of Heathens,Eubulus in Amalthaeâ introducit Herculem Delitlarum vituperato∣rem. v. Is. Causab. in Athen. l. 2. c. 23. whom Eubulus the Greek Comoe∣dian does expose upon the Stage for their learned Surfeits? who laugh at Abstinence as a Foolery; and look on all Self denial as arrant Madness. (A thing proceeding from nothing better than the distemper'd Hypochondres.) Who having
learn'd the deep Science of Eating well, and being able to make a Treatment as becomes Cri∣ticks in Sensuality, are apt to put a greater va∣lue both on Themselves, and their Atchievement, than if they had taken the Town of Troy. Euripid. in Androma∣châ Mene∣laum intro∣ducit sic lo∣quentem. . Lastly, how many Antihypocrites, although Professors of Christianity, do vye with Ovid, and Messalina, the Emperour Proculus, and the rest of that heathen World,Cornelius Agrippa de vanit. scient. cap. 63. (for the recording of whose effronteries Cornelius Agrippa is to be blam'd,) in that they do not onely disclose the real Enormities which they have done, but also boast of more Debauches, than they ever had the appetite, or possibly the strength to be guilty of? Now he who so far hates hypocrisie, (which is a damnable abstaining from appearance onely all of Evil,) as to glory in his Impieties, and by consequence to abstain from the very appea∣rance also of good, (whereby he does not onely displease, but despise his Maker,) is as one fly∣ing from a Lion, when behold a Bear meets him; or as one leaning upon the Wall, and a Serpent bites him. (Amos 5. 19.) He is as one fallen, out of a Feaver into a Fire; and to be reckon'd, of the two, the more horrid Devil. § 9. In opposition to the first of the two Ex∣tremes,
we must make our first step to raise us Thus unto a Second. If Abstinence is so noble and so necessary a Duty, though from Those very things which are but dangerously Good, what then is Abstinence from the objects which are damnably Evil? To keep our selves far e∣nough from Such, we must carefully set before us King David's Method; when being to qua∣lifie himself for an Approach to God's Altar, he did not say he would wash his Face, but his Hands in Innocence. Besides it ought to be con∣sider'd that all the Commandments, saving two, having been negatively propos'd, imply the Bottom of all our Duties to lie in our Absti∣nence from evil. As being That, without which, even all our good Deeds will be done in vain; yea and the best of all our Works will be but handsome Abominations. For the highest and the most positive of all our Duties, are com∣prehended by S. Paul under these three Heads, our living soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World, Tit. 2. 12. But 'tis absolutely impossible that we should ever live soberly, un∣less by abstaining from all Excess; that we should ever live righteously, unless by abstaining from all Injustice; that we should ever live godly, unless by abstaining from all Prophaneness. It
is a vain thing for any, to think of loving and serving God, who does not first of all cease to injure his Neighbour and Himself too. Virtus est, vitium fugere; The very first of all Virtues is a man's Abstinence from Vice; & sapientia pri∣ma est, Stultitiâ caruisse.—The fear of the Lord, That is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding. Job. 28. 28. § 10. But however this is necessary, 'tis not enough, since we are far from being sure that this our Abstinence is sincere, unless by its be∣ing impartial too. For some of the worst of mankind may still abstain from some evils, al∣though it be but by the means of some occasional Averseness, and possibly too for want of a natu∣ral Inclination. 'Tis very far from being enough, that we have Tolerance in one kind, or Conti∣nence in another, which in Aristotle's Judgment are but a couple of Semivertues, (and yet 'twere well if most Christians would now attain to so good a Pitch;) no, nor is it quite enough that we have Temperance in them Both, however This is a complete and a perfect vertue. For this is onely to abstain from those grosser Evils, which do affect either the Touch or the Tast with Plea∣sure. That is to say, with such Pleasure, as is aequally common to Men with Brutes. No,
when our Parents were first commanded to ab∣stain from That Tree, which was inclos'd by God's Precept in the midst of the Garden, they were implicitly commanded to abstain from all evil. In as much as all the Branches of Sin and Wickedness, which from that time to this have defil'd our Nature, do owe their cursed Derivation to that one Stock. And by conse∣quence it concerns us to advance a step farther; to plead and pant after, and contend for such an Abstinence, as is not onely from This or That, (for then the very worst of us might soon be Christians good enough,) but from All sorts of evil without exception; and so to com∣ply with our Apostle in his important monosyl∣lable, by taking the object of our Abstinence with its unlimited universality. For (that we may pass from the first to the second Particular in the Text) it is — Abstain from All evil. § 11. I say from All, for these obvious, but usefull Reasons, which I shall not onely pro∣pose, but humbly submit to consideration. First, because He who is indulgent to any one sort of Evil, cannot say that there is one from which he does vertuously abstain; nor is he certain what
duration his partial Abstinence will be of. It being so easie for him to fall from one wicked∣ness to another, that wheresoever the cunning Serpent gets in his Head, he draws his whole Body in with the greater Ease. As if the con∣tagion that is in Vice were in proportion to the Links in the Chain of Virtue, our Indulgency to one is apt to draw the rest after.Ʋvaque con∣spectâ livo∣rem ducit ab uvâ. One rotten Action does as gladly infect another, as one pu∣trid Grape does communicate its venom to all the Cluster. And the reason is very clear, why He who gives himself the Liberty to feed intem∣perately on one Sin, is ipso facto become ob∣noxious unto the Surfeiting upon all; because he has not any Principle or Power within him, by force of which he can be sure to abstain from any. And the reason of that reason is just as clear too. For the same want of fear to offend his Maker, the same despight offer'd to Grace, and the same Callousness of Conscience, which either allows or betrays him to any one wilfull Sin, leaves him destitute and expos'd to the Power of All. So that if, by not committing, he seems at any time to abstain from this or that sort of Vice, 'tis not his Virtue, but his Luck. And if any thing is to be thank'd, (besides the re∣straining Mercy of God, who does often set his
Hook into the Wicked man's Nostrils,) he may thank his Stars for it; at least his Company, or his Custom, or the Laws of the Country wherein he lives, or at least the good hap of his Consti∣tution, as not sufficing him for some Sins, or not inclining him to others; and many times so strongly byass'd to darling obliquities on the left hand, as to be carried by the same Byass from other obliquities on the right. There being some sorts of evil so very opposite unto each other, (and inconsistent at the same instant,) that to abstain from one Extream, is not lauda∣ble in a Professor who is indulgent unto the other. 'Tis not thank-worthy in a Niggard, not to be guilty of Prodigality. Nor is it the Merit, but the necessity of an extremely great Coward, if he is not found guilty of too much Rashness. It being a sad kind of Virtue which a Man owes onely to Vice; as when he abstains from any one of two contrary evils, because he cannot commit them Both. § 12. Again, , Abstain from All evil, because the wilfull Transgression of any one of God's Commandments, makes us as liable to Judgment, (though not to so many degrees of Torment) as if we had broken every one. For what else can be the meaning of that
saying in S. James,Jam. 2. 10. that if a man keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all? He (for example) who abstains not from the Intemperance of the Tongue, (That enormous fleshly lust which is so regnant in these our days,) may be said to offend in one sole Point of Christianity; yet (like a little Col∣loquintida in a whole Pot of Broth) That of∣fending in one Point sheds such an Influence upon others, as to invalidate and evacuate his whole Religion. Jam. 1. 26. The reason of which is very evident, in that the same God that saith, Thou shalt not steal, or commit Adultery, does also say at the same Time, in the same Deca∣logue, and by the very same Authority, Thou shalt not take the Name of thy God in vain, nor bear false Witness against thy Neighbour. And the Breach of these Precepts, when it is wilfull or habitual, is as damnable in its nature as the Transgression of the former, and all the rest. For as the whole Nature of Treason against the Majesty of the King, does lie as really in the com∣passing or contriving of his Death, as in all the most bloody and ouvert Acts that can be nam'd; and any one of those Treasons is as capital as a Thousand; so the whole Nature of Rebellion against the Majesty of God, does lie as much in
the wilfull Breach of any one of his Commands, as in all together; and Damnation is the wages, as well of that one, as of all the rest. And as when a man is hang'd for committing Treason, it is cold comfort to him, that he is hang'd but for one Crime, and not for many; so 'twill but little, if at all, lessen the misery of the Damn'd, tat they were damn'd onely for Drunkenness, Schism, or Haeresie, or for another such habi∣tual and mortal sin, not for Murther, or Adul∣tery, which were not laid unto their charge; or rather for breaking the Fifth Commandment, than for transgressing the other Nine. And there∣fore since Impenitence is indispensably destruc∣tive, (though I know there is a greater and a lesser Damnation,) be it but in one, or in many evils, it must concern us to abstain with impartiality even from All. § 13. Again , Abstain from All Evil; as well from the least, as from the greatest; because our very least Sins do gather a Greatness to themselves, from the greatness of the Object we Sin against, and from the Great∣ness of the Means against which we Sin. (I mean our Prayers, and our Sacraments, and the frequency of our Sermons, by which who∣ever is not mended, is accidentally made worse.)
And because the least Sins are apt to lead into the greatest. Besides, Siracides said wisely (in this sense also,) He that despiseth small things shall perish by little and little. Ecclus. 19. 1. The least Sins therefore cannot possibly be so light, as that they may safely be slighted by us; because although what is venial can never lose its Distinction from what is mortal, yet 'tis worthily to be fear'd that a man may Sin mortally, by pleasing himself in his venial Sins; and by loving them more than the will of God. Nor are we drown'd with more comfort, by the Sea's stealing in through little crevices into our Ship, than by our Ship's being suddenly and at once cast into the Sea. Abstain we therefore even from all, the most diminutive Peccadillos, (as men of Latitudes in Practice do love to call them,) not from Evil onely in Deed, but in Word, and Thought too. For if Pythagoras had rather a man should throw out a. Pythag. Matth. 12. 36. Stone, than a word or two rashly and at a venture; yea, if of every idle word Men shall give an account in the day of Judgment, how much more of every evil one, when falseness and rancour are clea∣ving to it? And we read that evil Thoughts which proceed out of the Heart are especially the things that defile the Man. Matth. 15. 18, 19, 20.
A Truth discernable, as by other, so by this reason also, That many customary Sinners may be forcibly restrain'd from their evil Acti∣ons, who yet can never be restrain'd from their evil Thoughts too. For as Crows from Carrion are not forced to abstain by Satiety it self, but still abide upon the Place, as if they could ne∣ver fill their Eyes, though they have their Bel∣lies; so customary Sinners, when Age or Sick∣ness hath made them innocent as to their Actions, do love to think over the Sins they have not vi∣gour enough to act. They can no more cease from Sin which Custom has riveted in their Souls, than Flies inured to the Shambles are able to abstain from the smell of Meat. Now whether the Evil of our Thoughts be of Wilfulness, or In∣firmity, we are to exercise our selves in abstain∣ing from it. For we must actually abstain from all wilfull evil; and we must studiously abstain from all the evil of Infirmity, so as to hate, and to deplore, and to strive against it. This I say for our Humiliation; But I add for our Comfort too, that so long as we are striving with the utmost of our Ablility against the stream of hu∣man Frailties, we are not liable to Wrath, in case the violence of the Torrent prevail against us. Prevail against us (I mean,) so as in
spite of all our striving to have some residence, though not habitually to reign in our mortal Bodies. For when we strive against That from which we cannot so abstain, as to be every way sinless, Then we are reckon'd to abstain, so far forth as to be sincere. And though a Sinlesness is not, yet is a singleness or sincerity the in∣dispensable Requisite of a Christian. And in this sense at least we must abstain from all evil; as well from the least, as from the grea∣test. § 14. Lastly, , Abstain from all evil, although it shall not at all be sim∣ply, but accidentally such. Many hundreds of things there are, however reducible unto four or five Heads, which are not absolutely Evil, but yet are evil ex accidenti. And what is evil but accidentally, is simply Good. And so there are several good things, which though absolutely, and simply, and antecedently such, yet from The same, being consider'd in some Relations and Respects, it is a Christian man's Duty very carefully to abstain. And in consequence of This, Abstain from every good thing, which thy Conscience does condemn; and from every good thing, which thy Conscience doubts of; and from every good thing, by which thy Brother is
made to stumble, and to fall headlong into Sin; and from every good thing which is comparative∣ly evil, by being heedlesly preferr'd to what is very much better; and from every good Thing, which strongly administers an Occasion, and a Temptation unto evil. I say abstain from the first sort, because though there is nothing un∣clean in it self, (of all those Meats which are food for men,) yet to him that esteemeth any thing to be unclean, to Him (in that Errour) it is unclean. Rom. 14. 14. And abstain from the second sort, because he that doubteth is damn'd if he eat, in that he eateth not of Faith, for what∣soever is not of Faith is Sin. Rom. 14. 23. And abstain from the third sort, because though every kind of edable is simply Pure, (and so may lawfully be eaten,) yet it is evil for that man who eateth with offence. And there∣fore if thou hast Faith, and understandest thy Christian Liberty, make a private use of it be∣twixt God and thy self. For happy is He who con∣demneth not himself in that thing which he allow∣eth. Rom. 14. 20, 21, 22. Again, Abstain from the fourth sort, because God hath declared He will have Mercy rather than Sacrifice, Mat. 9. 13. And the saving of a Sheep on the Sabbath Day, rather than the resting from bodily labour.
(Mat. 12. 11.)Hos. 6. 6. and rather a being reconcil'd to an injur'd Brother, than bringing a Gift unto the Altar, (Mat. 5. 23. 24. Last of all let us abstain from the fifth sort of Objects, which are simply good enough, but accidentally evil, be∣cause of the Precept of our Apostle in the words of my Text; which, though it may seem to be a rigorous, is yet a mercifull Command. For 'tis easier, whilst we are innocent, to abstain from the guilt of any one act of Sin, than having yielded unto one, to forbear another. Absti∣nence from evil is nothing else but an Act of Fasting. And certainly He who cannot fast from the Approaches of Impiety, will much less fast from the Presence of it. If we cannot well abstain from conversing with the Occasions, how much less from the Act of a pleasant evil? or if not from the Act, how much less from the Ha∣bit? Aegrius ejicitur, quàm non admittitur Hostis. 'Tis very much easier not to admit, than to drive out an Enemy. Very much easier to prevent, than to cure a Leprosie. Which our Apostle well considering, was not onely of the Opinion, but made it the Rule of his Practice also, (in his whole Ninth Chapter of the First Epistle to the Corinthians,) that to keep far enough off from doing any thing unlawfull, he was to abstain
from many things which were lawfull too. Nor does he content himself here to say, Abstain from all Habits and Acts of Evil, but from all Appearance of it. And so I am faln upon the means whereby our Abstinence may be completed, the last Particular in the Division. , &c. Abstain from all Appearance of Evil. § 15. And to the end that we may do so, in every sense and acception the word will bear, let the Caveat be extended to these two Heads. First of all to those things, which, though not evil in themselves, yet to others, or to us, do appear to be so; Next to things, which, though not sinfull, (no not so much as in appearance,) do put upon us a kind of Byass, and Propensity to Sin. To the former I shall refer, whatsoever Things are lawfull, but yet uncomly, or inexpe∣dient. I shall refer unto the later, whatsoever Things are lawfull, but of dangerous consequence; not formally evil, but grosly evil in the effect. § 16. And first abstain from those things, which if not evil in themselves, yet to others, or to us, do appear to be so; and by consequence though they are lawfull, consider'd simply in their Natures, yet in certain conjunctures they cannot lawfully be done. As (for example) it
is1 Cor. 8. 4. 8. lawfull to eat of things, which either are or have been offer'd in Sacrifice unto Idols; which yet weVer. 9. cannot eat lawfully, if in the Presence of a Brother who hath either a condemning or doubting Conscience. We must beware that this our Liberty become not a Stumbling-block to them that are weak. And therefore He that had knowledge (in the Times of the Apostle,) was not in reason to sit at meat in the Idol's Temple,Ver. 10. for fear that he who had none should be imboldned to eat of things offer'd unto Idols, even against his over weak and erroneous Conscience. So that although not to abstain for another man's sake, when we need not for our own, cannot be said to be a Sin through any unlawfulness in the Object indulged to; yet 'tis a Breach of that Rule which was set by S. Paul for all to walk by, That no man put a Stumbling-block, or an occasion to fall, in his brother's way. Rom. 14. 13. (Which Rule cannot extend to those things Indifferent, which being such but antecedently, are consequentially Necessary, in as much as they are under the Obligation of a Command, and a Command from That Authority which God has commanded us to obey. And this Parenthesis being premis'd for the preventing of Mistakes, I proceed to give an Instance of the Case but
now mention'd. For) Thus the Liberty to fly, for the escaping of a shamefull and painfull Death, though very lawfull as to its nature, may be unlawfull, as to its use; in regard of many Circumstances wherewith the Case may be apparell'd. For first (however it is law∣full,) it may be highly inexpedient, as to the scandal it may give to our weaker Brethren; (concerning which I have spoken enough al∣ready;) And next, (however it is lawfull,) it may be scandalously indecent, as to the Gra∣vity of a man's Age, and the Dignity of his Cal∣ling. In each of which cases, That which is lawfull in it self, is notwithstanding not allow∣able in the Circumstances propos'd; because inconsistent with two main Virtues; to wit, with Charity in the first Instance, and with Pru∣dence in the second. An Example we have of Both in the renowned Eleazer, (2 Macc. 6.) Who being sentenced to the Torments for refu∣sing to eat of unlawfull Meats,Copiosiùs haec Narratio ha∣benda est a∣pud Jose∣phum, in Libello cui Titulus, . would not basely save his life, no not by eating such Meat as was lawfull for him. And for this his Resolution he gave two reasons. First, he argued from the Indecency, and again from the Danger of it. 'Twould be indecent to Himself, and as dan∣gerous to others; who straight would follow
his Example, as well of Cowardize, as of Cou∣rage, by whichsoever of the two he should chance to lead them. First, he would not bring flesh of his own Provision,2 Macc. 6. à v. 18. ad. v. 31. and make as if he did eat of what was commanded by the King, (as his old Friends at Court would fain have had him, v. 21.) because he was told by his Discretion, that 'twas not sutable to the honour of his reverend Gray-head; (v. 23.) and He would shew himself such as his Age required, (v. 27.) Again, He would not save his Life by such an appearance of Impiety, as the eating of what was lawfull in lieu of what was unlawfull, because he was prompted by his Charity, not to indanger many young Persons their being betray'd by that Artifice, to think that old Eleazer, when he was Fourscore years and Ten, had at last gone away to a strange Religion. (v. 24, 25. Where∣as 'twas very fit for Him, who was one of the Principal of the Scribes, (v. 18.) to leave a no∣table Example of Sincerity and Courage, and of Daringness to die for the Laws of God. (v. 28. and 31. Thus there are very many things, which though lawfull to us as Christians, are yet unseemly for us as Men; and do dishonour our Vocation, even then when they do not defile our Conscience. For how many Trades are there,
very lawfull in themselves, which yet by us of the Clergy cannot lawfully be driven? And therefore Abstinence from These is to be reckon'd as a Duty, at least to our Quality, and our Rank, if not precisely to our Religion. Abstain we therefore (as much as may be) from all that carries any appearance, or shew of Evil; And as from all that is Expedient, unless it appears to be lawfull too; so from all that is lawfull, but not expedient. § 17. Again,Sed sagitare magis simu∣lacra & pa∣bula Amoris, Atque alib studeat ani∣mi traducere motus. Lu∣cret. l. 4. de Remedio Amoris. Abstain from those things, which though not evil in themselves, are yet In∣centives, or Occasions, or Introductories to evil; and however not formally, yet effectively such. For as it is not onely said, Thou shalt not steal, but over and above Thou shalt not covet; so the way not to covet,Exod. 20. 17. is not to see, not to tast, not to touch such an Object, as is naturally apt to inchant the Senses.Mat. 5. 28. Our Saviour tells us of Adultery in the Heart. And the Apostle S. Pe∣ter,2 Pet. 2. 14. of Adultery in the Eye. And Moses pressing his Congregation to an effectual Abstinence from the Evil,Num. 16. 26. which Corah and others had newly done, said, Depart from the Tents of these wicked men, and Touch nothing of theirs. Depart from all suspected Persons, and Places too. For he that toucheth Pitch shall be defiled therewith.Ecclus. 13. 1.
AndCh. 3. v. 26. he that loves danger shall perish in it. Whatsoever is born of the Flesh is Flesh; (Joh. 3. 6.) Nor does the Wax with more Aptness take an Impression from the Seal, than the Flesh from the Bait of an ill Affection. Insomuch that some parts of the holy Scripture were (in the Times of Cassianus) not intrusted to the Ears of the younger Christians,Cassian. lib. 19. Col∣lat. §. 16. Ne noxiae Titillationis sti∣mulus excitaretur. He that hopes to be Safe whilst he converseth with Incentives to any Sin, is thought by Solomon as Irrational, as if he should walk on hot Coals, and hope his feet will not be burnt; or take fire into his Bosom, in a confidence that it will not consume his cloths. Prov. 7. 27, 28. NayCum foemi∣nâ semper esse, & non cognoscere foeminam, nonne plus est quàm mortuum sus∣citare? Quod minus est non potes, & quod majus est vis credam tibi? D. Bernard. Super Canti∣ca Serm. 65. p. 760. S. Bernard was of opi∣nion, That to be conversant with a Woman, and yet be innocent in converse, is a difficulter work than to raise the Dead. And then the Hebrew Wise men could not be righteous over∣much, when they prohibited all discourse betwixt Man and Woman, (excepting onely That of an Husband with a Wife,) both in regard of the Scandal, and Danger of it; the possible scan∣dal unto others, and actual Danger unto Them∣selves. § 18. How very nearly it does concern even the gravest, and the most safe, to abstain from
all Occasions and Opportunities of evil, may be collected from the Examples both ofNec res est dubia quam narro: quia penè tanti in eâ testes sunt, quanti ejus∣dem loci Ha∣bitatores. Quandam Sanctimonia∣lem secum permisit habi∣tare, certus de suâ ejus{que} con∣tinentiâ, An∣dreas Funda∣nae Civitatis Episcopus. Mox de suo habitaculo non solùm e∣andem Dei Famulam, sed omnem quo∣que foeminam illine expulit. Greg. Mag. Dialog. l. 3. c. 7. fol. 29. Andreas Bishop of Fundo, and of the exemplary Marti∣nian, a famous Hermit. Whereof the former was fain to banish an holy Matron out of his House, because he found he could not safely injoy her sight, nor be protected by her Inno∣cence, from the great Hazard of his own. The Laur. Su∣rius T. 1. Die 13. Febr.—Misit An∣gelos Deus ad Tutelam cultumque Generis Hu∣mani.—Illos cum homini∣bus commo∣rantes Diabo∣lus paulatim ad vitia pel lexit, & mulierum congressibus inquinavit. Tum in Coelum ob Peccata non recepti ceciderunt in Ter∣ram. Sic eos Diabolus  ex Angelis Dei, suos fecit satellites ac Ministros. Lact. l. 2. c. 15. p. 65. Later finding he could not otherwise be ex∣empted from the Occasions and Baits of Sin, threw Himself first into the Fire, for the refining of his Desires; and after That into the Water, whereby to drown them. Nay as if the holy Angels were not fit to be intrusted with such Temptations, not onely Philo and Josephus, but divers Fathers of the Church, (Justin Mar∣tyr, Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus, and Lactantius,) have understood by the Sons of God who could not innocently gaze upon the Daughters of men, (Gen. 6. 2.) Not the Po∣tentates of the Earth, but even the Angels of Heaven. Now though I think with Theodo∣ret, and most of the ancient Commentators, that the Fathers were in an Errour who so expounded;. Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 3. p. 450. . Just. Mar. Apol 1. p. 44.
yet it assures us of their Opinion, how much Temptations are to be shun'd, and how carefully we should fly the Occasions of them. Igni cum Foeno non bene convenit, said Martinian to a Beauty whom he had pull'd out of the Sea, but would not trust himself with when she came to Land. But more remarkable were the words of the pious PresbyterEx tempore Ordinationis acceptae Pres∣byteram suam ut sororem di∣ligens, sed quasi Hostem cavens, ad se propiùs acce∣dere nunquam sinebat—Et ab eà sibi communionem funditùs Fa∣miliaritatis absciderat. &c. Greg. Mag. Dial. l. 4. c. 11. fol. 37. Ʋrsinus, when a good Woman came to help him as he was giving up the Ghost, (one whom he lov'd too as a Sister, but yet avoided as an Enemy,) Recede à me Mulier, adhuc vivit Igniculus, Paleam tolle. As if he fear'd that That Stricture or Spark of life re∣maining in him, might have grown into a Flame at the sight of Chaff. § 19. Now since it cannot but be inferr'd from the whole Tenor of my Discourse, That the way to become able to abstain from all evil, is to abstain from all approach and appearance of it, from all that does lead and allure us to it, from all that has a Tendency and Byass towards it; Nothing remains but that we labour, in every Instance of Temptation and Ghostly dan∣ger, (if we are willing to use the means whereby our Abstinence may be completed,) to frustrate the Malice of the Devil, to baffle the Arguments of the Flesh, and to tread under our feet an
insulting World, even by carrying our selves wisely in all our ways, and by keeping constant watch over all our Walkings; and that we ne∣ver suffer our selves, either by stratagem, or by force, to be diverted or drawn aside from this saving Method, until our well-meant Indeavours shall all expire into perfection; our Contend∣ings with the Flesh, into Triumphs over it; our rigid Abstinences from Evil, into the ravishing Injoyments of all that's Good; our Temporary Lent, into an Everlasting Jubile; our short Self-denials, into the Pleasures of Aeternity; our Days of Mourning and Mortification, into endless Fruitions of Bliss and Glory. Which thou, O God, of thy Mercy vouch∣safe unto us, for the Glory of thy Name, and for the Worthiness of thy Son; To whom, with thee, O Father, in the Unity of the Spirit, be all Honour and Glory both now and forever. Amen.
OF ABSTAINING IN GENERAL FROM Fleshly Lusts. 1 PET. 2. 11. Dearly Beloved, I beseech you, as Strangers, and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly Lusts, which war against your Soul. Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against you as evil Doers, they may by your good works which they shall behold, glo∣rifie God in the day of Visitation. § 1. SAint Peter, as a good Builder, (a Spi∣ritual Workman who needed not to be asham'd,) having prudently laid the first Foun∣dation
of his Discourse in the former Chapter, to wit, the Holy Spirit of God efficaciously work∣ing by his word; And having erected thereupon the three grand Pillars of Christianity, Faith, Hope, and Charity; does straight proceed in this Chapter to superstruct on those Pillars by way of general Exhortation. Which though particularly directed unto the Christians of the Dispersion in several Provinces of Asia, yet 'twas equally intended, and is as applicable to Ʋs too, on whom the ends of the World are come. Now his general Exhortation is briefly This. First of all, that we lay aside all kind of Malice, and Hypocrisie, and the malignity of the Tongue. (v. 1.) Secondly, That as Infants do suck the nourishment of their Bodies from the same Mother's Breast from whom they had newly re∣ceiv'd their Being; so also We, being regenerate by the good word of God, and thereby re∣puted as new-born Babes, should from the same word of God, suck out a nourishment for our Souls, and thereby grow unto perfection. (v. 2.) This word as he calls by the name of milk, so he commends it to our Palats, as sweet, and whole∣som, (v. 3.) After which he goes on with his Exhortation, but steps aside from his Metaphor, and addresseth himself to a new scheme of Rhe∣torick.
Calling Christ a Living-Stone, (v. 4.) and the Members of Christ a Spiritual House, (v. 5.) and proving Both out of Esa, (v. 6.) Next he shews the opposition betwixt the Obedient, and the Rebellious; representing Jesus Christ as a support unto the former, but to the later a Stone of stumbling, and a Rock of offence. (v. 7, 8.) Then, having said how God had taken us from out the men of this world, and made us a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People, a People called out of darkness, into his marvellous light, (v. 9, 10.) He here proceeds to exhort us, with somewhat a greater degree of warmth, that we behave our selves suitably to our Vocation. Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as Strangers, and Pilgrims, abstain, &c. § 2. A very pertinent Exhortation to all the Duties of the Lent; to Christian Purity, and Strictness, and to Abstinence from Enormities of every kind. Abstain from Fleshly Lusts, that is, (as S. Paul does explain S. Peter,) from Rioting and Drunkenness, from Chambering and Wantonness, from Strife and Envy, from Malcontentedness and Sedition, from Revenge∣fulness and Rebellion, from Schism and Haeresie. For that These are all equally the Lusts of the
Flesh, or the Fleshly Lusts, I shall necessarily shew in the proper Places of my Discourse. The Ex∣hortation (taken in gross) does consist of two Parts. The material part of it is express'd in these words, [Abstain from Fleshly Lusts, and have your Conversation honest,] The formal part of it in these, [Dearly beloved, I beseech you.] Thus we see the Exhortation is usher'd in with an Intreaty, and This with such a Com∣pellation, as shews an Earnestness of Affection in him that speaks. His Exhortation is so im∣portant, so perswasive his Intreaty, and so mel∣tingly obliging his Compellation, that hardly any thing can be added to give an energy or weight to S. Peter's Preaching. Though he desires no more of them, than to have mercy upon them∣selves, yet he begs for it as heartily, as if he were begging for his Life. Dearly beloved, I beseech you, I come unto you as a Petitioner, that ye will not be so transported out of your Interest and your Wits, as madly to ruin your selves for ever. I make it my humble Supplication, that ye will rather live happy to all Eternity. If there is any thing in the World with which you are willing to oblige me, do not wilfully run upon Swords and Halberts;Isa. 33. 14. Seek not to dwell with devouring Fire; Be not so foolish as to catch at
everlasting Burnings; But be of an honest Con∣versation, and abstain from Fleshly Lusts which war against the Soul. Thus S. Peter's Exhortation is very Affectio∣nate and Earnest. And taking our selves to be the Persons to whom the Exhortative does belong, We have it inforced upon our hearts by Five strong Arguments or Motives. All the worthier of our Attention, because arising out of the Text. The First Argument is taken from the Condi∣tion of the Persons, to whom the earnest Exhor∣tation is here directed. We are Citizens of Heaven, and but Strangers upon Earth, and therefore we must live as becometh Strangers. Nor are we Strangers onely, but Pilgrims. Not onely , out of our own Country, but withall , that is, Travellers in a strange one. For this I take to be the diffe∣rence between these Two, , Strangers, and , Pilgrims, That though they are Both out of their Country, yet the former have an Aboad, but the later none. Those have some kind of Rest, but These are always in a Journy. Those inhabit a foreign Country, whilst These are onely passing through it. And seeing this is our Condition, that we relate to this World, not as Strangers onely, but Passen∣gers,
Men whose Houses are but as Inns, and whose Life is but a Pilgrimage, it concerns us to walk as becometh Pilgrims; that is, to ma∣nage our Conversation with so much wariness and fear, as not to lie open to just Reproof. The Second Argument is taken from the Qua∣lity of the Things, in opposition to which our Apostle's Exhortation is here contriv'd. These are , such Fleshly Lusts, as are very pleasant Flatterers, but no true Friends. For though they are fawning upon the Flesh, yet they are not at all the less, but the greater Enemies to the Spirit. And how desirable soever they may appear unto the Body, yet , they are implacably, though in∣visibly, ever warring against the Soul. The Third Argument is taken from the Con∣sideration of our Credit, with the Enemies of Christ amongst whom we live. Our Conver∣sation is to be honest, , among the Gentiles. And that for this reason, , That however they do maliciously, they may not deservedly speak against us. Where∣as in case we live dishonestly, and indulgently to our Lusts, we shall help them to excuse, if not to justifie their Malignities against our Per∣sons, and our Profession: And they will have
a just ground whereupon to defame us as Evil-Doers. The Fourth Argument is taken from the Con∣sideration of our Enemies Welfare; To wit, their present Conversion, and future Safety. In whose sight if we converse as becometh Christ's Servants, by our abstaining from Fleshly Lusts, and having an honest Conversation, saith the Text, They then will look upon us with reverence, and judge of our Principles by our good Works. We shall not onely stop their Mouths, but weaken the violence of their Hands, and help to mollifie their Hearts, and become happily instrumental to the salvation of their Souls. The Fifth Argument is taken from the Glory of God and its great Advancement. We must indeavour so to live, as to adorn the Doctrine of Jesus Christ. Our Conversation must be such, as becomes the Gospel. Our way of Walking must be exemplary, and our Behaviour must be exact, that Christ's Religion being credited, his Kingdom also may be inlarged, whilst by the Allective of our Example men will be won from their corruptions, and shew forth the Praises of our God, who hath called us out of darkness into his marvellous light. And this, as 'tis the last,
so 'tis the best and chiefest Argument for our punctual abstaining from Fleshly Lusts, and ha∣ving an honest Conversation, , That Men (by seeing our good works) may not glorifie Ʋs, but , may glorifie God in the Day of Visitation. § 3. These are all S. Peter's Arguments. Nor have I stept either beyond or beside the Text for the finding of them. And for the pressing of the Duty He here injoyns, never were there more or better Arguments in the world, by any Pen-man contriv'd into fewer Words. Before I insist upon any Argument whereby to inforce the Exhortation, I must first of all explain the Exhortation it self, First observing the impor∣tance of Fleshly Lusts, and then what is meant by abstaining from them. In order to the First, two Things are to be known. How we ought to understand the mo∣ral use of the word Flesh, (especially as it is taken in Several parts of the New Testament,) and what is meant by the Lustings of it. By the word Flesh in the New Testament is very commonly meant the Appetite. This is the seat of our Affections, the subject matter of Vice and Virtue. Our Affections are ever con∣versant in pursuing, or eschewing, in injoying,
or in suffering their several Objects. Their Ob∣jects in the general are Good, or Evil. And both are consider'd in Themselves, or in relation to the Circumstances wherewith they happen to be cloath'd. Good consider'd in it self is at once both the Object and Cause of Love. But in relation to its Circumstances, it is productive of other Passions. For, if present, it causeth Joy; and if absent, it breeds Desire. Again, the Good which is Absent is either attainable, or it is not. If the former, it causeth Hope; and if the later, it breeds Despair. In like manner an evil Object is to be taken in its absolute, or in its relative Consideration. In the former 'tis productive of simple Hatred; but in the later it produceth either Sorrow, or Aversation. The First, if it is present; and if absent, then the Second. Again, the evil that is absent is either avoidable, or it is not. If the former, it causeth Boldness: but if the later, it causeth Fear. Thus we briefly see the Rivulets of all our Passions, or Affections, together with the Fountain from whence they flow. Now so many of our Affections as are reducible to Desire, may be called not improperly our several Lusts. Things so necessary, and natural, and indiffe∣rent in themselves, that being abstractively, and
precisely, and antecedently consider'd, they are equally in an aptitude of becoming both the matter of Vice, and Virtue. But when extra∣vagant, as to the Object, or exorbitant, as to the Measure; Then they are, and are justly call'd, either the Lusts of the Flesh, or the Fleshly Lusts. § 4. Now 'tis observable in the Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament, that Lust is many times Synonymous both with Avarice, and Desire. The Greek , and the La∣tin concupiscere, does equally Signifie them all. And thence it is that all Three have beenSee Deut. 14. 26. com∣pared with Deut. 12. 15; 20, 21. pro∣miscuously us'd in our English Bibles. For there we meet as well with lawfull, as with unlawfull Lusts; and as well with a good, as an evil Avarice; (and with Both as they are taken in the innocent sense of our Desires;) Nay, there we meet with such a Lusting, as is not onely lawfull, but also eminently good. We have an Example of the first, Deut. 12. 15. Thou mayest kill and eat Flesh in all thy Gates, whatsoever thy Soul lusteth after; that is, whatever it de∣sireth, or hath an Appetite unto. We have an Instance of the second, in the First Epistle to the Corinthians; where though 'tis said, that no Covetous shall ever inherit the Kingdom of God,1 Cor. 6. 10.
yet there are things which we must Covet, and Covet earnestly,1 Cor. 14. 39. saith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 31. We have a Specimen of the Third too, Gal. 5. 17. Whereas the Flesh lusteth against the Spirit, so doth the Spirit against the Flesh. And this does shew us what is meant by the Law in the Mem∣bers, and the Law in the Mind, which are said to be warring, that is, to be Lusting against each other, Rom. 7. 23. the last of which is as good, as the first is evil. § 5. But here we must not impose that ob∣vious Fallacy on our selves, which is, à benè divisis ad malè conjuncta. For though the Flesh, and the Lusts, being in Sensu diviso, have both their innocent Significations, yet in Sensu composito, they ever signifie what is sin∣full. Nor onely the Breaches of any one, but of several Precepts in the Decalogue. For in the Epistle to the Galatians, not Adultery one∣ly, but Murthers, not Fornication onely, but Witchcraft, Idolatry, Seditions, Haeresies, are reckon'd up by S. Paul amongst the works of the Flesh, and that in perfect opposition to the Fruits of the Spirit. Nor is it onely said (in the last Precept of the Decalogue,) Thou shalt not covet thy Neighbour's Wife, But not his House, not his Servant, not his Oxe, not his Ass, no nor
any thing else that is thy Neighbours. So that all evil Covetings are Fleshly Lusts, in respect of the Principle from which they come, though not always of the Object towards which they tend. Though in regard unto the later, they are not all Lustings after the Flesh, yet in re∣gard unto the former, they all are Lustings of the Flesh, or , Fleshly Lusts. 'Twas such a Lust of Curosity, joyn'd with ano∣ther of Ambition, which made Eve eat of forbid∣den fruit. 'Twas such a Fleshly Lust of Envy, which made Cain murther his Brother Abel. 'Twas such a Fleshly Lust of Avarice, which made an Achan lay hold of the golden Wedge. Nor was it less a Fleshly Lust which moved Ab∣solon to compass his Father's Kingdom, than That by which he defiled his Father's Concu∣bines. § 6. Now from all these Fleshly Lusts we are exhorted to abstain, as may appear by their An∣tithesis to such a Christian Conversation, as is not onely to be chast, but universally honest among the Gentiles. And yet from those in special manner are we exhorted to abstain, which are peculiarly compriz'd in the seventh Precept of the Decalogue, and are expressed by the name of lascivious Lusts, 1 Pet. 4. 3.
For those were chiefly the Fleshly Lusts of the Gnosticks, from whose unclean course of life the Jewish Christians of the Dispersion were here dehorted. And so they signifie with S. John when he reduces all the Army of our Spiritual Warriers to Three Brigades, and makes an emi∣nent Distinction of the Lust of the Flesh,1 Joh. 2. 16. both from the Lust of the Eye,Gal. 5. 16. and the Pride of Life.Eph. 2. 3. § 7. But what kind of Abstinence is here in∣tended? not such a complete and total Absti∣nence, as is from all kinds of Lusting with∣out exception. For This may seem as vain a Task, as to Abstain from being Men; since 'tis evident from the Confessions both of Saxony, and Helvetia, as also from the 9th. of our 39 Ar∣ticles, That Concupiscence remains in the most regenerate. To which implicit Objection, I answer Thus. That though the Precept for abstaining does refer both to the Object and Act of Lusting, yet it is with this Difference, that we must totally abstain from the things Lusted after, and as much as in us lies from the Lust it self. For if we cannot prevent a Lust from ever entring into the heart; yet we can and must keep it from breaking forth into our Ac∣tions, and from the Presence of the Temptation
which leads to Both. Many pretend to Disabi∣lities to which they have not a real Title. It clearly lies in our power, to make a Covenant with our Eyes; to set a Watch over our Ears; to keep the Door of our Lips; to thrust Impedi∣ments in the way betwixt Us and Danger; and by the help of God's Grace, (which is not wanting unto any who are not wanting unto It,) it also lies in our Power to keep a Guard about our Hearts; to put a Bridle upon our Wills; and give a check to the Cariere of wild Affec∣tions. So that if I may paraphrase S. Peter's Exhortation, it will in the whole amount to This: Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as ar∣rant Foreigners and Exoticks on this side Hea∣ven, that ye religiously abstain from forbidden Objects in the general, and especially from Those which are most Treacherous to the Flesh. Give not any satisfaction to carnal motions, and be not any whit indulgent to loose Desires. Make no provision for the Flesh,Rom. 13. 14. to fulfill the Lusts thereof.Gal. 5. 16. But keep it rather from Incen∣tives, and try to starve it. As it wars against, you, so do you against it. Besiege it closely on every side; Block up all its Avenues; Intercept its Provisions by Prayer and Fasting. Reduce the Flesh to such an Exigence for want of Vic∣tuals
and Ammunition, as may effectually com∣pel it to make a Surrender unto the Spirit. Put your selves with Resolution into a moral Impossi∣bility of being worsted. And in order there∣unto, Abstain not onely from the Food of your Fleshly Lusts, but withall from the Borders and Confines of it; not onely from the All that may cause uncleanness, but from all that may occa∣sion the things that cause it. § 8. For here 'tis worthy our observation, (in the management of our warfare against those Enemies, which do often the more success∣fully, because invisibly war against us,) That we are otherwise to encounter with the Tempta∣tions of the Irascible, than with the other more insnaring ones of the concupiscible Faculty. The onely way to quell the first, is indeed by Fight∣ing, but the way to beat the second, must be by Flight. The way to vanquish those Allure∣ments of Flesh and Blood, which are vulgarly express'd by the name of Beauties, is not bold∣ly to contend with, but rather prudently to ab∣stain from the Presence of them. We commonly reckon that a Garrison is little less than half ta∣ken, when it admits of any parley with its Be∣siegers. To enter into a Treaty, is the Begin∣ning of a Surrender; and then with a greater
force of reason. He that approaches so very near, as to wrestle with the Temptations He ought to fly, and entertains so much commerce, as to combat with them, is like a very stout Cham∣pion who salls to grapple with a man that is arm'd with Sickness; I mean the Leprosie, or the Plague, or other diseases of Infection. Be∣cause notwithstanding he throws the man far enough, it will be hard to clear himself from all contagion of his Disease. Many are led into Captivity to the Law of Sin, by not distinguish∣ing as they ought, (and as holy men of old were wont to do,) betwixt Temptations and Temptations of several sorts; I mean the Tem∣ptations they ought to fight with, and the Tem∣ptations they ought to fly. To make it profita∣ble and plain, I will illustrate what I say, by one or two Scriptural Examples. § 9. When nothing but the Patience of Job was tempted, by the loss of his Estate, and the destruction of his Children, Tunc surrexit, saith the Text,Job 1. 20. Then Job arose, rouz'd up himself like a sturdy Lion; and as it were girded him∣self with strength. He was so far from drawing back from the face of Danger, that he arose, and stood to it, and bravely baffl'd both the wit and the strength of Satan. But when the same
Job was tempted by the Allurements of the Flesh, Then he manifested his valour, (like Fabius Maximus, or the Parthians,) by taking the Courage to use his Prudence. And he mani∣fested his Prudence, by the timeliness of his Flight. He made a Covenant with his Eyes,Job. 31. 1. not to look upon an Object which might indanger him by Delight.Nunquam fu∣gatur, nisi cum fugitur, nuquam mac∣tatur, nisi cum maceratur, &c. Espen∣saeus de Con∣tin. Conjug. l. 6. c. 11. à p. 896. ad p. 903. It was then his chief Wisedom, when (not his Constancy, or his Patience, but) his Chastity was concern'd, not to make trial of his Mastery, in containing from a pleasant for∣bidden Object, but rather wholly to abstain from the Presence of it. The different way of incoun∣tring the different sorts of Temptation, may be collected from the difference, wherewith the Scripture doth direct us to deal with the Devil,Jam. 4. 7. and the Flesh.1. Cor. 6. 18. Resist the Devil,Cum aliis vi∣tiis potest ex∣pectari con∣flictus; haec autem fugien∣da est, quia aliter vinci non potest. is the Precept of S. James; but fly Fornication, is the Caveat of S. Paul. For other Vices (saith Anselm upon that Caveat to the Corinthians) are easily con∣querable by Conflict, whereas This of Fornica∣cation is onely conquerable by Flight.Anselinus in 1 Cor. 6. 18. Now to fly Fornication,—. Aristot. Eth. l. 7. c. 9. is not onely to be continent, (which implies a kind of Combat, though 'tis not follow'd with consent; a being somewhat affected, although not drawn;) but 'tis totally to abstain from all commerce with the Tempta∣tion.
'Tis to defeat it in such a manner,Caetera vitia vincuntur re∣sistendo, sed Fornicatio fugiendo. i.e. totaliter vi∣tando cogi∣tationes im∣mundas, & quaflibet oc∣casiones. as King Edward the Sixth, and the most excellent Bishop Wainflet are said by Budden to have de∣feated the Armed Rebells under Jack Cade, vel non pugnando; by not fighting with them at all, but onely by praying against their Wickedness. The total abstinence I speak of,Aquinas in 1 Cor. 6. 18. in eundem sensum Ca∣jetanus ibid. v. Cassian. Collat. l. 19. §. 16. is not onely from the Objects of Fleshly Lust, but from the Vicini∣ties, and the occasions, yea from all the very memo∣ries and mentions of them. For so Aquinas and Cajetan do expound S. Paul's Caveat, 1 Cor. 6. 18. § 10. It follows then that we are likelier to be secure from such dangers by timely flight,Puellae vel Christo reser∣vatae amore captus est, & sauciatus Magnus ille Cyprianus. Ʋnde? & quomodo? tangunt ocu∣lorum faces etiam intan∣gibilia. Nec solum captus est, sed & sol∣licitavit— Liberanda de locis pericu∣losis Navis, ne inter Sec∣pulos franga∣tur. Eruenda velociter de incendio Sar∣cina, prius∣quam flam∣mis superve∣nientibus con∣cremetur. Nemo diu tutus, Periculo Proximus. Espensaeus ubi supra pag. 900. than to beat them quite down by a stout Re∣sistance. And though the later must be imploy'd when we are actually ingag'd, yet to antici∣pate such ingagements, it will be our best me∣thod to use the former. For how much safer 'tis to fly, than to incounter such Allurements, (though incounter them we must, when we can∣not fly them,) we may illustrate by the exam∣ples of Joseph, and Sampson, who were as va∣rious in their Behaviours, as they were diffe∣rent in their Success. Joseph fled from his Mistriss by whom he was tempted day by day. He was so far from discoursing about the matter in de∣sign,
as that he would not be with her, but sprang from her presence, and got him out. Gen. 39. 10. 12. Whereas Sampson (on the contrary) was no sooner come to Gaza, than he saw there an Harlot; nor did he onely See but he went unto her. (Judg. 16. 1.) Again, no sooner was he come to the Valley of Soreck, where he adven∣tur'd to converse with another Woman, (v. 4.) but one of the next Things we read of, is His telling her all his heart. (v. 17.) And the very next to That, is His sleeping upon her knees. (v. 19) And the consequent of This, the loss of his Liberty, and his Eyes. (v. 21.) It was not then without reason, That so great and good a Prophet as the Prophet Elijah, who had so bravely1 King. 18. 18. withstood King Ahab, did quickly afterChap. 19. v. 3. fly away from the Face of Jezebel. And that Abimelech should have fled at the sight of Sarah, is very evident even from hence, That no sooner had he taken her, than he was fain to put her away. (Gen. 20. 3. 7.) Nor did he part onely with Her, but with a thousand pieces of Silver,V. Munste∣rum in Lo∣cum & Cor∣nelium à La∣pide. (v. 16.) And that in velamen Oculo∣rum, for a Covering of the Eyes. And that not onely unto Her, but to all that hereafter should look upon her, as Gerundensis, and Hamerus explain the Text. Or (in the Gloss of Tertul∣lian,)
for the buying of veils enough, wherewith to cover both her own and her Maiden's Beauty; and this to the end they might not easily either See, or be Seen by the other Sex. § 11. But I have largely enough explain'd the moral use of the word Flesh, and what is meant by the Lustings of it, and what it is to Abstain from all These, as well according to the Object as Act of Lusting, and as well in a divided as compound Sense. Besides that in so spacious a Field of matter, and so fruitfull of meditation, as That I am entring now upon, there will be need of some Care that none be sur∣feited even with Abstinence. For though an Abstinence (not from Flesh, but) from Flesh∣ly Lusts, is both the Best, and the most whole∣som, and the most suitable to the Season in its primitive Ʋse, and (where the Guests are all Christian) the most desirable Entertainment to be imagin'd, yet a Satiety of the best things is apt to become the worst Satiety in the world. And therefoe rather than exceed the Time allow'd for This Service, I will begin and end too with That one Argument, or Motive, which here is taken from the Nature, and perpetual Employment of Fleshly Lusts; which are not onely no Friends, but most Implacable Enemies;
nor onely Enemies to our temporal, but aeter∣nal Interest. § 12. It is not onely here said, , that they fight, which may imply nothing more than a Single Battle; but , they war, which imports a continued State of fighting. So far from being capable of a firm and solid Peace, that they allow us not a Truce, or time to breath in. Nor do they terminate their ma∣lice upon the Body, (for then we needed no more to fear them than Armed Enemies from without,) but (which is nearer and dearer to us) , they ever war a∣gainst the Soul too. § 13. Thus the life of a Christian, as 'tis a Pilgrimage of the Body from Earth to Earth, (for Dust thou art, and unto Dust shalt thou re∣turn, said God to Adam,) and a Pilgrimage of the Soul from Heaven to Heaven; (for the Spi∣rit shall return to God that gave it, saith the Royal Ecclesiastes;)Militia est vita hominis super Ter∣ram. Job 7. 1. so as truly is it a warfare of Soul and Body in conjunction, whereof That fights for Heaven, and This for Hell; The for∣mer under God's Banner, and the later under the Devil's. The Flesh, and the Spirit are so unequally match'd, that however nearly wedded, they are incessantly falling out. Each may
say unto the other, nec possum vivere cum te, nec sine te. For however unwilling they are to part, they are seldom or never at Agreement. There is a Law in the members so continually warring against the Law of the mind,Rom. 7. 23. that the Flesh still lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spi∣rit against the Flesh. And these areGal. 5. 17. contrary the one to the other. Now 'tis the nature still of Contraries, very earnestly to indeavour a mutual overthrow. And they must Both be well beaten, brought down, and refracted, ere they can peaceably cohabit under one and the same Roof. Which kind of Peace may be effec∣ted betwixt another sort of Contraries, (for Heat and Cold may agree together in a Luke∣warmness, white and black in mixt Colours, Day and Night in a Crepusculum, however These two last are but privatively oppos'd;) but in this moral Contrariety 'twixt the Spirit and the Flesh, it never can be; the reason is, because when the Spirit is most indulgently at Peace with the Flesh, the Flesh is then the most dangerous and fatal Enemy to the Spirit. Exactly such an Enemy, as Joab was to Abner, when he took him aside, and slew him2 Sam. 3. 27. peaceably. Or as the very same Joab to Captain Amasa, when he sa∣luted him as a Brother, inquir'd after his health
as a kind Physician, offer'd to kiss him as a Dear Friend, that so he might civilly and sweetly smite him under the fifth Rib.2 Sam. 20. 9, 10. Or as the two Sons of Rimmon to Righteous Ishbosheth, when making as if they would fetch some Wheat, they kill'd him slylie in his own House,Chap. 4. v. 6. 11. and quietly resting upon his Bed. Or as Judeth to Olofernes, when she pleas'd him into Destruction, and ma∣liciously made him in love with her Conversa∣tion; when she ravish'd him with her Beauty, that she might kill him with the fruit of his kindness to her;Judeth 12. 14, 16, 18. & Ch. 13. 8. stole his Heart whilst he was waking, that whilst he slept she might take his Head too. And exactly such an Enemy is the Flesh unto the Spirit, when the Spirit gives no disturbance, but dwells in quietness with the Flesh. For then the Lusts of the Flesh do give the Spirit such wounds as it cannot feel. Wounds indued with such a numming, Narco∣tick Quality, as hurts the Spirit without offense, and by killing it very pleasantly, sends it insen∣sibly to Hell. Nor are any whit the less, but the more certainly destroy'd for being laid into a sleep by an over-great Dose of Opium. Hence those ,. invisible Wars, and indiscernable Insurrections, from which the an∣tient Greek Liturgies were wont to pray for a
Cessation. For when the Soul is so degenerate as even to doat upon the Body, Then does the Body with most advantage insensibly war against the Soul. The treacherous Lusts of the Flesh, (like the treacherous Assassinates of Olofernes and Ishbosheth,) assault the Spirit in its own House, and (which is the worst of all Super∣cherie) as they find it fast asleep in the Bed of Carnal Security. Nor is it onely not awak'd by the Blows they give it, but it rather sleeps the faster for being struck, (just as if it were struck by the Rod of Hermes.) That when at last it shall awake, either in This, or another World, it may not be to escape, but to see its Ruin. § 14. So that the War I now speak of, is more than Civil or Domestick. For there we war against others, but here, against our own selves.Mic. 7. 6. A Man's Enemies (saith the Prophet) are those of his own House. And indeed the greatest Enemies, excepting those of his own Heart. This especially being the Field, where∣in the Lusts of the Flesh do still incamp against the Spirit, and give it Battle; and strive to bring it into Captivity to the Law of Sin. And because the whole Man does consist of these two, Flesh and Spirit, Body and Soul, matter and form, as essential Parts of his Composition, it
cannot but follow that we our selves are inces∣santly warring against our selves. To wit, our selves, as we are Animals, against our selves, as we are Men. Our selves, as we are Men, against our selves, as we are Christians. Our selves, as we are Carnal, against our selves, as we are Spiritual. Again it follows, that we our selves are the greatest Enemies to our selves, because we arm our vile Members against our Mind. (For what our English Translation does call the Instruments,. is in S. Paul's own language, the Armour of unrighteousness.)Rom. 6. 13. And by the help of this Armour, we Arm our base Appe∣tites against our Wills; and our brutish Affec∣tions against our Reasons. We use our selves as unmercifully, as Samson's Enemies did Him. We strive to pluck out our inward Eyes, and to deliver our selves bound to Sin, and Satan. We side with the old man against the new; Abet the outward man in us against the inward; are such Enemies to our selves, as to despoil our selves of Grace, whereby (as much as in us lies, and without Repentance,) we make our selves inca∣pable of Bliss and Glory. § 15. But when I speak of a War between the Flesh and the Spirit, I do not mean onely the visible and gross Body of Flesh, which of it self
is but passive, and cannot fight. No 'tis the animated Flesh, the Flesh that is capable of Lusting; It is a fleshliness of Spirit, and a car∣nality of Reason, which is arm'd with a Wisedom fetch'd up from Hell, and stands in hostile op∣position to that which cometh down from Hea∣ven, Jam 3. 14, 15, 16. And accordingly when God had upbraided Israel, with their being a foolish and sottish People, and void of all under∣standing, he gave the reason of it in this, That they were wise to do evil. (Jer. 4. 22.) Observe the pithy Brevity of That Expression, Because they were Wise, they were therefore Foolish. Their Wisedom did not onely consist with Folly, but in That sort of Wisedom their Folly and Sot∣tishness did consist. This is that Wisedom of the Flesh, which exalteth it self against the Know∣ledge of God. 2 Cor. 10. 5. It is an Earthy, Sensual, Devilish wisdom, as God Himself by his Apostle is pleas'd to call it. And 'tis with very great reason he calls it Devilish; because the Lust of the Flesh, which is its Wisedom, is a direct Devil within us; as having a faculty to intice us, and to draw us quite away from fight∣ing under Christ's Banner. Therefore 'tis that Lust and Satan have the very same Character in holy Scripture.Jam. 1. 14. A man is tempted (saith
S. James) when drawn away of his own Lust and inticed. More than which cannot be said of the Devil himself; who cannot drive us by force in∣to any Sin, but onely draw us by Flattery, or morally drive us by panick Fears. Now the very same Warrier, which sometimes is call'd by the name of Flesh, is elsewhere termed the carnal Mind; which is as much as to say, the fleshly Spirit.Gal. 5. 17. Rom. 8. 7. The carnal Mind (saith S. Paul) is enmity against God, for it is not subject to his Law, nor indeed can it be. It is so naturally a Rebel, that it can never be any other, so long as it remaineth a carnal Mind. A very natural thing it is for the Son of the Bond-woman, even in Abraham's own house, to hate and persecute the Son of the free. And even in Abraham's own Person, it was as natural for the Flesh to war against the Spirit. Esau kick'd against Jacob, whilst both were yet in their Mother's Womb. And even Jacob himself, although as peaceable as he was plain, had yet a Law in his Members, as it were lifting up the heel against the Law in his Mind. The best of Men are but Men, and therefore at their best will still be sub∣ject to Corruption. Some Canaanites will be left in the holiest Land. S. Paul himself had fears and fightings, as well within as without.
And notwithstanding his Abundance, as well of Grace, as of Revelations, he had a thorn in the Flesh, which did exceedingly terrifie and wound his Spirit. Nor was David more afflic∣ted by envious Saul, than his inward man was vexed by the hostilities of the outward. When our Spirits are most willing to do the will of our Lord, we are forced to complain that our Flesh is weak; and in that very weakness does one of its chiefest strengths lie. Even then when we can say, Lord we believe, we have great reason to add, help thou our unbelief. Let the Flesh (like the Thief, I mean the unconverted Thief on our Saviour's Cross,) be bound up and Crucified, yet (like the very same Thief) it will continue to resist, or revile the Spirit. As when the Tay∣lor in the Apologue had stopt the mouth of his scolding Wife, She was able still to rail with her finger's ends. An Apologue not so light, as the moral of it is grave and serious. For the Spirit and the Flesh are (in Aristotle's Comparison) as the  and the , i. e. as the Husband and the Wife; and so the moral of the Apologue may be affirmed to be This. Whilst Fleshly Lusts have a Being, are unmortified and alive, let congruous Grace do what it can, (so long as it is not irresistible,) there will be Hostilities
against the Spirit. For were it possible for the Flesh to cease from warring against the Spirit, a Man might possibly be innocent on this Side Heaven. Which because he cannot be, the Car∣nal mind by sound Consequence must needs be at enmity with God. Hence it is that Rank Atheists are very commonly Rank Wits too, full of Artifices and Tricks, very skilfull to destroy Themselves and others. And 'tis an Enmity so much the worse, even because it is Spiritual, as well as Carnal, or (to use S. Paul's language) a Carnal mind. For the Spirit of a man, which by nature goeth upwards, when like theEccles. 3. 21. Spirit of a beast, it tendeth downwards, quite against its own nature, and as it were clings unto the Earth by being Carnal, it is not onely a strong, but a subtil Enemy. It wageth war against the Soul, that is, itself, as well by stratagem, as by force. It is a Treacherous, cologuing,Heb. 3 13. deceipt∣full Thing. And though it seems to be but one of those three Brigades whereof the Devil's whole Army is said by S. John to be compos'd, (the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life,) yet has it all the lower World to serve for its Armory or Magazin; Profit, and Pleasure, and Pomps, and Vanities, Beauty, and Honour, and Strength, and Greatness, and (to
express it in a word) All the Darts of the Flesh which it does shoot (after the measure that the Devil gives Aim,) against the Spirit, are com∣monly drawn out of that one Quiver, that is to say, the Carnal mind. § 16. Since then our Enemies are such, as have been describ'd;Anima, Dei insignita I∣magine, de∣corata Simi∣litudine, de∣sponsata Fide dotata Spiri∣tu, redempta Sanguine, de putata cum Angelis, ca∣par Beatitu∣dinis, haeres Bonitatis, Ra∣tionis parti∣ceps, quid tibi cum Carne unde ista pa∣teris? Ber∣nard. de Ani∣mâ. c. 3. p. 1051. so strongly, so subtilly, so incessantly warring against the Soul, (A Soul adorn'd with God's Image, and indu'd with his Spirit, and redeem'd with his Blood, and sus∣tein'd with his Grace, and in a capacity of his Glory,) our very Dangers may serve for Orators, to incourage and incite us in our Encounters. And our Dangers are to be measur'd by the pre∣ciousness of the Subject, or Prize we fight for. And this is here expressed to be the Soul. That's the Helena , or , the Ball or Apple of contention, thrown as 'twere between us, and our Fleshly Lusts; We asserting it to God, and They to Satan; We contending for its Safety, and They contriving its Destruction. Now so infinite is the difference between the values to be put upon Souls and Bodies, that He whoRom. 5. 3. Philip. 2. 17. Rom. 7. 24. rejoyced in those Afflictions which did but war against the Body, did groan and tremble under the Lusts, which still did war against his Soul. And in comparison of the hurt, which
may happen unto the Soul, we are forbidden to fear them that can kill the Body. For what is the Body, in its original, but Dust and Ashes? what, at the best of its Consistence, but a fair Nursery of Diseases? And what, when parted from the Soul, but the food of Worms? whereas the Soul is That Spouse, which God hath betro∣thed to himself,Liquidò col∣ligere debe∣mus, quiasi Deus Sapien∣tia, Anima autem Justi Sedes sapi∣entiae, dum Coelum dici∣tur Sedes Dei, Anima Justi ergo est Coelum. Greg. Mag. in E∣vang. Homil. 38. l. 2. p. 133, 134. Vide etiam Bernard. su∣per Cantica, Serm. 27. p. 646. Hos. 2. 19, 20. Not a Citizen onely of Heaven, but Heaven it self; as S. Gre∣gory and S. Bernard are pleas'd to call her. And therefore if the Warriers or Fleshly Lusts I now speak of, do fight against our immortal Souls, it concerns us as much as our Souls are worth, to war against, by abstaining from Fleshly Lusts; By which if ever we are conquer'd, we are un∣done. As being dead whilst we live, (to use S. Paul's Oxumoron) and (which is a great deal sadder) as being to live when we are dead too, although it be onely to die for ever, or rather to be for ever dying. These are some of those foolish and hurtfull Lusts, which drown the Soul in misery and perdition. They transform the whole man into a State of Brutality. They cast us out of his presence,1 Tim. 6. 9. in whose presence is life, and at whose right hand are pleasures for ever∣more. For when 'tis said by the Apostle, That if we live after the Flesh,Rom. 8. 13. we shall die; his mean∣ing
cannot but be This, That we shall certainly be damn'd. For They that live after the Spirit must die the first Death, and Therefore This other must needs me meant of the Second. Thus our Dangers do incourage us in our Encounters. § 17. Another Incouragement which we in∣joy whilst we are prosecuting our War against Fleshly Lusts, lies in the Goodness, and the No∣bleness, and (as the consequence of Both) in the Pleasure of it. For what can be better in it self, than to side with the Spirit against the Flesh? with the Rational part in us against the Brutal? what more honourable, or noble, than to win a Victory over our selves? It was not near so great a Glory to the Young man of Macedon to have brought into Subjection all the Provinces of Asia, as it had been to have subdued at once his Avarice and his Ambition. For 'tis not the greatness of the Conquest, but the goodness of the fight, which yields an happiness to the Victor, and solid glory to his success. When Paul was ready to be offer'd, and at the Approach of his Departure, his chiefest Comfort and Honour stood both in This,2 Tim. 4. 6, 7. That he had fought the good fight, that he had finished his Course, and had kept the Faith: that he had prosperously ingaged against Fleshly Lusts, which, however they had warred,
had not prevailed against his Soul. Many are worsted in their Warfare, for want of distin∣guishing (as they ought) between the Acts and the Effects of their Self-denials. 'Tis true the Act of Self-denial will affect the best of us with pain or trouble; but how much more will it delight us by our Injoyment of its Effects? (as the drawing of a Tooth is painfull and trou∣blesom for a moment, although in order to per∣fect ease.) We know the Soul is the life, and so the happiness of the Body, as God himself is both the happiness and the life of the Soul. And as there is no greater pleasure, than that which affects the very Soul of a Pious man, (for 'tis a Proverbial Antimetabole, and in every man's mouth, that the Pleasure of the Soul is the Soul of Pleasure,) so the Pleasure of the Soul can hardly be greater, or more refin'd, than in despi∣sing and rejecting the grosser Pleasures of the Body. Nor need we fear that such a Pleasure is not attainable at all, because it does not grow up, like a worthless Mushrom, in a night; but rather (like the goodly Rose) requires a cer∣tain Tract of Time to give it Ripeness. For a Left-handed Conscience, like a Left-handed Man, by abstaining long enough from the use of the Left, and by continuing long enough the use
and practice of the Right, will perform the same Actions with ease and pleasure, which at present may be difficult, and painfull to him. Habitual Sicknesses of Soul being like to those inveterate diseases of the Body, which cannot possibly be cur'd by one or two Tasts of a Noble Med'cin, but must submit to whole Methods and Courses of it. Many Sciences and Arts are extremely te∣dious to such as are but new beginners and lear∣ners in them; which yet will yield them the greatest Comfort, Content, and Pleasure, as soon as Ʋse, and Ʋnderstanding hath bred a very good Acquaintance and Friendship with them. Will any Man who is not mad, break off the finger of his Watch as an useless Thing, because he cannot perceive it moving? or leave off the practice of a generous abstinence from his Debauches, because his very first Indeavours of Self-denial and Pious life are not so pleasant or so easie, as he expected? let him have patience, and That Finger will most apparently, though insensibly, make a progress from this, to another hour. So let him stay his due time, and his practice of Reformation will pass from difficult to easie, from easie to usefull and familiar, from familiar to delightfull and joyous also. Let a vitious man get but the knack of Virtue, (which without Custom he
cannot have,) and he will wonder how he could once have been pleas'd with Vice. But he who stays 'till it is pleasant to leave his gross plea∣sures, will never leave them; because the plea∣sure of leaving such, cannot begin 'till they are left. From whence it follows, that He who will not be perswaded to persevere in abstaining from Fleshly Lusts, until his Abstinence is easie, and pleasant to him, is like the natural Fool of Greece, whom Hierocles in his  does mer∣rily call his Athenian Scholar, who determin'd within Himself never to go into the Water, until (before hand) he might be sure that he could Swim. Or like the overwary Messenger (of whom we read in the Spanish Story) who ha∣ving been threaten'd under a Poenalty by him that sent him, not to return without an Answer, would not part with his Letter to the Person to whom 'twas sent, until he might first have an Answer to it. For a man not to abstain from Fleshly Lust till he finds it pleasant, is just as sensless, and as absurd, as for a man to be im∣patient of ever learning the use of Books, 'till he can read and understand them with ease and pleasure; or to grumble at the labour of taking a Pencil into his hand, until he finds he can use it like some Apelles. If there is any man that
hears me, who is conscious to himself of so great a Folly, I have no more to beg of him than barely This; That he will not come with Prae∣judice to the Amendment of his Life, (as the Israelites did to the Land of Promise, in fear of Anakims and Lions to be incounter'd in the way,) and that he will not distrust a vertuous course 'till he has try'd it. That he will weigh Vice and Virtue in equal Scales, before he cleaves unto the First, or rejects the Second. That he will have so much Justice both for God and Him∣self, as to make an essay, whether a Customary Abstinence from Fleshly Lusts, will not yield him more pleasure than all his Customary Injoyments have ever done. That he will once have the courage to make a Trial of new obedience, (I mean an incorrupt and impartial Trial.) And that being once ingag'd in the practice of it, he will not poorly start back at its first uncouth∣ness; (for difficilia quae pulchra, the goodliest things in their Injoyment are ever difficult in their acquist;) but that imitating the Bravery of Caleb and Josua, he will deferr to make a Judgement or final Aestimate of the Thing, 'till he has had a Sound proof and experience of it. For if the Savour and the Tast he shall have of Virtue, be but as much, and as long, as his
Tast of Vice, he will sooner swallow the Stings and the Gall of Asps, than vouchsafe the licking up of his nauseous Vomit. § 18. But besides this Incouragement (which of it self is very great) from the Fight it self, (a fight for God against Satan, and for the In∣terest of the Soul against Fleshly Lusts,) there is a Third arising to us from the consideration of our support. For 'tis the powerfull Spirit of God,Rom. 8. 26. which helpeth our Infirmities. Yea, when our Infirmities are so potent, as to disable us even from praying, and from crying out for help, the Spirit interceedeth for us with Groans which cannot be uttered. And at the intercession of such a Spirit, our Spiritual Enemies will fly, as the walls of Jericho did fall at the sound of a Trumpet. 'Twas by the help of This Spirit, that though the Enemies of David were still in hand to swallow him up, yet he was able still to say,Psal. 56. 2, 4. He would not fear what Flesh could do unto him. Whilst the weapons of our warfare are not Carnal, but Spiritual, They are mighty, through God, to the pulling down of strong Holds; casting down Imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth it self against God, and bringing into captivity every Thought to the obedience of Christ. Our weapons indeed are mighty, but 'tis through
God, who does not onely guide our Feet, but also lifts up our Hands, and directs our Blows, and often strikes for us Himself too. And yet the Victory which he wins, his Goodness placeth to our Accompt. His is the Glory of the Con∣quest, but Ours the Comfort. And This accor∣dingly was the Incouragement our Saviour gave to his Apostles,Joh. 16. ult. Be of good Comfort, I have over∣come the World. The Sting of Death, which is Sin, He hath pluck'd out for us. The strength of Sin, which is the Law, He hath weaken'd in our behalf. He hath routed our common Ene∣my, and looks that We should follow the chase. Which the Apostle well considering, did seem (with one and the same Breath,) to turn his out-cry into an Eulogy, his complaint into a Jubily, his Temptations of Despair into Joy and Triumph.Rom. 7. 24. For no sooner had he said, O wret∣ched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death? But in the next words he added, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Nay farther yet; He does not onely say in another place, Thanks be to God who hath given us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ; But also invents a new Word, to shew the great∣ness of our Victory above that of others; Through Him that loved us,  (says the Text)
we do not onely overcome,Rom. 8. 37. but are more than Conquerors. Indeed without Him our strength is weakness, our Wisedom Folly; and accor∣dingly the Apostle does very appositely exhort us, to be strong in the Lord, and in the Power of His might. Eph. 6. 10. And when 'tis said by S. John, Ye are of God, little Children, and have overcome them, he gives this Reason, Because greater is He that is in You,1 Joh. 2. 14. than he that is in the World. For whatsoever is born of God over∣cometh the World; and this is the Victory that overcometh the World, even our Faith. 1 Joh. 5. 4. This must therefore be our Prayer, That Christ may dwell in our Hearts by Faith. And this will then be our Incouragement,Eph. 3. 17. That being strength∣ned with might in the Inward man, we shall be able to stand in the evil Day.Ver. 16. § 19. But we have yet another Incourage∣ment, to wrestle with and to fight against Fleshly Lusts, from the exceeding great Richness of our Reward. For when we can say with the Apostle, we have fought the god fight, we may also say with him in the same Assurance, because upon the same Ground,2 Tim. 4. 8. Henceforth is laid up for us a Crown of Righteousness. Betwixt which two there is so vast a Disproportion that the Fight is for a moment, and the Sufferings growing
from it do quickly wither; whereas the Crown is immarcescible, such as cannot but injoy an eternal Spring. And therefore S. Paul vvas not out in his Reckoning, vvhen he reckon'd that the Sufferings (and amongst Them the Self-denials) of this present time, are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us. Rom. 8. 18.A Bold ex∣pression I confess, but 'tis S. Paul's, 2 Cor. 4. 17. Which kind of Sufferings and Self-denials do not onely praecede, but even work for us a weight of Glory. 2 Cor. 4. 17. And the reason of This expression may be argued even from hence, That to fight against the Flesh, so far forth as to mortifie,Col. 3. 5. and put it to Death,Rom. 8. 13. (which are the literal importance of the Apostles two words, , & ,) is to make our selves Partakers of the sufferings of Christ. Which sufferings of Christ, do not onely occasion, but clearly work for us a weight of Glory. And for this very end do we partake of Christ's sufferings, (by Self-denials on his Accompt,) That when his Glory shall be revealed, we may also rejoyce with exceeding Joy. 1 Pet. 4. 13. Yea the bare consideration of such an unspeakable Reward, did put S. Paul upon Rejoycing, not onely after, but in his Sufferings and Self-denials. Col. 1. 24. A Reward great enough to make a Coward turn Fighter. For who would not fight even for
fear, that he shall lose such a Reward? The onely thing we have to fear, is our not fighting enough to win the Prize we fight for. Now every Fighter (says our Apostle, and so say all Agonistick Writers,) is to keep a strict Diet. S. Paul's words are, He must be1 Cor. 9. 25. temperate in all Things. Alluding plainly to the Olympicks, in which the Combatans were dieted for forty Days. Every Man had his Lent, whereby to fit him for his Encounter; and his Abstinence was his Armour, whereby to guard him from a Defeat. And if They were so Abstemious, to gain a corruptible Crown, how much more should we abstain, for the gaining of a Crown which is not liable to corruption? not onely an exceed∣ing, but an aeternal weight of Glory? Such was the Logick with which S. Paul argued, and such was the Rule of his Acting too. For (saith He) I so run,Ver. 26, 27. not as uncertainly; So fight I, not as one that beateth the Air. But I keep under my Body, and bring it into subjection. His own words are, , & . I fight as a Pancratiast, (that is,) as a Cuffer, and Wrest∣ler too. I beat my Body black and blue? I make an arrant Slave of it; lay upon it both the Yoke and the Cross of Christ; subdue my Flesh unto my Spirit; deny my self the use of
my Christian Liberty; suffer the loss of many things which I might lawfully injoy; that by any means I may attain to the Resurrection of the Dead, that by any means possible I may ap∣prehend That, for which I am also apprehended of Christ Jesus. All which I take to be impor∣ted by those two words, 1 Cor. 9. 27. Where by the way we may observe of our Apostle S. Paul, He did not war against Another's, but against his own Body. For he knew his own Body was the worst Enemy to his Soul; and that to save himself from it, was to keep it under. He knew the Flesh to be so sturdy, and so implacable a Rebel, that if he should suffer it to thrive, and to get an Head, he would have reason to be jea∣lous of its Aspirings; and to stand in some fear, lest whilst he preached unto others, He himself might become a Castaway. § 20. Now we must go, and do likewise. For we expect the same Crown, and are beset with the same Enemies, by which if he was in∣danger'd, much more are we. And therefore if it was His way, much more must it be Ours, to abstain in good earnest from Fleshly Lusts, by abstaining from the things by which they are nourished and upheld. Intemperance is the Mo∣ther of all the rest, or if not properly the Mo∣ther,
yet at least she is the Nurse, as being ever∣more feeding, and making provision for the Flesh, and by consequence giving strength to its several Lusts. And therefore striving for the Mastery, let us be temperate in all things. Let us add Fasting unto our Prayers, and constant Watchfulness unto our Fasting, and persevere in all Three, till we have crucified the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts. For since our Lusts are so restless as never ceasing to rebell, we must be every whit as restless in reducing such Rebels to their Allegiance. Nay it concerns us to be restless, though they should possibly be at rest. For as a Leopard, or a Lion, though sometimes gentle, and debonaire, are yet with reason kept close, in Chains, or Dungeons, be∣cause they still retain the nature of salvage Beasts; so Fleshly Lusts, though very much tamer at one Season, than at another, do yet retain the whole nature of Fleshly Lusts, and if they are not lock'd up in Chains, or thrust down into a Dungeon, we know not how soon they may rage against us. However then our Flesh∣ly Lusts may Seem to be at peace with us, let us never be at peace with our Fleshly Lusts. And though the vileness of our Enemies, or the miseries of a Defeat, the Honour and Gallantry
of our Ingagement, or the Divinity of our Sup∣port, (by the Grace of God, and the Means of Grace,) should not be able of themselves to pre∣vail upon us, yet the additional consideration of the Immensity of our Reward, should (one would think) beget within us the noblest cou∣rage and resolution. We find them both in one Text, and spoken both with one Breath, and the later is an Inference which cannot but fol∣low from the former, That whosoever will but fight the good fight of Faith,1 Tim. 6. 12. will not fail to lay hold on Eternal life. And this the God of all Mercy prepare us for, both for the Glory of his Grace, and for the Worthiness of his Son, unto whom with the Father in the unity of the Spirit, be all Obe∣dience and Thanksgiving for ever and ever. Amen.
OF ABSTAINING In particular from DISOBEDIENCE TO AUTHORITY In things INDIFFERENT, As from the worst and the most scandalous of all FLESHLY LUSTS, in S. Peter's Judgment. 1 PET. 2. 13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake. § 1. SAint Peter having exhorted us to ab∣stain from Fleshly Lusts which war a∣gainst the Soul, and inforc'd his Exhortation with Five strong Reasons, (in the two next
Verses before my Text,) straight gives an In∣stance in the most scandalous and the most dam∣ning piece of Carnality, of all those sorts in ge∣neral from which he exhorted us to abstain. For what Connexion or Coherence can there be be∣twixt my present and former Text, (lying as close by one another, as by S. Peter they could be laid,) unless it be that Disobedience to hu∣man Governours and Laws, is of all Fleshly Lusts the most disgracefull to Christianity, the most repugnant to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, most incompatible with the Profession and the Salvation of a Christian? That this is the mean∣ing of S. Peter, seems to be clear from the word , very significant in the Original, however omitted in the Translation. To stop the Mouths of those Enemies who speak against you as evil Doers, (says S. Peter to the Christians of the , to whom he writes,) by your abstain∣ing from Fleshly Lusts, and by your unblameable Conversation among the Gentiles, , be ye subjected, and , be ye Therefore subjected; and , to every hu∣man Creature, that is to say, to every Man who is a Magistrate, created by God (not by the People) to be a Governour. But still a Crea∣ture, and a Man, and (Both together) an
human Creature; wholly mortal, as to his Per∣son; though wholly divine, as to his Office. Therefore to Him submit your selves, , not for the Magistrates or the People's, or your own sakes onely, but first and chiefly for the Lord's. First, because of the Lord's Precept, Matth. 22. 21. Next, because of the Lord's Example, Matth. 17. 27. Thirdly, because of the Lord's Ordaining him, Rom. 13. 1, 2. Fourth∣ly, because He bears the Lord's Image, and is the Lord's Deputy, Lieutenant, or Vicegerent upon Earth, the Lord's Minister, and Avenger, Rom. 13. 4. Lastly, because ye must love the Lord, (v. 5.) and love the Lord ye cannot, unless ye love the Lord's Surrogate, and your love to Superiours is to be seen in your Obe∣dience. Again, submit your selves without partia∣lity, (, is the Apostle's word,) to every Ordinance of Man, or to All the Lord's Surro∣gates without exception. Not onely to the Supreme, as sent by God's Providence, and God's Commission; but to subordinate Rulers also, as sent by Commission from the Supreme. Not to the Emperour onely Himself, (whether Claudius, or Nero, at the writing of this Epistle,) but to Proconsuls, and Procurators, both of
Asia, and Bithynia, as sent by Caesar. Yet not to Them, against Him; not to Furius Camillus Scribonianus, against Claudius: not to the Par∣liament, against the King; nor to the King, a∣gainst Himself; not at all to his Authority, a∣gainst his Person; nor in his Right, to his Wrong; (as some Christians have plaid the Sophisters to the reproach of Christianity;) But to each in his order. To the King, as Supreme; (so it follows in the Text,) and to Governours, as sent by Him. Where the word as is very emphati∣cal. As, and no otherwise, than as by Him sent. As, and no otherwise, than for His sake, and on His accompt. And so, à quatenus ad omne optimè valet argumentum. Submit your selves to All, as sent by Him; and submit your selves to None, but so far forth as He sends them. S. Peter's Logick is very plain, and makes the Case very clear upon every side. § 2. Of all the Arguments or Reasons which are producible for the inforcing S. Peter's Prae∣cept, here are two of concernment to Men in general, and a Third for Believers, or Christian People in particular. Of the two former, the first is taken from the Author and Assertor of All Authorities, unto which Men as Men are here commanded to submit. They must do it prop∣ter
Dominum, because The Lord hath Autho∣rized human Authorities upon Earth, and The Lord will defend or avenge them All. The se∣cond is taken from the End of the divine Consti∣tution of Human Authorities in the World. To wit, an equal Distribution both of Punishments, and Rewards. Those to Evil-Doers, and These to Them that do well. (v. 14.) By which Distribution of which two things is procured the Peace and Quiet, and by consequence the Happiness of human life. The Third and spe∣cial Argument, touching us meerly as we are Christians, is taken from the Credit of Jesus Christ and His Gospel, which We who are Chri∣stians are highly obliged to assert. And assert it we cannot by any one Argument so well, as by submitting our selves impartially to every Or∣dinance of Man. By making it appear to the Jews and Heathens, that the Gospel or Law of Christ obliges its Subjects to live a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and honesty. That Chri∣stianity is a Religion, either reviving or intro∣ducing love and loyalty and order and Tran∣quillity into the World. That Obedience to the Authority of human Laws and Legislators, is one of the Prime Characteristicks whereby a Christian is to be known. That the best Chri∣stians
are still the loyal'st. That the more we love and fear the Lord Jesus Christ, the more we submit for the Lord's sake to every Ordinance of Man. And that They who do otherwise, are but Titular Christians; not at all Christians, but in Profession; none of Christ's Followers, but in Repute. And therefore Christianity must not be estimated by Them, who are Rebels to the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Nor must We who are The Lord's, by submitting our selves for the Lord's sake, be measur'd by Them who are none of Ʋs, but Disorderly Walkers out of the High way to Heaven, from whom S. Paul bids us withdraw our selves; and whom S. John bids us not receive into our Houses, nor bid them God speed; and that for the Credit of the Gospel, which (but for this Prophylactick) They would bring into Disgrace. § 3. This Third and last and special Argu∣ment of S. Peter, drawn from the Credit of Christianity, for the inforcing of our Submission to every Ordinance of Man, thereby meaning our Obedience to human Laws and Legislators, is of so great a value with him, and so peculiar to us as Christians, that He urges This Twice in a little room; immediately before, and immediately after my present Text. First, our Loyalty and
Obedience, and all other honest Conversation must be made known unto The Gentiles, that they who speak against us as Evil-doers may by our good works which they shall behold, glorifie God in the day of Visitation. (v. 12.) Next, it is the will of God, that with such our well-doing we may put to silence the ignorance of foolish Men. (v. 15.) This is an Argument which S. Paul does urge often, whereby to make men afraid and asham'd of Vice. Through you (says He unto the Christians who dwelt at Rome) the Name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles.Rom. 2. 24. For the unbelieving Gentiles do judge by your Practice of your Profession; by the Blemishes of your lives who are called Christians, they grow averse to Christianity; and have no good opi∣nion of Christ himself whom you worship, be∣cause they guess that your Religion has so very ill an influence upon your Lives. So again ar∣gues S. Paul to Timothy,1 Tim. 6. 1. Let as many Servants as are under the Yoke (either under Heathen Masters, or amongst Heathen Men) count their Masters worthy of all honour, that the name of God and his Doctrine be not blasphemed. For when Servants are refractory, or Subjects rebel∣lious, although they are such to Heathen Masters or Magistrates, they draw disgrace upon the
Gospel, and tempt the Infidels to believe that men are the worse for being Christians; that the Doc∣trine of Christ is corruptive of Principles, as well as Manners; and Christian Liberty but a Cloak for rebellious Practice. Now to antidote this Venom, and to wipe off this Disparagement, as well from the Doctrine, as from the Name of Jesus Christ, S. Paul commands Timothy to be earnest and often in preaching Obedience and Submission to all Superiours; esteeming These the weightier things of the Christian Law. And therefore These things Teach and Exhort,Ver. 2. (says He to Timothy with an Emphasis,) as being Things most essential, not onely to the saving of Christian's Souls, but essential to the saving of Christianity it self, and to the saving of our Sa∣viour from being blasphemed among the Gen∣tiles. And for as much as no Obedience can be more naturally or politically, or religiously due from one Mortal unto another, than from Wives to their own Husbands, S. Paul does there∣fore press Titus to preach up This also for This great End,Tit. 2. 5. that the Word of God be not blasphe∣med. That Christian Religion may not suffer by their Enemies taking notice of their un∣christian disobedience to those above them. That Jews or Gentiles may not suspect any ill
Issues or Infusions of Christian Principles, as if they were exclusive of moral Virtue; and that Inferiours either were, or that they might be the worse for their being Christians. Lastly, since Masters are a kind of Domestick Magistrates, to whom Obedience also is due by the same divine Right, (and no sturdy Servant will ever make a good Subject,) Servants therefore must be urged to be Obedient to their own Masters,Ver. 8, 9, 10. and to please them well in all things, not answering again, for This Great Reason, that they may adorn the Doctrine of God our Saviour in all things; and that he who is of the contrary part may be asham'd, having no evil thing to say of them. § 4. From All which ways of Argumentation put together, I conceive my self qualified to make these profitable Conclusions. That Obe∣dience and Submission to every Ordinance of man for the Lord's sake, whether Supreme, or Subor∣dinate by his Commission, does make the most (of all Duties) for the Ornament and Honour of Christianity. That Disobedience and Resistance do make the most for its Disgrace. That the Doctrine of Obedience to publick Parents, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, is more authentica∣ted and taught by Jesus Christ and his Apostles
throughout the Gospel, than by all other Systems, Codes, or Pandects, by all other Bodies, Col∣lections, or Constitutions of Religion, or Phi∣losophy, throughout the World. From all which things it seems to follow, that they who call themselves Christians, and yet are Authors or Fomenters of Schisms and Factions, (such in∣dustrious Embroilers of Church and State, by sowing the Seeds of discontentment and of dis∣satisfaction in People's Minds, as if they long'd to be fishing in Troubl'd Waters and to be lick∣ing up again those publick Spoils and Reve∣nues, which they were forced to disgorge in the Great Year of Restitution,) They (I say) who thus act, and yet do call themselves Christians, are the greatest Antichristians, the greatest Ad∣versaries of Christ, and the greatest underminers of Christianity, which He can possibly set on Work who was a Murtherer from the Beginning. Can any Man wonder at the spreading of Irreli∣gion and Atheism, more since the Year 41, than ever before in our Memories, and perhaps in our Readings too? (unless I may except the Days of Hildebrand, when Hell is said to have broken loose?) One accompt of it is plain and ob∣vious: The horridst Rebellion under Heaven (from after the Year 41) having been managed
by Christians, made the name odious ever since. Insomuch that some Blasphemers have dar'd to say, (not That old and common word onely, sit Anima mea cum Philosophis, but as the effect of a greater hatred,) They would not indure going to heaven, if they thought they should meet with such Christians There. Which, though the lan∣guage of the most stupid and thick-headed Sin∣ners, who can no better distinguish 'twixt Words and Things, or 'twixt the Picture and the Life, or 'twixt the Vizard and the true Face, or 'twixt the Actor and the Man, or 'twixt the Use and the Abuse of the best things that can be nam'd, or last of all, betwixt a Nominal and Real Chri∣stian; should yet be sufficient to deter such as are Christians at least in Wish, from giving occa∣sion for the future to such Aversions. If the E∣nemies of Christ would but read over our Gospel, and well consider it, they would be juster and more ingenuous, than to look upon Rebels and Mutineers, in Christian Kingdoms and Com∣monwealths, as truly Christians. But rather would guess that out of Malice they wear the Pro∣fession of Christianity, to make it odious; on purpose to bring it into disgrace; and (as much as in them lies) to make us all asham'd of it. Though God be thanked we are so far
from being asham'd of the Gospel of Christ, or asham'd of our Affliction in the Gospel's being abus'd,Jam. 2. 7. and in The Adversaries Blaspheming that worthy Name, by which 'tis our Happiness and our Privilege to be called, that weAct. 5. 41. rejoyce to be thought worthy to suffer shame for Christ's sake. Yea 'tis our , Such Disgrace is our Boasting; and weRom. 5. 3. glory in Tribulations. Yea one step farther S. Paul advances; we do so glory in our disparagement which we suffer for our Submission to every Ordinance of man upon Christ's accompt, or in Obedience to his Doctrine, or for the Lord's sake, (as S. Peter speaks,) that we glory in Nothing else. God forbid that we should Glory (says S. Paul to the Galatians) save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,Gal. 6. 14. by whom the World is crucified unto us, and we unto the World. § 5. But what I speak last is but Occasional, and may be reckon'd as a Parenthesis, shewing All are not stagger'd or wavering in the Faith, though many are. And indeed they are so many whom the Schisms and Rebellions of men pro∣fessing Christianity have made to waver, if there are not many more whom they have made to fall off; There are so many who do suspect the Christian Name in them that wear it as a cloak of Mali∣ciousness,
(which S. Peter provides against in the 16th. Verse of this Chapter,) and so many who do detest it for being so worn; that if ever there can be any, This is certainly the Time, wherein the People are to be press'd to obey their Governours. God I mean in the first place, and human Authority in the second. And This as really in the second, as that other in the first, because our Obedience to the first does clearly depend (for its Completion) upon our Obe∣dience to the second. Men should be made to understand, by perspicuous and frequent and cogent reasonings, how the whole of our Reli∣gion may be easily wound up into these two Bot∣toms; our adaequate Obedience to God and Man. To the Royal Law of Christ, and to the Laws of the Nation wherein we live; whether those Laws are Ecclesiastical, or Civil. These two are the Measures we may warrantably take of our selves, and others. These two are the Touchstones by which we all are to be try'd. Not the one without the other. There is no fearing God, without honouring the King, nor vice versâ. Our Obedience to God is a thing impossible, with∣out a suitable Obedience to his Vicegerents; whe∣ther the King as Supreme, or other Governours Subordinate. These commissioned by Him, as
He by God. Not onely Scripture, and Reason, but long Experience, and Observation, have made me look on These two as things which are never to be parted, either in Practice, or in Discourse. Without These two, all the rest are worth no∣thing. And neither of These alone can be sin∣cere without the other.Prov. 24. 21. My Son (says Solomon) fear the Lord and the King, and meddle not with Them that are given to change. Either fear them Both, or Neither; though each in his Order; The Lord for his own sake, and therefore First; The King for the Lord's sake, and therefore Se∣cond. But meddle not with Them, whose evil communication may corrupt thy good manners; and therefore meddle not with Them that are given to change, who do neither fear God, nor honour the King; and accordingly are weigh'd in the opposite Scale of the Wise man's Ballance. The People must not onely be told now and then upon the By, but must purposely be taught, nor must they cease from being taught until con∣vinc'd of this union, [The fear of God and of the King, Obedience to Divine and to human Laws,] as essential to our Present and Future Safety. § 6. When I inquire into the Reasons, why amongst a World of Christians there is so little of Christianity; and why the Pro∣testants
themselves divide as much from one another, as they all do from the Church of Rome, which is as much as from the Jews or the Turks themselves, (for they will no more communicate with the one than with the other, although in most Fundamentals they All agree,) This, amongst several other reasons, appears to me to be the chief, that there is one thing Essen∣tial to the Christian Religion, and by conse∣quence to the Salvation of all men's Souls, which, however a Fundamental, is not yet so well known, or not so heartily believ'd, or not so seriously consider'd, and laid to heart, nor so duly preached up, as it ought to be. For if it were, there could not be so many Schisms and Separations here in England, as now there are. There could not be by any means such Inclina∣tions to Rebellion, such Oppositions of Authority, and such Contempt of human Laws, (whether Civil or Ecclesiastical,) as now we see there are daily; and are rather in a likelihood to grow worse and worse, than in any present Hope of a sound Amendment. Now the Truth which is Essential to our Christian Religion, and to the saving of our Souls, (which I conceive to be so seldom either known, or believ'd, or suffi∣ciently Consider'd, or Taught as such,) is plainly
This: [That the Duties of the First Table, can∣not possibly subsist without the Duties of the Second. That Obedience to God, does ever include and carry with it a strict Obedience un∣to our Governours. That human Laws (where e're the matter of them is lawfull) are the Laws of God too. And that for this cogent irre∣sistible reason, (which I have several times ur∣ged, and think I can never urge it enough,) because commanded by that Authority which God has commanded us to obey.] § 7. Shall I exemplifie and illustrate what I say by plain Scripture on either side? God for∣bids us by Moses to worship Idols. And He bids us, by S. Peter, submit our selves to every Ordi∣nance of man. Again, He bids us, by S. Paul, Obey them that have the Rule over us.Heb. 13. 17. Now is not God's Law as binding in what he bids, as in what he forbids his peculiar People? I know the former binds Semper, and the later ad Sem∣per. But when they Both bind, they cannot but bind with an Aequality. Or is not his per∣emptory Command as obliging under the Gospel, as it was under the Law? Is not the Message of God as good, when dispatch'd to us Christians by S. Peter, and S. Paul, and by Christ himself, as when sent unto the Jews by a single Moses?
Is not God the same Jehova to Them and Ʋs? and his Word as authentick in these last Times, as in the First? Why then do not Christians make it a matter of as much Conscience, to obey the Laws of Men whom God has commanded them to obey, as not to worship a graven Image which God has commanded them not to worship? That Each is equally God's Command, was ne∣ver deny'd by any Christian, nor ever can be. And is not His Command that we do a Good thing, as valid as his Command that we abstain from what is evil? Yea, 'tis as much a Christian's Duty, to obey his lawfull Governours, and by consequence their Laws Ecclesiastical and Civil, as it is, not to worship a graven Image. The first is as conducible to our Salvation as the se∣cond. And Damnation is as much threatened to the Breach of the one, as the other Precept. § 8. Now in my slender judgement, (and such as it is, 'tis the best I have,) there can be no likelier way, whereby to win over our weak and dissenting Brethren from the ways of Sepa∣ration they have espous'd, than that of labour∣ing to convince them by all good means, from the Pulpit, and from the Pew, and in the pri∣vacy of the Closet, by publick Preaching, and Catechizing, and private Conferences especial∣ly
(which we shall find to be ever the most ef∣fectual,) that (saving the Dignity and Priority of the first and great Commandment, as the Ground and Foundation of all the rest,) our Obedience to our Governours, and human Laws in force amongst us, is as really an essential or Fundamental of Christianity, and of as absolute Necessity to our Salvation, as the Belief of one God, or any other that can be nam'd. It being as rigidly commanded by God in Scripture, under the very same Promises of Reward if we obey, and under the very same Threats of end∣less Punishment if we rebel. 'Tis not enough that This Doctrine be like the Homily of the Church against Rebellion, which is commanded by Law and Canon to be read once a year in every Parish; nor is it enough that it be preach∣ed up of course upon the Thirtieth of January, and the Fifth of November; But 'tis of absolute necessity to be riveted and ingrain'd, first of all into the Heads, and after That, into the Hearts of People committed to our charge, that they must needs be Subject, (that is, Obedient) to human Magistrates and Laws, not onely for fear of the Magistrates Wrath, or for hope of worldly Profit, no nor onely for fear of Hell, or for hope of Heaven, but (as S. Paul goes on to
tell us) for Conscience sake. I say, for Con∣science towards God, and for Conscience towards our selves, because 'tis part of the Law of Na∣ture, and simply Good in it self: not consequen∣tially, (as every positive Law is) but antece∣dently obliging, and without any the least re∣lation to God's particular written Law, (so often repeated in the Scriptures,) though This does make our Disobedience to be the more unex∣cusable, and the Person disobeying fit for the greater Condemnation.Matth. 23. 14. I know the Custom of Disobedience, and the great Numbers of the Refractary, and their Impunity thereupon, and the seemingly-good morals of some Dissenters, and their giving out themselves for the Godly Party, (These five Fallacies put together) have bred an opinion in many weak and unwary Christians, that they need not be subject to the Higher Pow∣ers upon Earth, though S. Paul says they Need, Rom. 13. 5. That the Powers spoken of are not the Ordinance of God, though S. Paul says they are. (v. 1, 2.) That they may not submit to every Ordinance of Man, though S. Peter says they must. (1 Pet. 2. 13.) And so they imagin that it consists with a Godly life, to slight the Autho∣rity of their Governours, and scorn their Laws, unless when their Governours and their Laws
are to protect Them and Theirs, both in their Livelihoods and their Lives, from fraud and violence. (in which one case, they will readily submit to every Ordinance of man, though not for the Lord's sake, as S. Peter would have it, yet for their own.) In a word, they think it lawfull, to live in Schism, if not in Sacrilege; (still in Sacrilege where they are able;) and so to tear in pieces, not the Seamless Coat onely, but the Body of Christ crucified in a mystical sense. § 9. To frame an Amulet in proportion to the Contagion of this Disease, wherewith a world of easie Souls of catching Complexions have been infected, I humbly conceive it may be made of these Six Ingredients. First, that no Form of Godliness can be other than Pharisaical, which is not attended with common Honesty. Next, that none can be truly honest, who do not render to All their Dues. Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honour to whom Honour. (Rom. 13. 7.) Thirdly, that nothing can be more due from any one to any other, than from the Subject to the Soveraign, and all in Authority under Him.
To wit, the Tribute of Obedience, as well as Money; the active Custom of Conformity, as well as passive Subjection to Laws in force; and as well to Those Laws which tend to the publick Peace and Safety, as those others which main∣tain us in the private injoyment of our Estates; The Fear of offending, as well as of suffering for our Offences; lastly, the Honour of inward Reverence, as well as of outward Complaisance. Not as Men-pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ. Fourthly, that a Dishonest man is ipso facto and eo ipso an ungodly man; and Disobedience to the Fifth Precept, as bad as Rebellion against the seventh or the eighth, or rather worse; And so a Common Nonconformist to Laws establish'd, is (to speak within compass) as Scandalous in his life as a Common Drunkard. Fifthly, that such a Subject as will no longer allow the Laws, than the Laws allow Him in his being lawless, or no longer than they are usefull and pleasant to him, (as when they avenge him upon his Enemies, protect him in his Liberty, and assert him in his Estate,) deserves not those Benefits of Propriety and safety the Laws afford him. Sixthly, that as many as do avow themselves
Protestants, and yet divide from the Church of England, do contribute a great deal more to∣wards the bringing in of Popery, than All the Emissaries of Rome could have done without them. § 10. If we earnestly desire (at least as much as in us lies) to put an end to all Schisms and Separations; to procure or promote the publick Peace of this Nation, and (in That) the publick Safety, by procuring and promo∣ting Ʋniformity in Religion, and a general Con∣formity to the Laws we live under; we must be restless in convincing all the People we can con∣verse with of these Six things. Not onely by making them unable to deny, but by making them able to assert the Truth of them, and there∣by to be Converters of other men. We must never be at rest, nor let Them be so, until they are perfect in these Particulars. Or if not in all, yet especially in the chief. As, that though the Laws of God cannot possibly depend on the Laws of Men, (but vice versâ,) yet our Obe∣dience to God's own Laws does depend on our Obedience to Those of Men. They onely differ by the Distinction of mediate and immediate. And so they are Termini Convertibiles; for the immediate Laws of Men are the mediate Laws of
God. And that by force of This Text (never enough to be repeated, and chew'd upon,) Sub∣mit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake. And why for the Lord's sake, if not because the Lord hath so appointed? What God does mediately command by his several Deputies, his Moses, and his Aaron, his Zerub∣babel, and his Joshua, and all his succeeding Le∣gislators in Church and State, He does as really, and as truly, and as bindingly command, as what He immediately commands by a Voice from Heaven. In so much that the Distinction of me∣diate and immediate does no ways alter the Ob∣ligation, or make God's Law either more or less His. Now though the Doctrine of Obedience unto the mediate Commands of God, is very learnedly, and piously, and frequently preach'd in many Places, yet it has not universally its wish'd effect, because not preach'd as a Fun∣damental, as essential to our Religion, and as of absolute Necessity to the Salvation of the Soul. The Doctrine cannot be press'd enough, until 'tis press'd in This Notion. For Liberty is so sweet, and Obligation so distastfull to most mens Palates, that they will never make Con∣science of being punctually Obedient to hu∣man Ordinances and Laws, whilst they are
flatter'd that their Souls may be sav'd with∣out it. § 11. Touching the several Ways and Means whereby This Work is to be done, I am plainly of This opinion. That though it may be well done from out the Pulpit, in such profitable Discourses as we commonly call Sermons; yet very much better it may be done out of the Pew, in the more primitive way of Preaching, and the more profitable, I think, which is Catechizing. But best of all by private Conference, wherein we deal with our Dissenters one by one; and give them the reasonable Advantage (which in the publick they cannot have) of alledging all they can for their Separation, and of objecting all they can against our Church from which they separate, and by consequence against the 33 Acts of Parliament by which our Liturgy and Church do remain establish'd. For This Advantage given to Them by a Private Con∣ference, gives Ʋs also the Advantage of giving clear and full Answers to their Objections. Which if we do to their Satisfaction, we shall gain them back to God, and to His Spouse (our Dear Mo∣ther) The Church of England. This we cer∣tainly shall do, if their Error is but of Weak∣ness, and so consistent with an honest well mean∣ing
Spirit; whereas if of Wilfulness, Pride, and Stomach, Then indeed they are possess'd with such a Deaf and Dumb Spirit, as of which (without a Miracle) we are not able to dispossess them. And so we may lawfully give them over as incurable Patients on whom All Remedies are cast away. (As we may lawfully cease to cast that which is holy unto Dogs.) For in good Earnest, of the two, I do esteem it a lesser Mi∣racle, to make the Blind man to see, or the Deaf to hear, than either the Wilfull to believe, or the Obstinate to submit to the clearest Reason. The onely Charity left for Such, is to deli∣ver them up to Satan; I will not say for the Destruction, but Humiliation of the Flesh; that so (if by any means possible) their Spirits may be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus.1 Cor. 5. 5. § 12. If what I have said is not sufficient to reach the end I aim at, I will try what success I may happen to obtain by a shorter Method; The Method of Marcus Aemilius Scaurus, a ve∣ry Noble Roman of known Integrity. Who being accused before the People in a very long Oration by Varius Sucronensis an envious Knave, defended himself in a very short one; or (to say truly) in None at all. For disdaining to con∣tend
with his base Enemy in words, He onely ask'd the Roman People this Question. Which of the Two (ye men of Rome) think ye the wor∣thier of your Belief? Varius Sucronensis, who does confidently affirm Aemilius Scaurus to be Guilty? or Aemilius Scaurus rather, who does protest that he is Innocent? Upon which words alone the Person accused was acquit∣ted; and the Envious Accuser severely cen∣sur'd. In a manner not unlike I shall onely say Here. The great Apostle S. Peter, as the Holy Ghost's Penman, bids us all submit our selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake. Whether to the King, as Supreme; or unto Go∣vernours, as sent by Him. But certain men of these Times, crept in unawares, who despise Do∣minion, and speak evil of Dignities, who think themselves of more knowledge and greater Authority than S. Peter, do as absolutely for∣bid, as S. Peter bids us. They will not have us submit to any Ordinance of Man, either Subordinate, or Supreme. But they will have us (for the Lord's sake) to recalcitrate ra∣ther, and kick, at every Ordinance of Man, as incroaching too much on our Christian Li∣berty. Now if I ask which of the Two, (S. Pe∣ter,
or His Enemies,) we ought to follow, or obey; very confident I am, ye will say S. Peter. These (I think) are words enough to have been us'd at This Time, upon the grounds I have to hope that No more are needfull.
A CAVEAT Touching the Danger of REFUSING THOSE CAVEATS Our LORD hath given us in His GOSPEL. HEB. 12. 25. See that ye Refuse not Him that speaketh. For if They escaped not who refused Him that spake on Earth, much more shall not We escape, if we turn away from Him that speak∣eth from Heaven. § 1. AS it hath frequently been said of the Laws of England, They are so many, and so good, that there needs but one
more, for the putting of the rest into Execution; so I may say with like reason of Sermons too; They are so every where enough, in case they are enough heeded, that there needs but one more, for the procuring to the rest a kind and hospitable Reception. For without such a Re∣ception, 'twere better for us that our Sermons were not fewer onely, but worse too. My reason is, because the more, and the more powerfull our Teaching is, by so much the more our Non-Proficiency must needs be render'd Inexcusable. Regular Preaching was ever reckon'd amongst the means of Salvation. And by the means of Salvation whosoever is not better'd, must needs be worse. Not to go forwards, is to go back∣wards, in the School of Christ; And when the Gospel is not admitted but to our outward Ears onely, it cannot be but as a Milstone about our Necks too.Luk. 2. 34. For as 'twas said by old Simeon of Christ Himself, That he is certainly for the Fall,Mat. 23. 14. where he is not for the Rising of many in Israel;Mat. 12. 40. so the Preaching of Christ, if we profit not by it, will accidentally be imploy'd unto our greater Damnation. § 2. Now considering this duly, with one thing more, That as Creeds have multiplied, True Believers have decreas'd; That as Christian
Professors do grow more numerous, Christianity it self doth seem to lessen; And that the Multi∣tude of Religions hath been in some Danger to thrust Religion out of the World, (the Spirit of God being of Ʋnity,Eph. 4. 3, 4. and not of Division, where∣as the Devils name is Legion,Mar. 5. 9. for they are many,) I say considering all This, both in the Causes and the Effects, and that the Time is long since come, wherein Professors of Christianity will not indure sound Doctrine,2 Tim. 4. 3. but having proud and Itching Ears do heap up Teachers to them∣selves, such as make for their Palate, and hit their Fancy, (which very Teachers cannot please them one minute longer, than whilst they speak pleasant Things, and only prophecy Deceipt,) and that of all our Epidemical or National Sins, none is likelier to provoke or pull down Natio∣nal Calamities, than a general slighting and contempt of the Messages of God in the Mouths of Men; I think it will not be impertinent to press that Caveat upon our selves, which God's inspir'd Amanuensis did inculcate somewhat of∣ten on his Disciples, (a Caveat which deserves and bespeaks an Audience, and which does not onely invite, but also threaten us into Atten∣tion,) See that ye refuse not Him that speaketh. For if they escaped not who refused him that spake
on Earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from Him that speaketh from Hea∣ven. § 3. The Text consider'd in the gross, is a rowzing Warning, or Alarm. And being ta∣ken in the retail, it hath Three general parts. First, the matter of the Warning, which though but negatively express'd by a bare [not refusing him that speaketh,] yet sure it cannot but be imply'd, that we must give a great Attention to the excellent Things that are spoken by him. Secondly, the Persons, who (above all other Persons) are most concern'd; and These are im∣ply'd in the Pronoun Ye. Ye that are Christians of the Hebrews, as having heard and imbraced the Faith of Christ, , See that Ye do not refuse. See that Ye be not debauch'd by whatsoever sollicitations of Jews or Gnosticks. Thirdly, the Argument, or Ground, by which the Warning is inforced and urged on; and This again is twofold. First the Experience of grea∣ter Mercies than had been shewn unto the Jews; Next, the Sequel of greater Judgments, in case those Mercies shall be abus'd. The greater Mercies are very evident from the comparison in the Text. They were spoken to by Moses, but We by Christ.Heb. 3. 5. Moses was faithfull in all his
house as a Servant, but Christ as a Son. Moses spake to Them on Earth, but Christ does speak to Ʋs from Heaven. And that the Judgments must be greater in case the Mercies shall be abus'd, is just as evident from the Reason on which the Text is here built. For Ingratitude is a Sin the most provoking to be imagin'd. And This receiving its aggravation from the number and weight of foregoing Favours, infers our Judge so much the fiercer in being revenged upon our Sins, the more indearing obligations we Sin against. For if they escaped not who refused Him that spake on Earth, much more shall not we, if we turn away from Him that speaketh from Heaven. Having thus view'd the Text in its several parts, let us observe the Propositions which are deducible from the whole. First, as Men (in the general) above all other Creatures, so Christians (in particular) above all other Men, are not onely not to refuse, but to imbrace, and adore Him that speaketh to them from Heaven. We must not onely be contemplative, but practical Hearers of the Word. Secondly, Christians are not excusable for their Apostacies or Neglects, by the greatest
Temptations to be imagin'd. But the greater Temptations they meet withall, the greater use they are to make of their Ghostly strength, and the more to illustrate their Christian Courage. For Thirdly, the more we do injoy the glorious Privileges of Christians, the more obnoxious we are to consuming Fire, (in the last Verse of this Chapter,) on a supposal that we be found to be dry, and fruitless, and so combustible matter for it. Lastly, not to give Attention to the Word of God speaking, not to love and entertain it with Faith and Fear, does pass with Him for a flat Refusal. For  is to reject with an Aver∣sation; it is the word S. Paul useth, when he exhorts his Son Timothy to refuse Prophane and old Wives Fables.1 Tim. 4. 7. And the opposite Thing to it is , to give an earnest heed unto the words which we have heard. (Heb. 2. 1.) Betwixt which two because we see not any me∣dium, , See the rather that ye refuse not him that speaketh. The third of these Propositions is an Inforce∣ment of the first, and must be therefore treated of in conjunction with it. But yet since it is not the sole Inforcement, (nor indeed should be
the chief, were we men of more ingenuous and generous Natures,) it will be fit to introduce it with some few others, and such as are aptest to prevail with men of the noblest Dispositions. Now there are four things especially, (all arising out of the Text,) by which this Warning may be inforced. To wit, the Quality of the Speaker, the Nature of what is spoken, the Con∣dition of the Persons to whom he speaks, and the Inevitable Destruction to such as are guilty of a Refusal. § 4. First consider who it is that speaks unto us in the Gospel. 'Tis He that sitteth be∣tween the Cherubims, and covereth himself with Light, as with a Garment. He that inhabiteth Eternity, and dwelleth in that Light which no mortal Eye can approach unto. He of whom 'tis therefore said by the royal Psalmist, that Clouds and Darkness are round about him, though righ∣teousness and judgment are the Habitation of his Seat. He that stretcheth out the Heavens, and layeth the Foundations of the earth, and formeth the Spirit of man within him. He that guards us with his Angels, and that guides us by his Spi∣rit. He that protects us by his Providence, and directs us by his Grace, and that orders all he does to crown us finally with his Glory. In a
word, 'tis God the Father, that speaks unto us in the Gospel by God the Son. And therefore for this, if for no other reason, so that ye refuse not Him that speaketh, because he speaketh in the language of unspeakable Love, and unspeak∣able Humility. For when as yet we lay weltring and polluted in our Bloud, how did he save us as so many Brands pluck'd out of the Burning? how very gladly did he descend from out the Bosom of the Father, to bid us Live? 'Twas He that descended to be born, to make himself capable of dying. 'Twas He that died for our sins, to become capable of rising for our Justifi∣cation. 'Twas He that rose, and ascended, and sat him down on the right hand of the Throne of Majesty on high,Heb. 1. 3. That there he might make In∣tercession for us; That by the Gifts of his Apostles whom he inspir'd for that end, he might cause his holy Gospel to be still Echoing in our Ears; and that by sending his Holy Spirit at once to sanctifie and instruct us, he might place it as a Signet upon our Hearts too. From whence it follows unavoidably, That if we miss of those things which have thus been prepared and pur∣chas'd for us, and shall finally come short of the glory of God, we cannot say unto God, that He hath withheld his good things from us; but
God may rather say to us, as heretofore to his People Israel,Jer. 5. 25. Your Iniquities have turned away these things, and your Sins have withholden good things from you. 'Tis onely the hardness of our Hearts, and the Spirit within, which har∣dens every thing else that is without us. 'Tis That that many times makes the Heavens Brass over our heads,Deut. 28. 23. and the Earth Iron under our feet. 'Tis very certain that on God's part, no∣thing has been wanting to make us happy. He came to this end, that we might receive him. He spake to this end, that we might hear him. Was lifted up to this end, that he might draw us up after him. And draws us up to this end, that he may seat us with himself at the right hand of God. And if our hearts are now such heavy, such unweildy pieces of Iron, or have a mixture of so much Lead in their composition, as not to be lifted above the Earth by so strong a Load∣stone, it does not argue a want on Christ's part, of enough Magnetick Virtue whereby to draw us, but onely a wilfulness on ours, whereby we gain an Incapacity of being drawn. Now for the better overcoming this brutish fleshliness of our Spirits, let us repeat and rein∣force the Consideration we are upon. God the Father speaks to us, by God the Son, what is
written by the Suggestion of God the Holy Ghost. There is nothing of Human in all the Gospel, be∣sides the labour of the Evangelists, in commit∣ting it to Posterity with Ink and Parchment, which yet was done by the Conduct of God him∣self. 'Tis true the Law was of God too, but That came byJoh. 1. 17. Moses; whereas the Gospel came from him by Jesus Christ. Christ was sent and Joh. 14. 10. commission'd by God the Father, as the Apostles were commission'd and sent by Christ. For so he told them at that Instant when he gave them their Mission and their Commission, (Joh. 20. 21.) As my Father sent Me,Joh. 14. 10. so send I You.Joh. 20. 21. From whence he is called by S. Paul, not onely the high Priest, but the Apostle of our Profession, Heb. 3. 1. All the Twelve were but Apostles of this one great Apostle, as well to offer us the Terms of Peace and Pardon, as to intreat and implore our Acceptance of it. Now when God sends Himself in a Message to us; when the Hea∣vens are bowed down to imbrace the Earth; when even Happiness it self is brought to visit us at our Houses, (which at present are but floating in a Valley of Tears;) and brought by Him who is the Author of Bliss and Glory; whose Dwelling is not onely in, but above the Hea∣vens; to whom the Sun in his Zenith is but a
Shadow, and the whole Globe of Earth but an humble Footstool; sure the least we can do, is to bid him welcome, to give him an hospitable Reception, and to open the Door of the House within us, at which he is pleas'd to stand knock∣ing, and sue for Entrance, with a Behold I stand at the Door and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the Door, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me, (Rev. 3. 20.) And therefore if ye can afford him no better cheer, yet at least entertain him without Contempt, ne∣ver treat him at his coming with a dishonour∣able Averseness, , See that ye refuse not him that speaketh. How many Miles did men go, in the heathen World, to hear but a Socrates, or a Pythagoras, a Plato, or a Plotinus? How many Miles went a Queen, to hear the Apophthegms of Solomon? what pains were taken by the Jews, to hear the reading of the Law? what by Naaman the Sy∣rian, to hear the Counsel of Elisha, a single Pro∣phet? And shall not God obtain a hearing, when he speaks to us by his Son? and by such a Son too, as is God himself? Certainly for the hearing of such a Speaker, 'twere worth our labour to go to Him, although it should cost us a longer Journy than from Sheba to Jerusalem; much
less should we refuse him, when He (in preven∣tion,) is come to us; when God, to make us his adopted Sons, does freely expose his onely begotten; and appoints him the Speaker, who is the Word too; I mean the hypostatical eternal Word. Who yet doesRev. 3. 20. stand at our Door, in a posture of painfulness and humility, whilst we are lolling in his House, and perhaps sitting at his Table. How that the Dignity of the Speaker should become an Incitement to our Attention, and what attention we ought to give to Him that speaketh in the Gospel, we may infer from that which Moses did once exact under the Law. What Attention that was, and how he evinc'd the greatness of it from the great Dignity of the Speaker, will best be seen by comparing three passages of Scripture. Deut. 4. 32, 33. Deut. 6. 6, 7, 8, 9. and Deut. 11. 18, 19, 20. In the first of which three, Moses magnifies the Privilege allow'd by God to the People Israel, To hear the voice of God speaking from out the midst of the Fire. Did ever People hear the like? in any Time? or at any Place? First, for Time, Ask the days that are past, since the day wherein God created Man upon the earth. Secondly, for Place, Ask from the one side of heaven unto the other, whether there hath been any such thing
as This, or hath been ever heard like it. In the two next passages, Moses strictly injoyns the People, to addict themselves wholly to the words of God's Law; to be conversant with them both Day and Night; to have them always upon their Hands, and in their Mouthes, between their Eyes, and in their Hearts. Whereupon we are to argue à minori ad majus. If such at∣tention was to be given to what was spoken one∣ly by Moses to all the People, how much more to what is spoken by Jesus Christ? for Christ was counted worthy of more glory than Moses, in as much as He that built the House, hath more honour than the House, (Heb. 3. 3.) And by how much a Son is above a Servant. (v. 5, 6.) And therefore if the Words which God had spo∣ken by his Servant, much more are the Words which He hath spoken by his Son, very fit to be written upon our Gates, and our Door-posts, to be fixt as Frontlets between our Eyes, to be set as a Seal upon our Hands, and as a Signet upon our Hearts. We ought to teach them unto our Children, and to be ruminating on them on all Occasions, in season, out of season, when we sit in our Houses, and when we walk by the way, when we lie down, and when we rise up. And thus we have the first of the four Inforcements,
by which the Warning of our Apostle may be set home upon our Souls. § 5. Secondly, Let us consider, (after the Quality of the Speaker,) the Nature of the Things that are spoken by him. They are not any such hard and insupportable sayings, as once were heard from Mount Ebal,Deut. 27. 26. Cursed is he that con∣tinueth not in all things which are written in the Book of the Law to do them;Gal. 3. 10. no nor such as were spoken long before at Beersheba, and to be put in Execution on Mount Moriah,Gen. 22. 2. Take now thy Son, thine onely Son whom thou lovest, and offer him for a Burnt-offering, upon one of the Moun∣tains which I shall tell thee of. No, he does not require of us any such Terrible Expressions of our Obedience. He commands us to kill and slay, not our Children, but our Sins. And yet our Sins are our Children too, the fruit of our Bodies very often, and still the fruit of our Souls. Nay, many times these ugly Children, (I mean our Sins,) are dearer to us than Sons or Daughters. (Agamemnon found it easier to kill a Daughter, than a Lust.) But they are viperous Darlings we so much doat on; such miscreant Children as will kill their own Pa∣rents, if not prevented by being kill'd. And these alone are the Children, which God requires
us to sacrifice to his Displeasure. Not our I∣saacs,Gen. 16. 12. but our Ishmaels, (I mean our wild, and furious, illegitimate Off-spring) are to be slain. We must sacrifice our Dishonesty, by doing Ju∣stice; we must sacrifice our Avarice, by shew∣ing Mercy; and we must sacrifice our Pride, by walking humbly with our God. Mic. 6. 8. Well, ye have heard what it is not; will ye now know what it is, which God in Christ doth speak to us? he speaks the best and the happiest Tidings, that any wounded or broken Spirit can hope or pray for. So God loved the world, that he gave his onely begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him, should not perish, but have life ever last∣ing. Joh. 3. 16. God sent not his Son into the world, to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be sav'd. v. 17. If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. Joh. 7. 37. He that believeth in me, there shall flow out of his Belly, Rivers of living water. v. 38. If a man keep my saying, he shall never see Death. Joh. 8. 51. Come unto me all ye that travel and are heavy la∣den, and I will give you rest. Mat. 11. 28. And if ye ask any thing in my name, I will do it. Joh. 14. 14. Thus we find God the Father speaking to us by his Son. Now observe how God the Son is speaking to us by his Servants. If any man
sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is the propitiation for all our sins. 1 Joh. 2. 1. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him, also freely give us all things? Rom. 8. 32. And here I cannot but call to mind what was said unto Naaman the churlish Syrian.2 King. 5. 10, 11, 12, 13. Who coming to Elisha to be cured of his Lepro∣sie, was prescribed by the Prophet no harder Medicine than to wash seven times in the River Jordan. When He, being Angry, in stead of Thankfull, ask'd if Abana and Pharpar, Rivers of Damascus, were not better than all the Waters of Israel. An Ingratitude so excessive, that his own Servants took him up, I know not whether with a more melting or a more cutting kind of Rebuke, saying to him, My Father, if the Pro∣phet had bid thee do some great thing, wouldst thou not have done it? how much rather when he saith to thee, wash and be clean? After the very same manner may I say here. If God had sent us a Message by his Arch-Angel Michael, who is said by the Rabbins to be the Messenger of his Justice, and so to bring news of the saddest na∣ture; should we not have entertain'd him as a Messenger from Heaven, with Fear and Reve∣rence? And then, (with a greater force of rea∣son,)
when a Messenger so glorious, and one withall so obliging is sent unto us, as God ma∣nifest in the Flesh; and sent unto us in such a Message, as is not onely the word of God, but the word of Reconciliation;2 Cor. 5. 9. sure the least we can render for so much Mercy, is not onely very willingly, but very thankfully to receive it. And therefore as for the former, so for this reason also, , See that ye refuse not him that speaketh. § 6. Thirdly, let us consider, (after the Quality of the Speaker, and the Nature of what is spoken,) the Condition of the Persons to whom he speaks. Even to us who were Gentiles, that had long sat in Darkness, and the shadow of Death. To us who were so diseased and sick of sin, as that we could not be cur'd but by the Death of our Physician,Mal. 4. 2. this Sun of Righteousness did arise, with healing in his Wings, and tran∣slated us out of Darkness into his marvellous light. We had nothing but Sin and Misery to make us capable of his compassion; and nothing more than his own compassion to make us capable of his Love. For had he not lov'd us whilst we were loathsome, and in a state of Depravation, he had not given himself for us to make us love∣ly,Tit. 2. 14. that is, to redeem us from all Iniquity. And
since the hardness of our Hearts was able enough to break His, (I mean, to break it) into compas∣sion, and pity towards us; shall not the tenderness of his Heart be able enough to melt ours, (I mean, to melt them) into Tears of sincere Repentance? At least it should melt us into so much good Na∣ture, as to afford him willing Ears when he speaks unto us. You know 'tis uncivil for any Aequal to look aside when another speaks. But 'tis sawciness in a Cottager, to slight the speech of his noble Landlord. 'Tis more than Insolence in a Subject, not to attend unto the words of a gracious Soveraign. How great a Crime is it (by consequence,) as well as a clownery in Re∣ligion, either to laugh, or look aside, or any other ways to express an haughty Carelesness, or Neglect, when God himself in his Gospel is speak∣ing to us by his Son? The Men of Israel and of Judah were more obnoxious to Judgment than Those of Nineve, both for slighting His preach∣ing who was greater than Jonah, and because they were a People much more oblig'd. For as the better he is that speaks, the worse it is, not to attend him; or as the more the Things spoken have been obliging, the contempt of such things is the more enormous; so the more favours they have received to whom the word of God is of∣fer'd,
the more unpardonable they are on suppo∣sition of their Refusal. Indeed the Jews, and the Mahomedans, or the Salvages of America, may refuse the Lord Jesus with some colour of Excuse. But we are capable of none, if we neg∣lect so great Salvation, when brought unto us by a Saviour with whom from our Birth we have been acquainted, and of whom we know This, (by the instruction of S. Peter,) that He alone hath the words of Eternal Life. And therefore whatever is done by others, who are but Aliens and Strangers to Christianity; yet in remem∣brance of the Privilege and the Dignity of your Vocation, your having been washed in the laver of Baptism,Heb. 6. 4, 5. your having had a Taste of the hea∣venly gift, and of the Powers of the world to come, your being a chosen generation, a royal Priest∣hood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People, which in time past were not a People,1 Pet. 2. 9, 10. but are now the People of God, which had not once obtained Mer∣cy, but have now obtained Mercy, , See that ye refuse not him that speaketh. § 7. Last of all, let us consider, (after the Quality of the Speaker, the excellent Nature of what is spoken, and the Condition of the Persons to whom he speaks,) the greater Degrees of Con∣demnation to such as are guilty of a Refusal. For
as the Dignity of our Calling is above that of others, so we find our selves obliged to greater Duty. And the more we are rewardable for our Discharge of such Duty, by so much the greater is our Danger, if we neglect it. For the Gospel will condemn us to greater misery than the Law, upon that Supposal. An injur'd Saviour will become a most angry Judge. And our contempt of richer Favours than had been shewn in Times past, will but excite our Benefactor to greater Fury. Mark (I pray) what it is, which I am now to demonstrate, and press you with, (for what you can never enough remember, I cannot mind you of too often,) That as the greater Dignities are allow'd us, the stricter Du∣ties we are injoyn'd; so by how much the stricter our Duties are, we must needs be obnoxious to greater Dangers. ToMat. 13. 11. us it is given to know the Will of our Master, and the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven. Here lies our Dignity. But if we know his Will, we mustJoh. 13. 17. do it too. There lies our Duty. For if we know it, but do it not, Luk. 12. 47. we shall be beaten with many stripes. Therein consists our greatest Danger. 'Tis not the knowledge of our Duties, but the living up to our knowledge, which will stand us instead in the Day of Wrath. Nay, All we gain by our Know∣ledge,
whilst it is destitute of Practice, is to be laden with greater misery than they that know nothing at all.Heb. 1. 1, 2. God who spake in times past to our Forefathers by the Prophets, hath in these last days spoken to us by his Son. There lies our Dignity. But the times of their Ignorance God winked at, (saith the Apostle) who now commandeth all men every where to repent. There lies our Duty, and Danger too. For if his be∣speaking us by his Son exacts to be answer'd by our Repentance, by so much the greater must be our Misery if we continue in our Impenitence. And then what Ground is it of Comfort, that God in these last days hath spoken to us by his Son, (thereby filling us with the knowledge of all the Mysteries of the Gospel,) in case our Knowledge is become barren, and doth not bring forth the Fruits of Evangelical Integrity? to wit, impartial Obedience to the whole Law of Christ? To what purpose is our Knowledge of all good things, without the sedulous execu∣tion of what we know, when God who hath spo∣ken by his Son, hath spoken This in effect a∣mongst other things, That our present Guilt will be the more, and our future Stripes the more numerous? It had been better for us, by conse∣quence, He had not spoken to us at all, much
less by his Son, if we shall now slop our Ears a∣gainst the Voice of this Charmer, or onely open our Ears to him, but not our Hearts. For what said our Lord of the stubborn. Jews, upon whom he had bestow'd the first-fruits of his Preaching, and to whom he had offer'd the first Refusal of his Favours?Joh. 15. 22. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had Sin; but now (that I am come, and have spoken, and both in vain,) they have no excuse or colour for Sin. After the very same manner, had not God spoken to us at all, or had he spoken to us ob∣scurely, (as he spake to the Gentiles before the Law, by the great Book of the Creation, the two∣fold Volume of heaven and earth,) or had he spoken to us onely by Dreams, and Visions, by Ʋrim, and Thummim, by Types, and Figures, by Angels, and Men, by whom he spake unto the Jews under the Paedagogie of Moses; we might have alledged in our excuse, (how ineffectually soever) that we either wholly wanted the means of knowledge, or that the means were much less than they might have been. But now since af∣ter all other Methods, by which he spake to us, and others, (and which are written for our In∣struction,) he hath left to us in writing what he spake to us by his Son, thereby enlightning our
Heads with an abundant measure of his Know∣ledge, and also hath given us of his Spirit, whereby to warm our Hearts too with a compe∣tent measure of his Grace; what Apologie or Pretense are we able to make for our Impieties? We cannot alledge at his Tribunal, That we were ignorant of his Glory, and unacquainted with his Works; forQuicquid humano as∣perctui subji∣citur, Tem∣plum ejus vo∣cavit qui solâ mente conspi∣citur, ut qui haec venera∣tur ut Tem∣pla, cultum tamen maxi∣mum debeat Conditori; sciatque quis∣quis in usum Templi hujus indacitur, ri∣tu sibi viven∣dum Sacer∣dotis. Macro∣bius. the heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament sheweth his handy work. (Psal. 19. 1.) We cannot say in that hour, that we were destitute of the Law; for He hathRom. 10. 6, 7, 8. written it in our Hearts. Nor that we wan∣ted his Gospel; for He hath put it into our Ears. Nor that we were strangers unto his Name; for we daily take it into our Lips. Nor can we plead that He exacted, more than 'twas possible for us to do; for (we know)Philip. 3. 13. we can do all things through Him that strengthens us. And he ac∣cepteth according to what we have, (although it be but a willing mind,) where nothing more can be perform'd. 2 Cor. 8. 12. He accepts the least Things, where the least are the greatest that we can give. Sincere we can be, although not sinless. Let us but be what we can, and be perfectly willing to be what we can not; that is, let us be perfect as it is possible for us to be, and perfectly willing to be perfectMatth. 5. 48. as our Father
in Heaven; and then we have that willing mind, which S. Paul doth assure us will be ac∣cepted. But here I would not be so mistaken, (by such as love to be misled into pleasant Errors,) as if I had hinted that the Will is still as good as the Deed; or that if we are desirous to do our Du∣ties, and do them not, it will certainly serve our turn, as well as if we had done them. The A∣postle does not so speak, and I onely speak with the Apostle; whose words to the Corinthians are plainly These. If there be first a willing mind, God accepteth according to that a man hath, and not according to that he hath not. Which is as if he should have said, God will not punish any man living who does as much as he is able, for the not doing of That, which 'tis impossible for him to do. From whence 'tis obvious to infer, not that any man may presume upon God's accep∣tance of his Will, or his woulding rather, with∣out the performance of his Duty, when he is able to perform as well as will it; (for this were to justifie our wilfullest, which are our very worst sins;) but that when we have in earnest done the greatest good we can, God accepts of our willingness to do the good we can not. Being as good as we are able, he will not be angry we
are no better. When he finds us sincere in all our Services, he will not condemn us for not being sinless. But notwithstanding all This, which is indeed for our Comfort, It is every whit as true, and for our Humiliation, that we shall be utterly unexcusable at the last great Audit, (in the day when God shall judge the Secrets of men by Jesus Christ,) in case we so far refuse Him that speaks to us from Heaven, as live no more strictly with all the Advantages of the Gospel, than the Jews and the Gentiles who liv'd without them. First, from the Gentiles, 'tis argued Thus by S. Paul.Rom. 1. 19, 20, 21. If They were left without excuse, who had no other Scripture than the great Book of Hieroglyphicks, the double System of the Crea∣tures in Heaven and Earth; and had no other Light, than that of Reason whereby to read it; and had no Law to go by, but That of Nature; and had no where else to see it, but in the Ta∣bles of their Hearts; and where 'twas written in no Characters, but what were Invisible to their Eyes; then what excuse can We hope for, whom God hath spoken to by his Son? (and who, be∣sides the Light of Nature, have All the Instru∣ments of Grace too,) if We shall sin against the light of so clear a Knowledge? 'Tis very plain
that we Christians may be less excusable than the Gentiles, who (many of them) never heard of the Name of Christ, and yet for all that were un∣excusable. Secondly, from the Jews, we find our Au∣thor to the Hebrews disputing thus, Heb. 10. 28, 29. If he that despised Moses Law died without mercy, under two or three Witnesses; , Of how much sorer Punishment shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God? And He is reckon'd to be the Man that hath trodden under foot the Son of God, whoever he is that sinneth wilfully, after he hath received the knowledge of the Truth. (v. 26.) For if then we sin wilfully, there remaineth no more sacrifice or expiation for sins; but a certain fear∣full looking for of Judgment, and fiery indigna∣tion, which shall devour the Adversaries. (v. 27.) The confirmation of this we have Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. where 'tis affirm'd to be impossible for them that once have been inlightned, and have tasted of the good word of God, if They fall away, to be renewed unto Repentance. And the reason there is, be∣cause (in God's interpretation) they crucifie to themselves the Son of God, and put him to an open shame. This again is confirm'd by 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21. where the End of relapsed Christians
is said to be worse than the Beginning. And thence 'tis inferred to be better, never to have known the way of Truth, than after they have known it to turn, &c. Thus you see how the Jews might be less excusable than the Gentiles, and yet how We who are Christians may be less excusable than the Jews. And therefore let us look to it, that we refuse not him that speaketh, but rather that we make him some proportionable Answer; speaking back to him better, than by our Sins, to wit, by Repentance, and change of Life. For if They escaped not who refused Him that spake on earth, much less shall we, if we turn away from Him that speaketh from heaven. § 8. I do insist so much the rather upon this fourth and last Topick, from which the Caveat or Warning is now inforc'd, because the hope of Reward in a world to come, is less avail∣able with men than the fear of Punishment; and because the Holy Ghost does seem to prefer this way of arguing, not onely in my Text, but in diverse other places of this Epistle. In the se∣cond Chapter more especially, (at the first, se∣cond, third, and fourth Verses,) we find the Ar∣gument and the Inference to be much the same that they are here. First of all observe the Ar∣gument, and especially the Topick from which
'tis drawn. If the word spoken by Angels was stedfast, and every Transgression and Disobedience received a just recompence of reward, , How shall we then escape, if we neg∣lect so great Salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him, God also bearing them witness both with Signs and Wonders, and di∣verse Miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, ac∣cording to his own will? which is as much as to say, That because Christ was superiour both to Moses and to the Angels, by the ministery of whom the Law was spoken unto the Jews, there∣fore we who are Christians are bound to yield the greater reverence to That which God in the Gospel hath spoken to us by his Son. For if the Israelites were plagu'd for their contempt of the Law, much more shall we Christians for our Neglect of the Gospel. § 9. What now is the Ʋse we are to make of this Doctrine, or what the Inference to be drawn from this Argument? Is it onely in the nega∣tive, That we refuse not him that speaketh? or that we have not any Averseness to his Person or his Words? no, a man may be indifferent, without averseness; he may be cold and unat∣tentive to what is spoken, without an absolute
Contempt, or Refusal of it. And therefore the inference is so plainly and so positively express'd, as to be utterly exclusive of all Indifference. 'Tis ,Heb. 2. 1. We ought to give the more earnest heed unto the things that we have heard; and that for this reason, lest at any time we let them slip. The Apostle's word is, , a Metaphor taken from the falling away of Water, when being not kept within its Bounds it runs wastfully about, and so is spilt upon the ground, as Phavorinus and Hesychius do both expound it. A Metaphor the fitter, and the more worthy to be consider'd, because the word of God in Scripture is compar'd and resembled to those three Liquids,Isa. 55. 1. Wine, Milk, and Water.1 Pet. 2. 2. To the first, by Isaias;Rev. 22. 1, 17. to the second, by S. Peter; and by S. John unto the third. We must be therefore very carefull, as well to retain, as to receive the Wine and Milk of the word, and as it were to bottle up the Wa∣ter of Life, (as David prays God to do his Tears,) lest at any time we shed it, or let it fall. For there is no Cordial Water, which we are not carefull to preserve; (be it but Cinna∣mon, or Surfet Water.) Nor is there any whole∣som Milk, which we think not too good to be cast away; (be it but a Cow's, or an Asse's Milk.)
Nor is there any want of heed to keep our Wine from being lost, although it be made of a com∣mon Grape. But since the Wine I now speak of is that that flow'd from his Mouth, who call'd himself the True Vine; And since the Milk is none other, than the sincere Milk of the word; And since the Water is no less pretious, than the Water of Life, a Water flowing out from Him whom S. Paul calls a Rock,1 Cor. 10. 4. from whence there gushes out a Fountain of living Water;Rev. 7. 17. 21. 6. sure we ought to be studious and carefull of it, more than of any thing in the world which is commit∣ted to be kept in our earthen Vessels.2 Cor. 4. 7. , we ought to give the more abun∣dant and earnest heed to the word of God which we have heard, (that Wine, that Milk, that VVater of Life, which we have drank out of the Gospel, and have imbib'd into our Ears,) whereby our Souls may be nourished to Life E∣ternal. Yet there are multitudes in the world, I mean in our Christian Reformed world, (upon whom what I have said must needs reflect very severe∣ly,) who are so cold, and so careless in reading or hearing the word of God, that there is hardly any thing else to which they are not much more attentive. If a Mountebank in the Street shall
speak to the People from a Scaffold, they will presently flock to him, and give him Audience. If any Revels are to be kept, or a new Comoedy to be acted, the Souls of men will be running out at their Eyes and Ears, through the great and earnest heed which they will give unto the things that are said or done. If a Tertullus or an Herod shall make an eloquent Oration, his Auditors will be apt to cry aloud with those Pa∣rasites, (Act. 12. 22.) it is the voice of a God, and not of a Man. Whereas when one of Christ's Sermons is recited out of the Gospel, the hearers are commonly as indifferent, and as seemingly unconcern'd, as if they said inwardly in their hearts, (the flat Reverse of what was said of the Speech of Herod,) it is the word of a Man, and not of a God. Do They give heed to what they hear, who if they are not quite asleep, are yet so yawningly attentive, as to forget in an Instant, what they hear in an hour? No, did they heed the word of God, as they often do the actions and words of Men, (if not in real admiration, at least in flattery,) they would carry what they learn from this Year unto the next; not in u∣tramque aurem dormire, or at least in duarum alteram, letting out at the right Ear what they receive into the left; as if they purposed to con∣fute
this Epistle to the Hebrews, when it saith in another place,Heb. 4. 12. that the word of God is quick, and powerfull, and sharper than any two edged sword, piercing even to the dividing of Soul and Spirit; or had a mind to enervate that saying of S. Paul, as to their Particulars, That the Gospel of Christ is the Power of God unto Sal∣vation.Rom. 1. 16. § 10. What may probably be the reason, why men will sleep at a Sermon, a great deal sooner than at a Play? is it not because they are less attentive, and by consequence less deligh∣ted to be in the Church than in the Theater, and by consequence more in love with what is meant onely to please, than with what is meant to pro∣fit them to Life Eternal? Or suppose them most delighted in Church-Assemblies. What then may be the reason, why they are much more at∣tentive to the words of Men out of the Pulpit, than to the word of God out of the Pew? Is it not that they prefer the gratification of the Ear to the Rectification of the Heart? And why should that be, if not for want of true Belief, or else of due Consideration, that the Old and New Testament are God's own word? and that the Gospel in particular is the word which God the Father hath spoken to us by God the Son?
And why should this be so little heeded, (if 'tis really believ'd) unless because it is so cheaply, and so commonly to be had? were the Sun to be seen but once or twice in the Year, he would be much more consider'd than now he is; it being the commonness of his Shining which makes him pass over our heads so unregarded. And as it is with the Works, so is it too with the Word of God. For in the Infancy of the Church, be∣fore printing was invented, what care and cost were men at, to write out Copies of the Gospel? and in what honour was it had, when but newly to be had in the Vulgar Tongues? whereas now that it is grown both cheap, and common, it is commonly as Pearl cast out to Swine. Many sit not at ease, whilst the Priest is in the reading of Psalms and Chapters; and many loyter with∣out the Church, until they are very well assur'd the Preacher is going into the Pulpit; not at all laying to heart, (what yet they cannot but as∣sent to, if ever it enters into their Heads whilst their Heads are Christian,) that the chiefest part of God's Service hath been performed in the Pew. For the most powerfull words of Men can but edifie at the best, whereas the pure word of God is apt to sanctifie andJoh. 15. 3. cleanse us, Joh. 17. 17. and as S. Peter once said to the Jewish Sa∣nedrim,
we ought to obey God rather than Man.Act. 5. 29. So in this Case also, we ought to hear God ra∣ther than Men. Now the Lesson which is read out of the Law and the Prophets is the very word of God which he hath spoken by his Ser∣vants. And so the Lesson out of the Gospel is the very word of God which he hath spoken by his Son. Whereas the customary Discourse which we call a Sermon, though it is profitable, and pious, and therefore worthy of all acceptance; yet 'tis of human Contrivance and Composition, if it is not all taken, word for word, out of the Scripture; and if it is, it is no more, than so much Scripture as fills an hour. And how far it is from That, our own experience may in∣form us from several Pulpits; wherein we are often entertain'd with accurate Essays, and Ha∣rangues, with florid Discourses, and Declama∣tions, which have a very strong savour of Art, and Diligence, and are deservedly applauded for Wit, and Learning; but are so far from be∣ing drawn from the VVell of Life, so far from being wholly made, or mostly deduced out of Scripture, as to have hardly any Tincture or Rellish of it.Hottinger. de Necessit. Re∣form. p. 21, 22. As if their Authors were afraid, with Cardinal Bembus and other Romanists, (who are complain'd of and accus'd by Domi∣nicus
Nanus Mirabellius,) to fully and flatten their Elocution with the Oracles of God. As if they had the same opinion touching the Lan∣guage of the Pulpit, with the Prophane Car∣dinal Hosius touching the wellfare of the Church, when he said it had been better if no Gospel had been written. As if the Scripture had seem'd to Them, what once it did to S.Cùm atten∣di ad illam Scripturam, visa est mihi indigna quam Tullianae Dignitati compararem. Tumor enim meus refugie∣bat modum ejus, &c. Augustin. Confess. l. 3. c. 5. p. 60. Austin before he was absolutely converted, very unworthy to be compar'd with Cicero's Elegance of Expression. I wish we might not complain of some, who are call'd to be Preachers of the Gospel, as Lauren∣tius Valla was said to do of Cardinal Sadolet, and Politian, and other Orators of their Age, Gentilem illos Sermonem magis, quàm Ecclesiasti∣cum deamâsse, That they have rather lov'd an Ethnical, than Ecclesiastical way of speaking. And yet if in a zealous Enmity to such affected Idolizers of human Eloquence, the Preacher frames his whole Sermon, word for word, out of the Scripture; what is This but the Recital of so much Scripture as fills an Hour? And then 'tis certainly as regardable, when barely read out of the Pew, as when with Emphasis and ge∣sture it is rehearsed out of the Pulpit. § 11. Refuse not therefore him that speaketh, upon any Pretense to be imagin'd. Not for
the meanness of the Person by whom he speaks. Not for the Plainness of the language in which he speaks. Not for the Hardness or mysterious∣ness of the things that are spoken by him. Not for the cheapness or the commonness of what he speaks. Nor yet for any other Objections, which some who are wittily profane are wont to urge against the Scriptures. For I suppose it to be true, because I find it in the writings of an honourable Author, ThatSee Mr. Ro∣bert Boyle his third Edi∣tion of Con∣siderations touching the stile of the Holy Scrip∣tures. p. 4. some of those who do acknowledge both the Truth, and the Authority, do find I know not how many faults with the stile of Scripture; As that it is too obscure, and imme∣thodical, and contradicting to it self; incohae∣rent, and unadorn'd, flat, and unaffecting; a∣bounding with things that are either trivial, or impertinent, and also with useless Repetitions. Monsters more prodigious than any Africa can afford us, who acknowledging the Authority and Truth of Scripture, can so blasphemously detract from the Credit of it. § 12. But , See that ye refuse not him that speaketh, for all the scanda∣lous Aspersions, that either the Wit or the Ma∣lice of Men or Devils shall at any time contrive to be cast upon him in his Word. And First, refuse not him that speaketh, for the meanness
of the Person by whom he speaks. The word of God being as sacred when pronounced by the Mouth of the lowest Priest, as when by That of the profoundest and greatest Prelate in the Church. Nay his word being as pure out of a vitious man's Lips, as the Beams of the Sun, when daily reflected from a Dunghill; or as the most uncorrupted and limpid Water, when it is running through a sordid and earthy Channel. As the Blessing of God to Israel was not the worse or the less welcome, for proceeding from the Lips of a cursed Balaam; so his Rebuke sent to Balaam was not the less to be attended, for be∣ing spoken by the Mouth of an arrant Ass. Be not therefore as impatient of being spoken to by a Priest of the poorest Talent and Degree, as Nabal was of being spoken to by a persecuted,1 Sam. 25. 3. 10, 17. and destitute, but royal Prophet; nor so impa∣tient of a Reproof from any the meanest of God's Embassadours,2 Sam. 3. 7, 8. as Abner from Ishbosheth, or as Herod from John the Baptist,1 King. 22. 27. or as Ahab from Micaiah, who for speaking an unpleasant, but wholsome Truth, was presently clapt up in Pri∣son, and fed with the Bread of Affliction too. Entertain not the vilest of all Christ's Messengers, as the Pharisees and the Rulers did Christ Him∣self,Luk. 16. 14. when they did ,Ch. 23. v. 35, 36. deride and
scoff at him for the despicable Garb of his Ap∣pearance. But be as civil to him at least, as ye would that your Equals should be to You; and even because ye are unwilling to have your Mes∣sages refus'd, for being sent by the basest of all your Servants, therefore See that ye refuse not him that speaketh, for the meanness of the Person by whom he speaks. § 13. Secondly do not refuse him, for the plainness of the Language in which he speaks. For what is Plainness, but Perspicuity? and of all those Virtues which are required in an Ora∣tor, Perspicuity and Pertinence are worthily reckon'd amongst the chief.Intendi ani∣mum in Scri∣pturas sanctas ut viderem quales essent. Et ecce video Rem non com∣pertam super∣bis, neque nu∣datam Pue∣ris, sed incessu humilem, suc∣cessu excel∣sam, & vela∣tam mysteriis, & non eram ego talis ut intrare pos∣sem, aut incli∣nare Cervi∣cem ad ejus gressus. Au∣gustin. in Confess. l. 3. c. 5. p. 60. So far forth as the Scriptures contein a Covenant, and a Law, the one of Works, and the other of Faith, (That delivered by Moses, and This by Christ,) there is nothing more becomes the State and Majesty of its Author, than to communicate with his People in greatest Plainness. Or is the Gospel very destitute of what the world calls Wit and Eloquence? call to mind that God the Father hath sent it to us by God the Son; and pay an humble Veneration to what is spoken, for the honour you bear unto Him that speaks. And since his words are the words of Eternal Life, (that is, the words of Direction by our Confor∣mity
to which we shall live for ever,) of what a barbarous ingratitude shall we be judged to be guilty, if we shall quarrel at his Care to have their meaning understood? Besides, it ought to be remembred, that there are Parables in the Scripture, as well as Plainnesses of Speech; Places so deep, that an Elephant may swimm, as well as Places so shallow, that a Lamb may wade through them. There are some such2 Pet. 3. 16. , things so difficult and hard to be understood, as that the Ignorant and unstable (who are arro∣gant, and proud, as well as empty,) do many times wrest them to their Damnation. And therefore whatsoever else may be the colour for your Refusal, See that ye refuse not an heavenly Speaker, for the Plainness of the Dialect in which he speaks; because, of all his Condescensions ex∣pressed to us in his word, this must certainly be one of the most Obliging. And yet § 14. Thirdly, do not refuse him, for the mysteriousness of the things that are spoken by him. For what were this but to find fault with the sublimity of the matter? and implicitly to complain, that there is strong meat for men of the ripest Age, as well as Milk for those Babes who are unskilfull in the word of righteousness?Heb. 5. 13, 14. It were to quarrel with the Scripture for having
any thing in it whereby to exercise our Diligence, and crown our Search, to make us sensible of our weakness, and to excite our Admiration. Be∣sides, it ought to be consider'd, that as there are Mysteries in the Scripture, so there are 1 Cor 4. 1. Stewards of those mysteries. As things lock'd up from low and vulgar Apprehensions, so there are also special men to whom is committed the Key of Knowledge.Luk. 11. 52. The Priest's Lips are to pre∣serve it,Mal. 2. 7. and the People are to seek it flowing out in expositions from his Orthodox mouth. 'Tis fit the Scripture should be plain, and myste∣rious too; I mean in several parts of it, for se∣veral purposes and ends. For if nothing in it were plain, we should but grope after heaven, and miss the way too. And yet if nothing were mysterious, its over great Familiarity would make it liable to contempt. Whereas the due conside∣ration of both together will discover to us the Ʋse and the End of Sermons. For though it is not perhaps the pleasant'st, yet it may seem to be the best, because the profitablest Preaching in all the World, onely to read, and expound, and apply the Scripture; to shew the sense, where it is difficult, and the use, when it is easie. And there∣fore See that ye refuse not him that speaketh, for the hardness of the things that are spoken by him.
§ 15. Fourthly, do not refuse him, for the cheapness or the commonness of what he speaks. For this were just as extravagant, as if a man should disesteem and depretiate the worth of the New Jerusalem,Rev. 21. 19, 21. because the very Foundations of the wall of the City were adorn'd with all man∣ner of pretious Stones; and so common a thing was Pearl, that the Gates of the City consisted of it; and so cheap was pure Gold, that the street of the City was nothing else. To slight the means of Salvation for being commonly to be had, is just as if a Nice person should die with Thirst, rather than quench it with common VVa∣ter. Or as if a proud person should scorn his life, for depending upon so cheap and so com∣mon an Element as the Air. There is nothing more destructive and dishonourable to men, than their Itching after things that are rare and no∣vel. This was one of those Crimes wherewith God upbraided his People Israel, That forsaking him the old and the living Fountain, they had hewn unto themselves such broken Cisterns, as had nothing but newness to recommend them. And therefore such Men and Women are very sharply to be rebuk'd, (as S. Paul chargeth Ti∣mothy in the very same Case,) who not enduring sound Doctrine,2 Pet. 4. 3, 4. for being old, do turn aside unto
Fables, for being new; and still are heaping up Teachers, not to work upon their Hearts, but to gratifie their delicate and prurient Ears. Choosing rather to quench their Thirst out of every new Ditch, than to satisfie themselves with the Antient Springs. And therefore if ye do not think, that the Antient of days is the less to be valued for being antient, to wit, the Lamb slain from the Foundations of the world; or that the Waters of Life eternal do lose their Virtue with their credit by being cheap, by being easily to be had,Isa. 55. 1. without Money, and without Price; See that ye refuse not him that speaketh, for the commonness of the things that are spoken by him. § 16. Last of all do not refuse him in case his words shall sometimes seem to be incoherent, immethodical, contradicting to themselves, un∣affecting, or impertinent, or clog'd with useless Repetitions. For first at most they can but seem to be such and such, as the Sun does onely seem to be deform'd in an Eclipse, and no bigger than a Bushel in his Meridian; Next, they cannot so much as seem so to labour with Defects, un∣less it be through our Defects of Ʋnderstanding, or of Humility, of competent Industry, or Art, sufficient Time to converse with, or Patience to consides the things we read.
§ 17. In a word, as we desire that we may never be refused by God Almighty, when at any time we shall speak, or cry to Him in our Distress, whether by Prayers, or Tears, from a Gallows, or from a Rack, perhaps out of a Prison, per∣haps out of a Pest-house, out of the Belly of a Leviathan, or (which at least is as terrible) out of the Bowels of a sinking and dying Ship, (for we know not what end may await us all;) I say, as ever we hope to be heard our selves, when in any kind of Exigence we speak to God,. Homer. Il. α. let us at least give God the hearing, when in any kind of Dialect he speaks to Ʋs. Be it by his Son, or by his Servants, be it by Precept, or by Example, by Life, or Doctrine, by Exhor∣tations, or Admonitions, by Promises, or Threats, by his Prophet, or by his Rod, by Words, or Blows. And be it by whatsoever Instrument the Blows of God are laid on; by War, Pestilence, Fire, or Famine. The first of which is now consuming our valiant Country-men abroad; The second (you know) hath been devouring far and wide here at home; The third hath late∣ly laid waste the goodliest Empory in the world, by having us'd our Great City, as once the Ci∣ties of the Plain: And unless our Repentance or change of Life, shall cry as loud in God's Ears
as our Sins have done, we know not how soon we may feel the Fourth. Less than which I cannot say to the most considering Congrega∣tion; and if this little be laid to heart, I think I need not say more. Committing therefore what I have said to due and serious Consideration, I shut up all with That Prayer which is the fittest to compleat and conclude the Sermon: That what we have heard at this time with our outward Ears, may by the powerfull Grace of God, be so grafted inwardly in our Hearts, as to bring forth in us the fruit of good Living; to the Honour and Praise of his Name, through Je∣sus Christ our Lord. To whom, with the Father, in the unity of the Spirit, be Glory, and Thanks∣giving both now and for ever. Amen.
THE APPENDIX. §. 1. OUr steddy Adherence or Assent to the Two last Articles of the Creed, (and indeed to the other Ten,) cannot possibly subsist without our Assent unto the First. We cannot certainly believe that we shall rise from the Dead, unless it be by believing that Christ is risen. And as little can we believe that Christ is risen, unless it be by believing first, that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto Himself. This implies and presupposes the First Article of our Creed, which is as well the Foundation as the Support of all the Rest. But since the breaking loose of Hell in This last Age of a loathsome World, we have met with such Ene∣mies (not onely to ours, but) to All Religion, as from their wishing and woulding there were no God, (no Resurrection of the Body, no life af∣ter Death, no Day of Judgment,) have pro∣ceeded so far, as to say, and teach, There is no God; nor any one of those Things which have been regularly built upon This Foundation.
And if we suffer This Foundation to be either undermin'd, or but shaken in us, All the Fa∣brick of our Faith will fall to nothing in an Instant. An Error here is like one in the first Concoction, which cannot be mended in the second. If we do not believe in God, [the first Article of our Creed,] we cannot choose but be Infidels in All that follow. Nor are we onely to believe him, as Belief is opposed unto a com∣prehensive knowledge; But we must knowingly believe him, as Belief is consistent with know∣ledge meerly Apprehensive. And so as to say with as much Truth, as S. Paul to Timothy, (every man for himself, in whatsoever Tempta∣tions and Times of Trial,) For I know whom I have believed.2 Tim. 2. 12. § 2. A Text which serves well for a double purpose; to ascertain our Knowledge, and to establish our Belief, as well as to shew the just measure, and use of Both in our Religion. A Text accordingly to be consider'd, not one∣ly in its Relative, but in its Absolute impor∣tance. First, the words in their Relation to Those that follow and go before them, will be most ea∣sily understood by being paraphrased Thus. I am a Preacher, and an Apostle, and therefore
now av. 8. Prisoner of Jesus Christ. Even for this very cause of my being sent forth byv. 1. the Will of God, and made av. 11. Teacher of the Gentiles, I suffer these Bonds and Persecutions of the Jews. But I am not asham'd of my Bonds, or Office; I am not sorry for my Preaching, though 'tis the Cause of my Imprisonment. For He on whom I have depended will never forsake me, I am sure. In His hands I can with chearfulness re∣pose my Life, by whom my Death will be a Door to my Resurrection. For I have not believ'd I know not whom. Nor do I nakedly believe, whom I love, and adore, and rely upon; but I perfectly Know whom I have believed; and have a plentitude of Perswasion, that He for whom I now suffer will never fail me, on Him my Cares are all cast, who careth for me. With Him I have intrusted the whole Depositum of my Labours in the preaching of the Gospel, and the De∣positum of my Sufferings for having preach'd it. And whatsoever I have intrusted, or shall in∣trust to His keeping, be it my Body, or my Soul, my Body in Peace, or my Soul in Patience, I am assur'd he is Able, and am perswaded he is Willing, to lay it up for me against That Day. A Day expressed to us in Scripture by such Pe∣riphrases as These. The Day wherein the Lord
Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming Fire. The day where∣in God shall judge the Secrets of men by Jesus Christ. The Day when all that are in the Grave shall hear his Voice, and come forth. The Day of Discrimination when He will make up his Mal. 3. 16, 17. Jewels, and a Book of Remembrance shall lie be∣fore him, for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his Name. All my Concerns are left with Him, who will keep them in safety against That Day. Thus lies the Text in its re∣lation to the Context. § 3. But being consider'd in it self, and with∣out such Relation, 'twill be as easily understood by this other Paraphrase. I know Him perfect∣ly, as to his Being, whom I believe as to his Es∣sence: or whom, as to his Essence, I know in part onely. I can demonstrate his Existence, although I can but most firmly believe his Word. For at one and the same time, as also in one and the same respect, I cannot know, and believe him too; because what I know, I do more than believe, or am past believing: And what I do but believe, I have not yet attained the know∣ledge of. Knowledge and Belief do move in two distinct Spheres, and That of Knowledge is so much higher, than This of Faith, that 'tis
the Perfection of a man's Faith, wholly to perish, and expire; to be drown'd, and swallow'd up into perfect Knowledge. St. Paul expresseth his Believing by his knowing in part.1 Cor. 13. 9. And the Top of his comfort does stand in This, that when that which is perfect is come,10. then that which is in part shall be done away.12. Here we can but see darkly, as through a glass; but the time is now coming when we shall see face to face. Here we onely can Believe the Three Subsistences of the Godhead in but one and the same Substance; whereas in That Day of Revelation and Resti∣tution, we shall Know this great Mystery even as also we are Known. Here we can but Believe the Resurrection of our Bodies; but (in the great Day of Recompence) our Fruition and Experience will make us Know it. We do not know more exactly that Five and Five do make Ten, or that a part of any Dimension is unequal to the whole, than we do Know and can demon∣strate (against the Enemies of a Deity) the uncontroulable existence of the Deity we adore. But This I say onely of God's Existence, and of his Essence onely in part. For in our deepest Contemplation of certain Mysteries in our Reli∣gion, such as a Trinity of the Persons in the Ʋni∣ty of the Godhead; the Generation of the Se∣cond,
the Procession of the Third, and yet the Coessentiality of Both-together with the First; I say, in This contemplation our Childish under∣standings become so froward, they cannot be quieted but by Faith. Our firm Belief of God's Word can alone rock them into a sleep. In the mean time 'tis matter to us of unspeakable Com∣fort, that by our absolute Knowledge of His Ve∣rity, and by our stedfast Belief of His Veracity, we can easily acknowledge the highest Mysteries in the Godhead; which in propriety of Speech we cannot yet pretend to a Knowledge of. All we can do is to believe, that God was in Christ re∣conciling the World unto Himself; but that a God of Heaven there is, and that a God there must be, and that God is a Spirit, and that God being a Spirit must needs be infinite, indivisible, from everlasting to everlasting, and self-subsist∣ing: These are things we do clearly Know. These are things we can prove by such cogent Reason∣ings, as every Skeptick will submit to, and Ma∣lice it self cannot resist. And so 'tis no Contra∣diction (whate're it seems at first hearing) to say, We Know whom we have Believed. § 4. Now out of this twofold Exposition of the Text, as well consider'd in its abso∣lute, as in its relative importance, a three∣fold
Quaere does arise, and offer it self to be resolv'd. The first Quaere is, How and Why we are said to know God, by knowledge properly so call'd; to wit, as perfectly, and as plainly, as we can know any thing else; or as fully, and as clearly, as any thing knowable can be known. The second is, How and Why our bare Belie∣ving the hidden Things of our God, (as the Scripture calls them) is much more proper, and more requir'd, and more rewardable in Reli∣gion, than our clear and full Knowledge of God's Existence. Nor onely of his Existence, but of his Essence also in part. The third Quaere is, What are the Powers and the Effects, and the great Benefits of Believing, (as well as of knowing whom we believe,) clear∣ly implied in the Text by the Causal For, as That imports S. Paul's Reason, for his not being asham'd of the things he suffer'd. A Resolution of the First, will have an apti∣tude to shame or convince the Atheist. A Resolution of the Second, will have a Ten∣dency to the Conversion, or the Confusion of the Infidel. A Resolution of the Third, will dit the Mouthes of those Scoffers, who seek to set up
meer Science, (and Science falsly so call'd,) not onely above, but against Religion. Nor will it be an ill Office, to make the Sciolists asham'd of their Profanations. § 5. Touching the First of these Subjects I speak the rather, (though 'tis pity 'tis not imper∣tinent in any Auditory of Christians,) because I have met with an Objection, which some have pretended to have had from several eminent men's Writings; to wit, that the Being of a Deity cannot possibly be proved by Demonstra∣tion, whereby to be the Object of real Knowledge; but onely by Probable Argumentations, which cannot possibly be effective of any thing greater than our Belief. And Humane Belief may be erroneous, though Knowledge cannot. Now whilst I consider that such Belief is but a stronger sort of Opinion, and that a Radical Fear at least (in Books of Logick and Philosophy) is affirm'd to be to Both an essential thing; and that the Object of Opinion when 'tis but humane, is said to be under a possibility of Falshood, however strong enough to exclude a possibility of Doubt∣ting; I say, considering these things, it seemeth first a Disparagement to the God whom we serve, to be asserted by his Votaries, as a Thing Cre∣dible rather than Known. Next, a Disparage∣ment
to Theology, not to be as Scientifical of its object's Existence, as some inferiour Things are; but to content it self to argue from Topicks Pro∣bable onely by nature, however as strong, and as perswasive, as the. Aristot. Eth. l. 1. c. 3. matter will bear which it seeks to prove. A Disparagement in the last place it cannot but be to our Religion, if we cannot be as certain of the Deity we adore, as of other Things; and if we are not as able to prove His Being, as any vulgar Geometrician to prove a Theorem in Euclid. Such cold and frigid ways of Reasoning, as do pretend but to perswade, not at all to compel, or constrain the Atheist, may seem à Tanto to excuse, and so to gratifie his Impiety, by thus extenuating the Evidence which God has given us of Himself; and by making That less, than indeed it is. To speak of the Deity's Credibility, may chance to harden some Atheists, who scorn all Preaching; though it may chance to soften others, who are but lightly drawn in, and of better Natures. But 'tis worthily to be fear'd, it may occasion some Skepticks, who yet are none. For some we know have been so stagger'd by Topical ar∣guments for a Deity, and the Beginning of the World, as to have made it matter of Question, whether the Godhead and the Creation are in∣deed
any other than strongly Credible. And whether that Opinion we have been taught to have of them, is really any other than highly Probable. And whether (by consequence un∣avoidable) we are not void of All Knowledge concerning God, however confident we have been, that a God there is. § 6. To this Objection I answer by These Degrees. First, I say, that the Objectors do either very much mistake some very learned men's Words, or that the learned men's Words are not expressive of their meaning. For how unfortunately soever some of excellent Erudi∣tion may have managed some Parts of their most excellent Design, by an ill choice of some Simi∣litudes, and by the wording of their Intentions; sure I am that their Judgements are found and orthodox as to the Deity, and withall as to the Evidence it carries with it. They do not any where deny that the Godhead is demonstrable; but say it is not a proper Subject of Mathema∣tical Demonstration. Nor say they any where precisely, The Godhead cannot be prov'd by sense; but onely that it cannot be so immediately. And in such sayings as These, there is no Harm. For § 7. Not to insist (at this Time) on That
Divine Demonstration, which is call'd by S. Paul, The Demonstration of the Spirit,1 Cor. 2. 4. partly made by Signs and Miracles from without, partly by im∣mediate and supernatural Revelations, to all the Prophets of the Old Testament, and all the A∣postles in the New. We have ways of Demonstra∣tion, which, though they are not Mathematical, are yet as clear, or rather clearer, and more compulsive of our Assent. And God may be proved even by Sense, mediantibus Creaturis, as S. Paul strongly argues in his first Chapter to the Romans. Where the Invisible things of God from the Creation of the World (He saith without a Contradiction) are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead. So that they (who do deny him) are without all Excuse, whether they know him, or know him not. But that They who were Atheists in point of Practice, were none at all in point of Speculation, the same A∣postle implies by saying, They held the Truth in unrighteousness. (v. 18.) And That which may be known of God is manifest in them, for God hath shew'd it unto them. (v. 19.) And again, They did not like to retain God in their Know∣ledge. (v. 28.) So very hard a thing it is (in the Judgement of our Apostle) to be a spe∣culative Atheist, even for one who desires
to be so; and is unwilling to acknowledge what he cannot but Know. § 8. But not to put the least stress upon the Authority of S. Paul, which Antiscripturists will not allow, (and 'tis for Their sakes espe∣cially that I am faln on This Subject,) I shall Secondly prove by Reason, touching the Being of a Deity, not onely that we are furnish'd with as much Evidence of its Truth, as such a thing is capable of; but that 'tis capable of as much Evidence, as the light we see, and see by, or rather more. For as a mental Demonstration is more cogently convincing to any Skeptick, than an Ocular; so That which shews the God∣head to us, is of mental Demonstrations the most convincing. For the most cogent Demon∣stration which can be made by a Logician, is that which argues from the Cause to the Effect, and is call'd with good reason Demonstratio Po∣tissima. But God Almighty being the Fountain of All things knowable in the World, and so the Cause of All Causes which are the Grounds of Demonstration, (the effect of which is true knowledge, whose Ratio formalis, formal Rea∣son is Assurance,) 'Tis plain his Being must carry with it so clear an Evidence of it self, that if we were not sure of That, we could be sure of
nothing else. We are much surer of it, than of any thing we can see, by how much the inward light we have is more infallible than our out∣ward. For This may easily deceive us, and in∣deed so often does, that much Experience has taught us to distrust our own Eyes in several Cases, and in some to disbelieve them. Whereas a man's Ʋnderstanding (of Objects adaequate to it self) can never either fail him, or be sus∣pected; because 'tis an Eye whose Sight is Know∣ledge. And Knowledge (properly so call'd) is so infallible in its nature, that without infalli∣bility it cannot possibly be Knowledge, but must needs be somewhat else; a shrewd Conjecture, or strong Belief, an obstinate Confidence, or Presumption; each of which is true or false, as it is well or ill grounded. Whereas to Know∣ledge as it is Knowledge, Infallibility is essen∣tial. Shall I make the Case clear, and unde∣niable by an Example? We know a man ha∣ving been blind from his very Birth, may have as absolute a knowledge that 5 and 5 do make 10, as the best Ey'd Lynceus. And a man the most illiterate is as far from being able to be deceiv'd in this point, as one of the greatest Erudition, or deepest Reach. Which strongly vindicates our Apostle from the possible Re∣proach
of a Contradiction, when he says, Things invisible are clearly seen;Rom. 1. 20. and that Mo∣ses saw him who is invisible.Heb. 11. 27. For God's Ex∣istence, though invisible to the Eye of the Body, is yet to That of the Soul most clearly seen; even as clearly as the Assertion that 5 and 5 do make 10 is ascertain'd to a man without Eyes or Lear∣ning. Not at all seen by the light without, but so much the more by the light within him. The Learned and the Illiterate, the Blind and the Quick-sighted, are very equally undeceivable in these Particulars. And therefore when 'tis said by the pert and dull Scoffer, (as pert and dull as the Japonians of the Jenxuan Haeresie,) Sunt qui negant Spiri∣tum esse ul∣lum, aut om∣nino quic∣quam praeter ea quae sensu percipimus. Maffeius Hist. Ind. p. 431. that He is too foolish who thinks he knows any thing he cannot see; and He too credulous, who is able to believe what he cannot reach; He may be presently made asham'd of his Ʋnderstand∣ing, by an argument ad hominem, that He is void of all Reason, and can have no Soul with∣in him, (much less a rational,) because he nei∣ther can see it, nor can it possibly be seen. So 'tis an Argument to the Scoffer beyond all An∣swer, that nothing by nature can be more ex∣cellent than a Beast, because a Beast cannot reach it, or comprehend how it should be. There have been some in all Ages, whose shamefull
Ambition it has been to make their Ignorance Monumental. Hercules by his Pillars, with a Nihil plus ultra inscrib'd upon them, and Mr. Hobs by his Hypothesis, that there is no Spirit at all, (nor any thing else above the Sphere of his low Capacity,) have but built obelisks to the Memory of their most eminent Imperfections, their Incomparable Pride, and their Incurable Stupidity. The man is fitter to be despis'd, than to be sadly disputed with, who takes his narrow Ʋnderstanding to be commen∣surate with the Ʋniverse, and the adequate Stan∣dard of all Existence; who will have All to be but Fiction, which is to Him Incomprehensible; and nothing really to exist, which is above or beyond his Soul's Horizon. He is worthier of our pity, whose perfect ignorance in Astrono∣my makes him ready almost to swear, the Sun is no bigger than a Bonfire; because the Distance of the Object, and the Deceiptfulness of the Or∣gan, do conspire Both at once to give it a Lit∣tleness of Appearance. 'Tis hard to say which is greater, our uncertainty of some things which we do every day see; or the Certainty of other things which cannot possibly be seen. § 9. Now amongst the many ways of pro∣ving a God by Demonstration, (some of which
cannot be made but to good Logicians, and very hardly if at all, in the English Tongue,) Two especially are the fittest for the Capaci∣ties of the Vulgar, whilst unassisted by Erudi∣tion. The first of which will be the easier, though the second will be more cogent, and more im∣perative of our Assent. The first, and the most obvious, is à Poste∣riori, as proving the Cause by its Effects. Which is as true a Demonstration, and as prevailing, as any the Mathematicks pretend to; and ma∣ny times more proportionable to Capacities un∣improv'd, than Demonstration à Priori, which proves an effect by its Cause or Causes. As 'tis many times easier to prove the Tree by its Fruit, than the Fruit by its Original, the Tree that bears it. Yea there are things, as the four Ele∣ments, whose inward Forms are unknown, and therefore they cannot be demonstrated to be what they Are, but à posteriori: such as Fire by its properties of heat, and light, and lightness, and the like; which yet do beget as great a Certainty of its Existence and Dispo∣sition, as could be had if we could know the whole Essence of it. And thus our common Masters of Musick do know the forces and the effects of all the Musical proportions of Sound
and Number, (perhaps to much better purpose than either Froschius, or Gafforel, or Boetius himself,) whilst yet the Reason of effects is a Stranger to them. Now that God is demonstra∣ble à Posteriori, (I mean as to his Being, and his Nature in Part, which is most easily appre∣hended, not as to his whole Nature, which is indeed incomprehensible; and the most that we know of what it is, comes by our knowing what it is not;) is very well shewn, as by other Writers, so especially by Cicero De Natura De∣orum, whom 'tis fitter to refer to, than to Tran∣slate, or Epitomize. But whosoever shall have the Patience (if I may not say the Pleasure) so to read, as to understand him, will confess the whole World to be a Volume so expressive of its Creator, as not to stand in any need of that his lesser Book, The Bible, to help it out. For if a man who shall but look on a goodly Palace, will rather argue that 'twas built by some skil∣full Architect, than that the Stones by meer Chance (with all the rest of the Materials) did fall into that order wherein he sees them; much more, when we look on the Sun and Moon, and all the Harmony of Things in Heaven and Earth, shall we conclude them rather the Work of some Invisible Contriver, than that they are the Blind
off-spring of Hap or Chance. God is much better known by such Foot-steps of his Divinity, than either an Hercules by his Foot, or a Lion by his Paw, or an Apelles by his Pencil. And as my Knowledge that the House wherein I am, had a Builder, cannot be lessened by my Ignorance of the Architect or Artist by whom 'twas built; so my Knowledge and Assurance of the whole World's having a Maker, (and every way su∣table to such a Fabrick,) cannot possibly be di∣minish'd, much less dissolv'd, or done away, by its Maker's being Invisible to Carnal Eyes. For how much ocular Demonstrations give place to mental, I shew'd before. And its Truth is yet farther confirm'd from hence; that Mr. Hobs his Demonstration of the Quadrature of the Circle (for which he will sooner dye a Martyr, than for any thing in Religion,) is by a skilfuller Ma∣thematician plainly demonstrated to be False. But This Principle in the Metaphysicks, [that of the two Parts of a Contradiction, the one must evermore be True, and the other False,] which is the first and chief Ground of all our Mental Demonstrations, (most especially of the God∣head) and every Mental Demonstration which is duly rais'd from it, or Necessitates an Atheist either to grant there is a God, or to affirm Both
Parts of a Contradiction, is so clear, and self∣evident (without the help of our outward sen∣ses) that it is cogent even to all, of allRom. 2. 14, 15. Per∣swasions, and has every where the Suffrage, as well of Taught, as of Ʋntaught Reason. In∣somuch as it cannot be quite so evident, that every Watch has a Spring, and every Spring a Spring-Maker, as that there is aAristot. 7 Phys. c. 1. & 8 Phys. c. 4. & 12. Meta∣phys. c. 29. Plato 10. de Legibus. Primus Motor of every Mobile in the World, and a Principle of Being to All that is. The Proof of what I have hitherto but barely said will be short, and easie. And the Way to it may thus be made. That some Things there are which began to be, Experience tells us. And that Nothing can be the Cause of its own Being and Beginning, is just as Plain.Confer Ber∣nard. de Con∣sid. l. 5. c. 6. For that which is not in being, cannot do or act any thing; and as little is it possible that it should be before it is. From whence it follows of necessity, that whatsoever began to be, had its Being and Beginning from somewhat else. As the Third from the Second, and the Second from the First. And because there could be nothing which could begin before the First, 'tis plain the First had its Beginning from That which never did begin. And that which never-began at all, yet is the Author of Beginning to All that ever did begin, is That
which in English we do commonly call God. God the shortest and the fittest of any Appel∣lative we can use in our English Tongue. Not that This or any Name can ever express his whole Nature; (for some of the Greeks ex∣press'd him fitly by , The Ʋnex∣pressible, and Moses more fitly by I Am That I Am, or that stupendous Tetragrammation, the Lord Jehovah,) but as safer and less improper, than Anima Mundi, Mens Divina, Natura Na∣turans, and the like, by which the Peripateticks, and Platonists, and from These the Rosicrucians, have laid a Stumbling-block in the Way of Themselves and others. Now because it does imply the first and worst of Contradictions, for That Being not to be, or Not to have been without Beginning, which gave a Being and Beginning to That which first began to be; therefore for any one to affirm, There is no God, or no Eternal Cause of Being to All that ever began to be, is to affirm Both Parts of a Contradiction. Although, in spite of Him∣self, and his own Perverseness, (if he is but an Animal indued with Reason, and not a pro∣digious sort of Monster in the meer likeness of a Man,) he must confess the one is True, and the other False. This is a mental and meta∣physical
Demonstration, more compulsively con∣vincing than any Ocular. It being Impossible to be True, that any thing is in Being, and Not in Being at the same Instant; as 'tis Impossible to be False, that every thing (at the same In∣stant) is either in Being, or Not in Being. These are things of such self-evidence, and so compulsive of Assent, that (as I said a little before) they have every where the suffrage as well of taught as of untaught Reason. And This I take to be such a Proof or Demonstration of The Deity, as it is sufficient to convert even an Acataleptick, who holds that nothing is to be known, but that a man does know nothing. Nor does it nakedly perswade, but irresistably com∣pel, and constrain the Atheist. I do not speak onely with Confidence, but do Know what I say but an old Experience. § 10. Again, we know whom we have be∣liev'd, by some of the meanest Creatures acting above the Sphere of their Activity. For all things acting above themselves, and with more force or vertue than other things of their Le∣vel are of themselves able to do, must needs de∣rive such power and virtue from somewhat else which is above them. As when Balaam's Ass spake, and rebuk'd her Rider, 'twas so commanding a
Demonstration of an Agent supernatural, work∣ing in, and upon, and above the Ass, that He who will not grant the later, must (in spite of him∣self) deny the former. Which because an An∣tiscripturist may gladly do, we are to instance in other Things, whereof (not his Reading, but) his downright Experience will best convince him. The Case may be usefully represented in the vast difference which we observe between a Marble, and a Loadstone. We find the Marble has nothing in it above the Nature of a Stone. It is as dull, as it is heavy; and as unactive, as it is lifeless. Whereas the Loadstone acts clearly above the nature of a Stone, or a Thing Inanimate, in drawing Iron as it does, an heavier Body than Itself, and that without a Touch or Contact, (so little need has it of Hands and Arms,) and This by way of Discretion too, with a discrimi∣nating Love to That Course Metal above All others. This, and the other Consideration, that a Needle touch'd with it has a particular Inclination to stand full Northward, in which Point onely it is at rest, and ever restless in any other, moved Thales Milesius, (the Wisest man in all Greece) to believe it Animate. And in∣deed he might have thought it, not onely Ani∣mate, but Sensible, nor onely Sensible, but Ra∣tional,
had not his Knowledge of a Deity (shew∣ing his Wisedom in the most stupid, as well as his Power irresistible in the weakest and the most passive of all his Creatures,) superseded the ne∣cessity of that Conjecture. To which I add, that nothing speaks a God lowder, or more di∣stinctly, than such a speechless sort of Creatures as Birds and Bees, whose unlearned kind of Sci∣ence and skill in Architecture or Tacticks, the learnedst Artist in the World can onely imitate, never equal, and would certainly admire, if not adore too, (as not a few of the Heathens were wont to do,) did not the Wisedom of a Crea∣tor unty the Knot, and make All easy to such as own him. Not to ask one of all the Quaeres we find in Job,Job 38. 39, 40, 41. (which yet are all argumenta∣tive, and plead the Cause I have in hand,) who but God can teach the Emmet, either to treasure up store of Corn for a Provision in the Winter, or (which is very much stranger) to gnaw off each little prolifick particle of the Grain, where∣by it may keep without growing, in the most pregnant and fertil Earth? Shall we say such Thaumaturgicks, as the Loadstone, and the Bee, the Emmet, and the Silkworm, are all , or Self-Instructers, in the exercise of the Arts and Curiosities they exert? If not so, it must
be Thus; that acting All, as they do, above the Sphere of their Activity, and beyond the low Rank they are placed in, they are clearly, , All taught of God. For where there is Art without Knowledge, eminent Skill without Learning, unerring Sight without Eyes or Vision, incomparable Providence without all Forecast, wonderfull Wisedom and Contrivance without the inherence and use of Reason, (as in the Bee, the Loadstone, the Emmet, and the Silkworm,) There we have a Demonstration of a Superiour, Invisible, Supernatural Agent, working in, and upon, and above the Creatures, as 'twere on purpose to convince us, that he is God. And truly till we are able to give a tolerable reason, (from Art, or Nature,) why some dull and dead Specificks do work with Discretion, and out of Choice, upon a determinate Part or Hu∣mor in the Body of man, and lets the rest all alone, (as 'twere by a wilfull Preterition,) as why Rhubard purges Choler, Hellebore Melan∣choly, Senna Flegm, Hermodactyls Viscosity; or why Cantharides are offensive in particular to the Kidneys, Mercury to the Throat, Strammo∣neum to the Brain, Opium to the Nerves through∣out the whole Body; I say, till we are able to give Another Cause or Reason of These astonish∣ing
Effects, I shall conclude that These Things have These Discretions onely from God; and that the Physicians were Enthusiasts, to whom These Secrets were first reveal'd. § 11. To summ up all in a word, (and to dismiss the first Method of demonstrating the Cause of all other Causes by his Effects;) from that virtue in the Hen which is derived to the Egge, and is the Principle of Essence to the yet unform'd Chicken, whilst it is not a Spirit, and yet Invisible, our excellent Harvey strongly ar∣gues the strict Necessity of a God, for whom alone it is not difficult to create out of Nothing the Things that Are. And in the same Book de Generatione, (to the reading of which 'twill be sufficient to referr our modern Doaters upon Experiment,) he says, Generatio Demonstrat Spi∣ritum, eumque Deum. He means a logical De∣monstration à posteriori; such as is That of an Artificer from any Artifice he exerts. Which does carry along with it so clear an Evidence of its Author, that a Watchmaker is said to move the Watch which he has made, at the greatest di∣stance: in as much as with his Hands and other Instruments of working, (as truly informed by his Hands, as his Hands by his Head, and his Head by his Intelligence, and his Intelligence
by the Fountain of its Existence,) he gave his Watch as well the Laws, as the Necessity of its Motion. § 12. The Second general Method of De∣monstrating the Object and Ground of Worship, whereby we Know whom we believe, (as to his Entity or Existence, and as to part of his Nature too,) is like to That which God made to demon∣strate the Being of the Sun. For as the Sun is best seen by the light it gives us, and even ob∣trudes upon our Senses, without the least aid from either the Mathematicks, or Logick, or from the Metaphysicks, or Physicks; so God himself, as to his Being, (though not as to all his Mysterious Essence,) is most clearly appre∣hended, and unavoidably understood, (without any assistance either from Art, or Education,) by theJustin. in Resp. ad Quaest. 1. Damasce∣nus 1. fid. Orth. c. 1. & 3. Cic. Orat. pro Milone. ordinary Light and Law of Nature. Man's knowledge of a Godhead has been ever just as natural, as his knowledge that he has Eyes, (without the help of a Reflexion from any Looking-glass whatsoever,) though he cannot either see them, or make them able to see themselves, unless it be by Reflexion, which yet does not make, but onely illustrate and prove his knowledge. Hence it is that All Nations, in All Times and Places, whether Salvage, or
Civiliz'd, however tempted by the Devil to love and cherish Dissentions, and especially, to affect a Singularity in Opinions, Though they have evermore differ'd in most things else, and even in the choice of the Gods they Worship'd; yet that a Deity there is, They have not been able but to agree.Nulla Gens tam barbara, quae non fa∣teatur esse a∣liquem De∣um. Cic. 1. Tuscul. Qu, . Aristot. 1. de Coelo. t. 22. V. Jambli∣cum in pr. de Myst. Aegypt. & Julianum apud Cyrill. l. 2. , solus est Sermo uni∣versalis. That there is above Nature a Divine Object of Worship and Adoration, is the one language of all the World: The onely Ʋni∣versal Character, stamp'd in every man's Heart and Head, who is perfectly a Man, and not a Monster; as He must needs be a Monster, who has no Reason; and much more He, who has no Religion. Thus is one single Error the Confu∣tation of Another. The Sin and Error of Ido∣latry does refell the Worse Error and Sin of A∣theism. It's observable of the Athenians, (in the Times of S. Paul,) that knowing nothing of the True God, but that a True God there is; and Knowing withall they knew him not, as to the Perfections of his Nature; erected an Altar with This Inscription,Act. 17. 23. , To the Ʋn∣known God. Two things I here mark to my present purpose. First, that the God whom they knew not, and yet ador'd, was indeed the True God, even the same that S. Paul had de∣clared
to them. Next that the God whom they knew not, and could not know, as to his Essence, They had a True knowledge of, and could not but know, as to his Being. Which is evinced and presupposed and inferred even from hence, that they did seriously, and zea∣lously, though blindly worship him. All which as an Historian, (rather than as a Prea∣cher,) and as a matter of Fact our Apostle told them. § 13. From hence it follows that Those A∣thenians who were the Ancestors of These, did shew themselves to be a wise and religious Peo∣ple,. Diodor. Sic. l. 13. p. 137. in that they offer'd by Proclamation a Talent of Silver for a Reward, to any Person who should be so happy and such a Lover of Religion, as to kill the foul Monster, Diagoras the Atheist, newly fled out of Attica for fear of Justice. Nor had they onely such an hatred of a positive Atheist, whose profession of Atheism gave him Atheos, for his Name; but they were as much admired for their Piety and Prudence, in that they banished Protagoras, and burn'd his Books, and this for no other reason than that he clanculary worship'd, and writ but doubtfully of a Deity; as if it were a moot point, whether there were any such thing, or no.
For to be doubtfull of a Deity, (and not to say I know whom I have believ'd,) I do suppose to be the utmost that the Affecters of Atheism have been able to arrive at by all their Arts; whether tending to extinguish the natural light of the Understanding, or to the making of the Con∣science so tough and callous by vitious habits of Debauch, as to justifie and commend S. Paul's expression of the Thing, when he saith, that some Consciences are cauteriz'd; they are so sear'd with an hot Iron, as to become quite in∣sensate, and past all feeling. I say, the thing we call Atheism I conceive to be no more than a meer Doubting of a Deity; not at all a presum∣ption that 'tis impossible for it to be. For Pro∣tagoras Himself, and the Magicians who had de∣bauch'd him, (brought by Xerxes into Greece,) did privately offer Sacrifice to certain Gods whom they ador'd, however they were in pub∣lick too brave to own it, because they scorn'd to have it thought by their dull Admirers, that any Deity did assist them in whatsoever they could do above other men. Now this Doubt∣ing of a Deity, implying a Deity to be Possible, (and that for any thing they know, it either may, or may not be,) does accidentally demon∣strate that a Deity there is, and that it cannot
but be. For seeing to doubt it, is to acknow∣ledge that it is Possible for it to be, (though not that it is actual,) and seeing the Sense of the word Deity is a Necessary Being, altogether independent and antecedent to all Causality, (which an Atheist will grant It must be, if 'tis at all,) it does imply a contradiction, to grant that it is Possible, and yet to deny that it is Actual; because to be Possible, but yet not Actual, is to be perfectly contingent; which for a Deity to be, and yet be a Necessary Being, is a most gross Contradiction in Adjecto. And a gross Contradiction being the onely way of pro∣ving any absolute Impossibility, is therefore one way of proving the Actual Being of a God upon a naked confession that 'tis but Possible for it to be. Which confession any Atheist will much rather make, than undertake the harder Task, of proving a Godhead to be impossible. And yet 'tis That he must do, or else be con∣vinced there is a God, by his previous Con∣viction that one there may be. § 14. The Atheist's Sanctuary and Refuge, to which he makes his last flight from the Ne∣cessity of a Godhead, (as the Fountain of Ex∣istence to all good things which began to be,) is an aeternal Succession of Individuals. Which,
however he cannot prove, or perform any thing like it, he is resolv'd to take for granted, to supersede (if it were possible) the strict Ne∣cessity of a Creator. But This objection has been so baffl'd, and put so quite out of all Countenance, by Paulus Venetus, andAmongst and above others, I mean the most acute and the most lear∣ned Dr. Gun∣ning, now my Lord Bishop of Ely, Pau∣lus Venetus and others, Mr. Latham in his Ser∣mon upon Rom. 1. 20. p. 3, 4, 5. others, whose Argument leads it clearly to This Absur∣dity which it incurs, that a Part must of necessity be equal to the whole upon that Hypothesis; that I shall say no more of it than briefly This. That on the supposal of an eternal Succession of Days, there must be a Medium Metaphysicum between the Two Eviternities, the one before, the other after every Noon; because the Noon of this day, (or of yesterday, or of the morrow,) cannot be more or less distant from that which never did begin, than from That which shall never end. Which infers an Aequidistance (in a negative way of Speaking) 'twixt two Durations aevi∣ternal, though not (in a positive) 'twixt two Extremes. But I add, that the Objection confutes it self; in that the Succession of Individuals, by the way of Generation in which we find it, affords a controuling Demonstration of its Aeternity's being Impossible; and does not need any such subtilty, as is required in the management of
the Argument foregoing. For, (to instance in the Succession of the Hen and the Egg,) we cannot say that the Hen did lay the Egg, and that the Egg was hatched into the Hen, and so backwards to all Aeternity; because the Hen (as a Parent) is by nature before the Egg; the for∣mer being the Cause, whereof the later is the Ef∣fect. From whence 'tis evident, that there was a First Hen; which being absolutely impossible to have been by Generation, it cannot but be, that it was created. And That which did create it, must needs be God. § 15. Having thus far proceeded in solving the first of the three Quaeres, How, and Why we are said to Know God, even as perfectly and as plainly as any thing Knowable can be Known; I cannot choose but charge the Atheist with arrant Dulness and Stupidity, (however he may pass for a Man of great Wit, with such as having none at all are unfit to judge of it,) for be∣ing able to make a Doubt in so clear a Case. Whereby he may seem to have too much, and too little Subtilty; because if he had less, he would not start any Objections against his Ma∣ker; and if he had more, he would be able to refute them. But because, though we do Know whom we have believed, we do also Believe
whom we truly Know, it remains that I proceed to the Second Quaere which I propos'd; How and Why our bare Believing the hidden things of our God (however in the Scriptures re∣vealed to us) is much more proper, and more requir'd, and more rewardable in Religion, than our clear and full Knowledge of his Ex∣istence. § 16. In order to the resolving of This Se∣cond Quaere, I must distinguish more fully than in my Answer to the First, betwixt the Myste∣ries in Religion, or its Subject in Hypothesi, and what in Thesi is the Ground and the Object of it. There are matters in Religion, as well as Nature, which are most worthy of our Belief, though much above the flight of our Comprehen∣sion. And though evidently credible, are not evidently True, how True soever in Themselves. They have evidence enough to require our Faith, though not enough to beget our Knowledge. Thus the Trinity in Ʋnity is as evident in it self, as the Godhead is; but not so evident unto us. And humane Faith may be so strong, as to exclude from the Agent all kind of doubting; though not from All Objects a Possibility that they are false. For nothing can exclude This, but Knowledge properly so call'd, to which a Cer∣tainty
is as essential, as Credibility is to Faith. And the absolute impossibility that the Mysteries of God should admit of falshood, ariseth one∣ly from the Verity and Veracity of the Godhead, not from the steadiness, or the strength, much less from the Nature of our Belief. But there are other things in Religion, which, though they are not more True than the Trinity in Unity, are yet for all that more Truly Known. Thus the Evidence I have of God's Existence, is so much greater than my Evidence of his be∣ing Three in one, or the Scriptures being his Word; that I am certain of the former, because I know it; and I doubt not of the later, be∣cause I stedfastly believe it. My Assurance of the one makes me infallible in my assent, which I cannot say I am through my Confidence of the other, unless I have it by a miraculous and im∣mediate Illumination, as fully as the Apostles their Gift of Tongues. Thus the Ground of the Difference of the things spoken of in our Reli∣gion, is the Difference of the Ground upon which they stand; to wit, a greater, or lesser Evidence to our short sighted Souls; not a greater or lesser Truth, and Reality of their Beings. For neither our Knowledge nor our Belief have any influence on the Things we Believe or Know.
§ 17. This Distinction being premis'd, I proceed thus to argue, and thereby to answer the Quaere made. Every man's Ʋnderstanding is too too sawcy with his Will, in pretending it is its Priviledge to give a judgement universally of Truth and Falshood, an Error not the less grievous for its having been occasion'd by a very great Truth. For though 'tis the office of the Intellect, in the Intellect's own Court, to pass a verdict upon Things within its Cogni∣zance; yet in such Transcendentals as are very much without and above its verge, or by a natu∣ral Right and Title beyond all humane Compre∣hension, a good understanding will confess, It must not determine, but obey. For to know things exactly does onely denominate us Lear∣ned, but not Religious: good Philosophers in∣deed, but not good Men. The word [Religion] and the Thing, being well consider'd, (as 'tis by few, and but seldom,) Its ratio formalis will be found, not to stand in proud Knowledge, but meek Obedience. And in Obedience of the whole Man; as well of the Soul, as of the Body. And in the Soul too, we owe an absolute Obe∣dience of all our Faculties to God, of our Ap∣petites, our Wills, our Ʋnderstandings. Sci∣ence and Religion do herein differ more espe∣cially,
that in the first our Understandings di∣rect the Will; but in the second they concur in submission with it: in That our Reason may command, as a proud Dictatrix; but in This she must obey, as a most Teachable Disciple. And for This there is very great reason. For 'tis so natural to Religion, to have its Mysteries; or Objects peculiar to Faith alone; that nei∣ther the Greeks nor the Barbarians could ever indure to be without them. And if there are few Mechanick Arts which have not their Myste∣ries and Secrets, unknown to All who are not Artists; what an unnatural thing were it, if the Mystery of Godliness,1 Tim. 3. 16. God manifest in the Flesh, or the Religion of the True God who is Incomprehensible, should have nothing con∣teined in it beyond the fathom or flight of a finite reason? What man knows the things of a man, save the Spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God. 1 Cor. 2. 11. And truly if it were otherwise, where were the Merit, or the Mystery, or the Necessity of Believing, on which so great a stress in Scripture is every where laid by our Lord Himself? We find in our Gospel these two rational Expressions, The Obedience of Faith, (Rom. 16. 26.) and the Law of Faith.
(Rom. 3. 27.) 'Tis the Obedience of our Faith which is so pleasing unto God, as that without This it is impossible for us to please Him. (Heb. 11. 6.) If Faith it self were not Obedience unto That which is called the Law of Faith, and to the Lawgiver himself who hath commanded us to Believe, It would not be so meritorious, or so rewardable in its Nature, as now it is. For herein chiefly does consist the excellent Nature of Religion, and of all religious Worship, (and withall the rationability of the immensity of our Reward,) that 'tis attended with Self-denial, and a Resignedness of the All that is most ex∣cellent in our Souls, unto the Will of that Ob∣ject we thus adore. Whereas if we absolutely Knew whatsoever by our Religion we are obliged to Acknowledge, or were we obliged to acknow∣ledge what we see or feel onely; there could not be possibly such a Thing as real Virtue in our Assent, when 'twould be impossible not to assent to what we should distinctly Know, and as im∣possible not to acknowledge what with our brutish and common Senses we see, or feel. Necessity and Vertue are incompatible in All, but in God Himself. And even in Him (speaking ) they differ too. Our Knowledge indeed may be call'd a Physical, but not a religious, or
moral Virtue. There are Virtues indeed which do lead to Knowledge; and Knowledge (truly so call'd) does dispose to Virtues. But naked Science is a meer Intellectual Habit, (wherein the Devils themselves excel,) and was never yet reckon'd an Ethick Virtue. The reason of all which is plain, and obvious. For the Object of a Man's Knowledge does compel his assent; whereas the Object of his Faith does but invite it. To matters of Faith our Assent is due; but to matters of Knowledge 'tis unavoidable. Our Knowledge shews onely we are intelligent in our nature; but our Faith shews in us also the Grace of Meekness. That indeed infers the Conspicuity of the Object; but This (which is more) the Flexibility of the Will. (To sum up the difference in a word,) by light of knowledge it appears that we are a reasoning sort of Crea∣tures; but by the Obedience of our Faith, that we are Religious ones. § 18. From these Premises I infer, we ought not to trouble our selves at all, that we cannot fully Know, so far forth as we can Believe. For God has given us Knowledge enough (if we live not up to it) to greaten our future Condemna∣tion; and the knowledge which He denies us is not necessary at all to our future safety. And
seeing 'tis one of God's Attributes, to be by Na∣ture Incomprehensible, (who were he not so, could not be God,) 'Tis fit the learnedst of his Creatures should be contentedly in the Dark, as to many things; the firm Belief of which things they stick not to testifie with their Blood. If we believe the Will of God to be revealed in his Word, and therein the Three Subsistences in but one and the same Substance, we may not be vext with the Experience, of our being yet un∣qualify'd to comprehend how it should be. For whatsoever things they are we are commanded but to Believe, it cannot possibly be a Sin, not to be able to know exactly. But 'tis aVix sibi temperant, quin eousque impudentia provehantur, ut Naturam oderint quòd infra Deum simus. Sen. de Benef. l. 3. 29. Sin to be disquieted, that the sublimest Things of God do exceed our Reach; and that whilst we are finite, Infinite Things will be above us. To comprehend what is finite, a finite Intellect is sufficient; and as sufficient also it is, to Apprehend what is In∣finite, though not at all to comprehend it; (so great and wide the difference is between an Ap∣prehensive and a Comprehensive knowledge; but an Adaequate knowledge of God, is onely com∣petent to God. As for Certainty and Knowledge, God has wisely dealt to us such fit Proportions, that we have Ground enough given us in God's own Word, to want with comfort what we have
not; and to injoy what we have, with Modera∣tion. 'Tis there we are assured of a threefold , or Full assurance. A Full assurance of Faith, (Heb. 10. 22.) A Full assurance of Hope, (Heb. 6. 11.) A Full assurance of Ʋn∣derstanding, (Col. 2. 2.) The last imports a full Knowledge of what is Knowable in God, and fit or good for us to Know; which leads us on to anibid. Acknowledgement of the Mysteries of God, in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisedom and Knowledge. And this does prompt me to ob∣serve S. Paul's Distinction, between , and , the Things of God which may be known, (Rom. 1. 19.) and the other Things of God which are Hidden from us. (Col. 2. 3.) As for God's Existence from everlasting to everlast∣ing, his omnipresence, his omnipotence, his all-sufficience, and his omniscience, his Truth, and Justice, his Love, and Goodness, and the like; in respect of all These, we perfectly Know whom we Believe. We have (literally speaking) a Full assurance of Ʋnderstanding. But for the Trinity of Persons, the Incarnation of God the Son, his Circumcision, his Crucifixion, his Sa∣tisfaction for all our Sins, the Resurrection of our Bodies, and Immortality of our Souls; in respect of all These, we rather Believe whom we have
known. We have in These a Full assurance of Faith,. and Hope onely. And the perfection of our knowing the things of God which may be known,Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 2. is Ground enough for our Believing the things of God which are Hidden from us. § 19. Of what has hitherto been said; Two good Ʋses may here be made. The one of Con∣futation, the other of Comfort. That belongs to Those men who are affectedly Ʋnbelievers; This will redound unto our selves, when in meer humane frailty we sometimes waver. And Both together will be an Answer to the Third Quaere which I propos'd, touching the Powers, and the Effects, and the great Benefits of Believing, (as well as of knowing whom we believe,) clearly implied in the Text by the Causal For, as That imports S. Paul's Reason, why he was not a∣sham'd of the things he suffer'd. For this Cause (says He to Timothy,) I suffer these things. But I am not asham'd. , For I know whom I have believed. § 20. First, to the Wilfull Ʋnbeliever who does affect being Incredulous, and casts about for all Colours to nourish the humour in him∣self, I shall argue Thus. That He who is so thick-headed as to alledge he is not sure there is a Life after Death, and a Day of Judgement,
must needs confess himself so Dull too, as not to be surer that there is None. And 'tis suffi∣cient to oblige a prudent Person to live exactly, (upon the account of Prudence onely,) that a life after Death, and so a Judgment, if he does not yet fully know it, may happen to him for ought he Knows. And that Aeternity of Punish∣ments (as well as of Rewards) is barely Possible. And that the Negative is not Demonstrable, any more than the Affirmative. Yea, that the Ne∣gative cannot be possibly, because a Negative; but the Affirmative (as it is such) has a passive power at least (which the Negative has not) of being the subject of Demonstration. For thus the Existence of a Deity may be demonstrated by a Person who is of greater Perspicuity than the man who Doubts of it, though not by Him who is so stupid, (and in a manner so unman'd,) as to be able to make a Doubt in so clear a Case. Whereas the Negative to This, [that a Deity does not exsist,] can be demonstrated by None, how acute soever; nor was ever yet pretended to be Demonstrable by Any. The most insipid of Fools is able to say, [there is no God;] and it can be but said by the wittiest Atheist. But (to return to That Instance which was of an Article of our Faith, and of Faith alone, to
wit, a Punishment Aeternal, or a Life after Death, or a Day of Judgment;) I say, an Evil which is uncertain, and by consequence so con∣tingent, as that it may, or may not be, must be provided against in Policy, if not in Conscience, or Religion, by one who would not be a Fool, as well as an Epicure, or an Atheist. A Lazarus may be sent out of Abraham's Bosom, (though de facto none is,) and a Dives out of the Deep too, to certifie the Truth of an Heaven and Hell, upon a supposal that such there are. But on a supposal that there are not, nor an Ex∣istence after Death, 'Tis plain that None can be sent to us with a Certificate that there is None. From whence 'tis evident that the Believer must needs be much on the safest side; because the Object of his Belief is under an evident Possibi∣lity of Demonstration; whereas the Contrary to This is flatly Impossible to be prov'd. Besides there is This great Difference too, that if the Believer is deceiv'd, he does but lose the short pleasures of vitious living; but if the Incredu∣lous is deceiv'd, He incurs the long Torments, (or rather endless, and so not long,) which will be one day the Wages of it. § 21. But in dealing, as I now do, with the obstinate Skeptick, or the affected Ʋnbeliever,
I onely argue from his own Principles of car∣nal Reason, and common Sense. And have spo∣ken onely of Faith as the Child of Fear, which is of the Flesh. Not a word of That Faith which is the Fruit of Spirit; and is not ac∣quired, but infus'd; nor the product of Art, but a work of Grace. The Faith imported in my Text is of a far more sublime and transcen∣dent Nature; and such as carried up S. Paul above the low sense of all his Sufferings. 'Tis no less than the Victory which overcometh the World.Heb. 11. 1. No less than the Evidence of Things not seen; no less than the Substance (that is, the confident Expectation) of things hoped for. It refresheth our drooping Spirits with unspeak∣able Comforts in the black and gloomy day of our greatest Trial, when all the Comforters up∣on Earth are utterly unable to yield us comfort. It fills us inwardly with Joy in the Holy Ghost. Conveys unto us a full assurance that our Par∣don is seal'd, our Peace ratified, that God is our Father, and we His Children. Gives us some Glimmerings and Fore-tasts of the Glory to be reveal'd. It presentiates things future; and prepossesseth us with the Injoyment of things in∣visible. Reveals unto us, by the secret and powerfull Whispers of God's Spirit, the Bea∣tifick
and glorious Mansions prepared for us in His House. Hereupon it does so place us above the Level of Temptations, as to exempt us from the fear of whatsoever Men or Devils can do un∣to us. Insomuch that what is intended by the Enemies of our Faith to make us sorry, by This is wonderfully made to increase our Joy. By This we are enabled to trust in God (as Holy Job did) although he kills us. So that lifting up our heads, and looking up unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith, we learn to love and to kiss his Rod; and are so far from re∣pining at his severest Dispensations, that in regard unto the Joy that is set before us, we can injoy the very Torments, and scorn the shame of a Crucifixion. In a word, should I exemplifie all I have said concerning Faith, by making a Narrative of Particulars, as far as from Abel to Charles the First, (which were to prove by the Argument they call Induction the wonder∣full Powers and Effects and glorious Benefits of Believing, as well as of Knowing whom we be∣lieve,) I must have taken for my Text the whole Eleventh Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews. § 22. But because This would prove an Enterprize too long and tedious, though not
too difficult to be perform'd; I shall conclude with some Directions for the securing of our Faith (if at least we have any) from slipping from us; and for the enabling us to say, with our Apostle in my Text, , we know whom we have trusted; we Know whom we have Believed; and are perswaded that He is able to keep that which we have committed unto Him against That Day. § 23. If we find our selves wavering in the Belief of those Things whereof we have not a perfect knowledge, (however a perfect know∣ledge of That, which is the Ground of the Things Believed, and we have reason to superstruct the strongest Belief to be imagin'd, upon so firm a Foundation as perfect Knowledge,) we may comfort our selves, and re-inforce our Sick Faith, by observing these following Rules. First, by reflecting on the importance of those known Words,Mar. 9. 24. Lord I believe, help Thou my unbelief. Implying an unbelief in one, does consist with belief in another measure. Just as contrary Qualities often meet in one Subject, in gradibus remissis, although in gradibus intensis they never can. Next, by making that Con∣fession and Prayer our own. Lord, we believe in a degree; but with fears now and then, and
some dishonourable Faintings. Nor of our selves can we do more; but That and more by thy Help. Help us therefore to believe, without the least degree of doubting, or distrust, or diffi∣dence. Whatever is wanting in our Belief, we pray thee pardon, and repair, and replenish in us. We cannot acquire it by Art, or Industry; but we can humbly wrestle with thee (as Jacob did) for this Blessing, by Prayer and Fasting. And through the Grace which Thou hast given us, We will never let thee go, till thou hast bless'd us with a steady unshaken Faith. Thirdly, by considering, that to be tempted (however strong∣ly) is no Transgression. But rather the more a man is tempted, and to the staggering of his Faith, the more victorious is his Faith when he does not yield. Yield we do not, whilst we dis∣sent from our Waverings; and hate the unstea∣diness of our Assent; and are heartily griev'd at its Haesitations; and are piously carefull to make it steady; and resolute in our Purposes to hold fast our Faith, even in spite of those Doubt∣ings we grapple with; and strive to make it so much the stronger, (the more our Tempter at∣tempts its overthrow,) by the Antiperistasis of Temptations. We do not yield, though we are buffeted, (both by Satan, and the Flesh, and
the World we live in,) whilst we are obstinate in our purpose to serve the God whom we own with our Self-denials; to serve him with the De∣nial of all the Rivals of his Religion; (our Wit, our Reason, our Erudition, our Profit, Plea∣sure, or Reputation;) and to honour him with the obedience of every Faculty within us; not onely with our Wills, but our Ʋnderstandings, whilst we make them stoop down, when they can∣not rise so high as to things above us; and the Mortuus est Dei Filius, prorsus cre∣dibile est, quia ineptum. Sepultus re∣surrexit, cer∣tum est, quia Impossibile. Tert. de Car∣ne Christi. rather to believe them, (if I may use Tertul∣lian's ,) because Impossible. For what is impossible to us, to God is easie. What to us is miraculous, to Him is natural. And therefore the Mysteries of our Religion, (to wit, the Trinity, Incarnation, Resurrection, and the like,) which to the misty Eye of Reason our Tempter would make to seem impossible, do to the clearer Eye of Faith appear to be True so much the ra∣ther. I say, the rather in two respects; in respect of our Tempter, whose ends we frustrate by our Belief; and in respect of the Things Themselves, which do the better become Religion for being above the short Reach of our stunted Knowledge; and which we are Therefore to be∣lieve, because unable to comprehend them. For were we able to comprehend them (as we do
many things below us,) This gross Absurdity would follow, that what is now our Religion, would be our Science. Wherein our finite Ʋn∣derstandings would not humbly submit, but proudly Triumph. And it would be an hard thing to be Irreligious. The Pelagians of old, and our late Socinians, do seem to forget the vast Distance, and Disproportion, betwixt the Faculties of Man, and hidden Mysteries of God, when they contend for a Sufficience in natural reason to1 Cor. 10. 14. receive the1 Cor. 10. 14. deep things of the Spirit of God. For as God being a Spirit must (for that very reason) be worshipped in Spirit, so the spiritual things of God must be spiritually discerned. There must be1 Joh. 3. 2. Similitude and Pro∣portion 'twixt Acts and Objects. Lastly, 'tis matter of comfort to us, and one of the means of reinforcing our wavering Faith, that what does often seem to fail us in one regard, may yet in another be ever with us for our support. We may with the Father of the Faithfull, the Faith∣full Abraham,Rom. 4. 18. believe in Hope against Hope. For as He could not hope for a great Posterity, in regard of His Age, and Sarah's Barrenness, which yet he could not but hope for, in regard of God's Promise, which could not fail; so, what we cannot believe exactly, in regard of its
being above the Reach of our Reason, and com∣mon Ʋsages of Nature; we cannot chuse but believe, in regard that God says it who can∣not lie. The Worthiness of our Faith does stand in This chiefly, that though 'tis many times Wavering, like the tremulous Needle in the Mariner's Compass, yet being touch'd by God's Grace, as That Needle by the Load∣stone, its prevalent motion is towards its Pole; and from That its Trepidations can never wrest it. Insomuch that we may say, (as once S. Paul in another case,) we are troubled on every side,2 Cor. 4. 8, 9. yet not in Distress; per∣plex'd we are often, but not in Despair; Per∣secuted by Satan, but by God not forsaken; cast down indeed, but not destroy'd. Trem∣ble we may, (like Aristippus in a ship∣wrack,) but (like Him) we are not guilty of yielding up our , (as 'tis wor∣ded by Aulus Gellius.) We do not basely consent to our Perturbations, which arise not from our Spirits, but from our Flesh. The Law in our Members (do what we can) will still be warring; but the Law in our Minds does ever worst it. We still believe with our Wills; Lord, help the Ʋnbelief of our Ʋnderstandings. Our Hearts are steady; Lord,
fix our Heads too. In spite of our very Ʋn∣belief (in point of doubt, or haesitation, or now and then a dark interval,) We will believe, so as to love the Incarnate Deity whom we admire; and so love, as to obey him; and obey him to such a point, as to lay down our lives for the love we bear him. And so will prove by all three, that we do real∣ly Believe what we cannot fathom, [God ma∣nifest in the Flesh,] because without our Be∣lieving, we can do neither. Neither Love, nor Obey, nor lay down our Lives in obe∣dience to him. Let our Doubtings or Dis∣believings (in some Degree, and by Fits,) be what they can; or let them seem to be what they will; yet we are certain of our Faith, whilst we are certain of our Fear to offend our Maker; and of our Love to his Goodness, and of our Obedience to his Com∣mands. Without this last ('tis very true) we cannot speak Peace to our selves, or o∣thers. For as S. John says expresly, By This we know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments; so 'tis the keeping of his Commandments, by which we know that we love, and obey him truly. § 24. Now having arrived at a full know∣ledge
of God's Existence,Est non scri∣pta sed nata lex; quam non didicimus, accepimus, le∣gimus, verùm ex Naturâ ip∣sâ arripui∣mus, hausi∣mus, expressi∣mus; ad quam non docti, sed facti; non instituit, sed imbuti su∣mus, &c. Cic. Orat. pro Milone. and his good-plea∣sure, (expressed to us in his Precepts,) or of his Verity and his Will, (revealed to us in his Word, and also ingraven in our own Nature, as a Law written in our Hearts;) and farther yet having attained unto a know∣ledge also in part of his Glorious Essence; (as that he is a Spirit, Existing of Himself from all Eternity, an omnipresent and an omni∣scient, and a necessary Being, from whom, and by whom, is every Good Thing that is; and that he is a Rewarder of Them that dili∣gently seek him;Heb. 11. 6. &c.) Having I say the sa∣tisfaction of knowing That which our Apostle does call ,Rom. 1. 19. That which may be known of God, which is as much as is need∣full, and as much as is enough; we must not disquiet our Minds in vain, byEcclus. 3. 21, 22. seeking out things which are too hard for us, or by search∣ing after Secrets above our strength; or by being over-curious in unnecessary matters; as the excellent Son of Sirach has very judi∣ciously forewarn'd us. The Trinity of Persons in the Ʋnity of the Godhead is the chiefest of Those Insearchables; which are indeed ,Rom. 11. 33. past finding out, more impossible to be traced than all his most mysterious ways,
which our Apostle thought worthy of That Expression. Such a mystery it is, as the most pious, and the most learned, and most a∣cute of all Writers were never well able to give account of. The most profound Divine Here is in the condition of Simonides, when demanded by Hiero, a definition of the Dei∣ty. The more he looks into This Mystery, by so much the obscurer it seems to be. The longer he considers, the less he is able to ap∣prehend it. S. John says expresly, (and I believe him,) There are Three that bear re∣cord in Heaven, the Father, the Word, the Holy Ghost, and These Three are One. (1 Joh. 5, 7.) The Antient Fathers and Councils, to stop the Mouths of several Hereticks, of Two especially, Arius first, and then Sabel∣lius, and to preserve the Christian Church from the Plague of Schism, found it necessa∣ry to add This Form of Words, (though not in a positive, but in an exclusive sense,) A Trinity of Persons in an unity of the God∣head. But if 'tisCùm quae∣ritur, Quid Tres? magnâ prorsus inopiâ humanum la∣borat eloqui∣um. August. de Trin. l. 5. cap. 19. asked what is meant by a Trinity of Persons, S. Austin says we want words to express it by. Dictum est tamen Tres Personae, non ut illud diceretur, sed ne taceretur quomodo Tres sint, &c. For who
can speak fitly of what is Infinite, and whilst he makes use of Terms, belonging onely to finite Things? yet This must be done, if we speak at all.Mornay de la Veritè de la Religion Christienne. c. 5. fol 41. b. Il en fault parler en lan∣guage humain, puisque le divin nous est incog∣neu. Onely let us not forget the wise Ad∣vertisement of Anselm, (whensoe're we so speak,)Sic est sum∣ma essentia supra & ex∣tra omnem aliam Natu∣ram, ut si quando de il∣la dicitur a∣liquid verbis quae Commu∣nia sunt aliis Naturis sen∣sus nullatenus sit Communis. Ansel Mono∣log. c. 62. that if we speak concerning God in Words which are Common to other Natures, our sense and meaning must not be Common, but peculiar to God alone. § 25. Nor is This All. For we want understanding to apprehend the Blessed Trini∣ty, as well as words to express it by. An∣selm's excellent Understanding was utterly lost in This Labyrinth.Ʋbi supra c. 86. The Understanding of Boetius was also drown'd in This Ocean.Boetius lib. de Trinitate & Ʋnitate Dei. Good S. Bernard's Understanding was swallow'd up in This Abyss.D. Bern. de Consid. l. 5. c. 7. p. 897. 878. From whence I easily con∣clude, (because I do it with humility and due submission,) that the Trinity in Ʋnity onely can be fathomed by it self.Martialis in Epist. ad Eudegal. c. 3. And that to speak of Three Persons, in any acception of the word Persons which is in use amongst Men, (when at any time they speak of crea∣ted Beings,) were to commit a grosser Haeresie, than that of the Antitrinitarians.
§ 26. This does prompt me to go out of this long Discourse, at the very same Door at which I enter'd. A Door of Hope and Consolation, which seems to hang on These three Hinges. First, that I know whom I have believed, by Knowledge properly so call'd. Next, that I believe what I cannot know, as far as 'tis affirmed in God's own word. Lastly, that I contradict not what 'tis most difficult to believe, (because not written in God's own word,) as far as I find it is agreed on by All my Teachers, (especially met toge∣ther in General Councils,) as an Act of Ʋni∣formity, or as an Article of Peace. For however I may err, it shall not be as an Haeretick, and as a Schismatick much less. It being the Glory of a Man's Faith, to bow down his Reason to his Religion; and the Dignity of his Religion, to study Charity, and Meekness, and Obedience to his Superiours, above some Truths. I say therefore with Leo de pas∣sione Domini Serm. 12. Leo, If I cannot explain what the Trinity is, I will not presume to say there is not a Trini∣ty. And with Radulphus Flaviacensis,Rad. Flav. in Levit. l. 10. c. 2. If I cannot apprehend how One is Three in the propriety of their Persons, and how the same
Three are One in the Communion of their Sub∣stance, I will not despise, or gainsay, but obey the Church. I do not mean onely the English, much less the Roman, but I mean the Holy Catholick and Apostolick Church, in which to believe, is the Ninth Article of my Creed. If this mystery of the Triune is as Ineffable, as Inscrutable by Dust and Ashes, (which we are) I will content my self (with Damascius) to sacrifice to him my Soul in Si∣lence; and adore him with Dionysius, (whe∣ther he is the Areopagite, or not,)Dionys. Areop. de divin. No∣min. c. 1. p. 447. ut No∣mine vacantem, as being said to be without, because above every Name. Neither Jeho∣vah, in the singular, nor Elohim, in the plural, nor Both together conjoyn'd can suf∣ficiently illustrate This stupendous , (as Divines love to call it,) This Recipro∣cal Inhabitation of Three Subsistences in one another, whereby the Ʋnity of the Godhead (is rather perfected, than destroy'd, and) remains Intire. § 27. 'Tis plain the word Persons is to be taken, (not so much in a Positive, as) in a Negative sense. For that the Words of S. John [These Three are One] might be no longer misunderstood and misreported, mis∣expounded
and misapply'd, as they were by several Haereticks before the First Nicene Ge∣neral Council, And that Christians every where might speak as 'twere with one Mouth, (in case they could not be (every where) of one mind,) It seemed good toHist. Con∣cil. Nicaeni ex Edit. Bin. Tom. 1. p. 322. & Alfons. Pis. l. 2. p. 383. & inferius p. 603. Vide etiam Baron. ad Ann. 362. That Council, to ordain that the Word Persons should be ap∣ply'd in Discourse to the Three Witnesses in Heaven, which are but One God. Thereby intending, not so properly, to give us a real knowledge of the Mystery, as to defend us from Error in it. And above all other Er∣rors, from those of Haeresie, and Schism. Not so really to inform us what the Three in One are, as to preserve us from Imagining that They are what they are Not. Not three parts in one whole, either Integral, or Essential. Not three Qualities in one subject. Not three Modes, Not three Formalities, Not three Names of one Thing. In which Act of Ʋni∣formity, (as before I once call'd it,) and espe∣cially in reconciling the whole Greek Church unto The Latine, Athanasius and Hosius were the most eminently Instrumental. Now in the Business of Religion, (though not in That of meer Philosophy) we are in all reason to yield assent to some High Things above our reason.
Else Religion were not Religion; and God himself would not be God, or Man at least would not be Man, and Mystery would not be Mystery, if God's knowledge of Himself, as a Trinity in Ʋnity, could possibly be com∣mon to Man with God. It is therefore, with Me, a prevalent Argument of His Verity, that His Nature is so vastly above the Sphere of my Comprehension. Apprehensive of his Na∣ture indeed I am; but comprehensive of it I cannot be. For whatsoever I can fathom, I cannot absolutely Adore; as seeing there are few of my fellow Creatures, whose Na∣tures I can say I do fully know. If I make a Man of Wax, or a Statue of Marble, I cannot so truly transcend my Creature, as my Creator does Me; because between Me and That, there is some proportion; but between my God and Me, there is none at all. And if my Creature for want of Reason cannot apprehend Me, much less for want of an Omniscience, can I comprehend Him. Thus though I cannot discern the Reason, why in the Ʋnity of the Substance there is a Trinity of Subsistences which I admire, yet why I can∣not discern the Reason, I can discern rea∣son enough; and (which is every whit as
well for a finite Reason,) I find it most rea∣sonable that so it should be. For exactly to know, why we cannot know exactly the things above us, is every whit as sufficient in or∣der to our Faith, as any kind of Demonstra∣tion can be in order unto our knowledge. So far is any thing from reaching what is infi∣nitely above or beyond it self, that no Being (but the Divine) exactly knows its own Na∣ture. And even This our very Ignorance of God's entire Essence may lead us to the know∣ledge of his Existence. For as my outward Eye sees, but cannot See that it sees, (This later being the Work of a nobler Faculty within me,) or as a Brute does apprehend its proper objects, but cannot apprehend at all How or Why it apprehends, (for want of a power to reflect on its Apprehension,) so a Man indued with reason, although he knows many things throughly, and also knows how he knows them, yet How, or Why, or by What means he comes to know, that he knows How he knows, he can never tell; unless it be by inferring, that it comes to him from a Superiour and Invisible Power, which Power is God's. § 28. By stating thus the whole Subject
of the Godhead in general, and of the Trinity in particular, (which I have singled out as one of the highest Mysteries in our Religion, the least understood, and the most stumbled at, by such as set up meer Science against Religion, and depretiate all Faith in respect of Knowledge,) I pay my Duty both to the Word, and the Church of God. To each of these as a Christian; And as a Man, to the Law of Nature. I fully satisfie my Reason, by weighing the Nature of Religion: and so I make a strict Agreement between my Rea∣son and my Faith. Nor can I better Con∣clude and dismiss the whole Subject, than in the sense of the devout and acute S. Bernard. Bern. de Considera∣tione l. 5. c. 8. To inquire into This Mystery, (he speaks of a Critical Inquiry,) is a peevish Curiosity: (and as perilous as it is peevish.) To Be∣lieve it in humility, as it is Worded by the Church, (which is the Pillar and Ground of Truth,) is a Pious Belief, and a Safe Pro∣fession. But to See it as it is, and to know it as we are known, is the final Consummation of Bliss and Glory. Which God the Father of his Mercy dispose us for, for the Merits of God the Son, and
through the powerfull Operation of God the Holy Ghost. To whom be Honour and Adoration for evermore. FINIS. Neither will the supposed, (and I fear truly supposed) greater Number of Atheists, than ei∣ther Papists or Sectaries, be any hinderance to the Papists, for finally prevailing. See Dr. San∣derson's long Preface to his Sermons in fol. §. 23.
The TABLE of particulars. A ABstinence from the Kinds, and the appearances of evil. p. 238, 239. to p. 272. from Fleshly Lusts in ge∣neral. p. 273, &c. to p. 315. from Disobedience to Authority in parti∣cular. 317. to 343. Antinomians from whence. 150. Atheism expressed in the Denial of Spirits. 3, 4, &c. by Rebellion against Governours. 82, 83. by Impudence in Sin. 251. confuted, 390, 397, &c. to 421. an effect of great Dulness in witty men. 430, 431, &c. Authority, though humane, is of Di∣vine Right; and as well the Subor∣dinate as the Supream. 319, 320, &c. See Humane Laws. Obedient. In∣different Things. C. CAlvinistical Doctrines. 148, 149, 170, 171, &c. Charity inconsistent with Schism. 63, 64. Circumspection in thesi. 79, 80, &c. in hypothesi. 115, 116, &c. Commandments how to be found in Peace and Holiness. 212, 213, &c. how the most rigorous are indeed the most mercifull. 263. Conscience what, and how a Rule to live by. 103. 104. to 108, and 151, 152. Church of England, how far from Popish, 68, 69, 142, 143, &c. Christ, how a stumbling-block to titu∣lar Christians, as much as to the Jews and Gentiles. 365, 366, &c. Christianity a Warfare, 293, 294, &c. but full of pleasure. 206, 207, &c. brought into credit by obedience to humane Laws. 321, 322, &c. Credulity antidoted. 29, 30, 31, &c. D. DAmnation, to whom 'tis due by way of eminence. 33, 34. Dangers incompassing every Christian. 189, 190. Deceivers if old more plausible than of late. 26, 27, &c. Demonstration Metaphysical more com∣pulsive of Assent than Mathematical, 404, 405, 406, &c. 419, 420, &c. Discretion, of what moment in Reli∣gion. 108, 109, &c. Distrust, a Duty. 124, 125, &c. Drollery how dangerous, 138, 139. Duellers how Impious, 249, 250. E. ELect, why they cannot fall finally, though many Regenerate may and do. 180, 181, &c. Enemies, how to be obliged. 204, 279. Enthusiastical Pretenders their most false Rule of Trial. 9, 10. F. FAith essential to Religion, and more rewardable than knowledge. 422, 423, 424, &c. Divine described as
differing from humane. 432, 433. &c. How to he secured from failing. 434, 435, &c. Fallacies in Religion and Practice pro∣vided against. 103, &c. 140, 142, &c. 283, &c. False Prophets and False Christs in the Primitive times. 116, 117, 118, &c. 135. False Teachers, Devils. 133, 134, &c. Fear consists with true Fortitude. 123, 124. Necessary to Faith, 161, &c. Flattery fatal. 294, 295, &c. Flesh, its frailty in the Best. 270, 271, 299, 300, &c. Fornication, how to be prevented. 289, 290, &c. G. GOD, His Glory the best motive to a good life. 278, 279. How he fights for us. 309, 310. His Being demonstrated by Mental and Meta∣physical, more clearly than other things by Mathematical Demonstra∣tion. 399, &c. 404, to 420. the things of God which may be known. 428, 429. Gospel, brought into Disgrace by the Schisms, and Seditions, and Disobe∣dience of its Professors. 321, 322, &c. In what degree to be heeded by us. 363, 364, &c. Grace sufficient not still effectual. 167, 168, &c. H. HAeresie what, and how differing from Schism. 45, &c. Happiness not in this life. 162, 163. Hobs how monstrous. 3, 10, 11, 12. Holiness how important. 198, 199, &c. Humane Laws asserted. 146, 147, &c. 227, 228, &c. 317, 318, to 343. Humility a chief mark of God's Spirit. 35, 36. Hypocrisie in its Height. 31, 32, &c. 207, 208, 218, 219, 239, 240, &c. 248. I. JEalousie dangerous to Souls, (as well as too much want of it) 95, 96, 142. Jesuites why Antichristian. 22, 23, 19, 20, 129, 130. Impudence in sinning worse than hy∣pocrisie. 249, 250, &c. Indifferent things become Necessary by humane Laws. 71, 72, &c. 220, 221, 317, 318, &c. Infallibility of Rome falsified. 153, &c. Justice, how a . 198, 199. K. KIngs alone can procure the Peace and Ʋnity of Christendom, and they can do it if they will. 227, 228, &c. Their Supremacy asserted, 318, 319, &c. Knowledge damning without Obe∣dience. 196, 364, 365, &c. how in∣consistent with Belief. 392, 393. how less worthy, and why less required. 423, 424, &c. as such, infallible. 401. L. LAws. See Humane, and Indiffe∣rent.
Lawfull things to be avoided. 262, &c. Lent, why its Abstinences prescribed. 245, 246. how to be kept. 247, 275. Liberty truly Christian, wherein it stands. 146, 147, &c. Life, when to be despised. 266, 267. Lusts of the Flesh. 275, 276, &c. Luxury in its height. 250, 251. M. MAN to Man a God or a Devil. 125, 127, 128, &c. the Best not to be follow'd in all cases and occa∣sions. 155, 156. O. OBedience to Government a Fun∣damental to Christianity. 19, 20, 48, 49, 74, 75. must be impartial. 230, 253, &c. to 260. to humane Laws due by the Laws divine. 318, 319, &c. Occasions of Sin to be avoided. 110, 111, 112, 263, 264, &c. 290, 291. P. PEace of what value. 76, 77, 194, 195, &c. Pleasures in Self-denial, 305, 306, &c. Popery, why laid to the charge of Pro∣testants, and by whom. 68, 69, 142, 143, &c. confutes it self. 153, 154. Preaching condemns whom it does not convert. 346, 347, &c. 365, 366, &c. The Best. 384. Pride in its Height is seen in Schisma∣ticks. 58, 59, &c. Prosperity no constant mark of God's favour. 30, 31. Prudence consists of three parts. 84. 59, &c. wherein of most use. 163. Publick good to be prefer'd before Pri∣vate. 221, 222, &c. R. REbellion the constant effect of Schism. 66, 67, 68. the most damning piece of Carnality. 118, 119, &c. Regenerate may finally fall from Grace. 173, 174, &c. Religion lies in a little room. 194, 195. How it differs from Science, and is more excellent than It. 421, 422, 423, &c. How evacuated by the Tongue. 257. S. SAlvation on what terms to be had. 217, 218, 231, 232, &c. Schism worse than Haeresie. 45, 46, 47, &c. 54, 55. why more damning than other Crimes. 56, 57, 58, &c. an A∣mulet against it. 336, 337, &c. Scripture wrested by the Heathens. 135, 136. to be attended, how much and why. 351, 352, &c. 372, 373, &c. why more than the Discourses which are commonly call'd Sermons. 376, 377, 378, 379. how despised by some great Papists. 378, 379. and by others. 380, &c. an Apology for it. 381, 382, &c. Security most treacherous. 98, 99, &c. Self-deceiving the worst. 126. Self-denial for publick Peace. 221, 222. how pleasant. 305, 306, &c. 312, &c. Sense, the outward not so infallible as the inward. 401, 402, &c.
Separatists in England why the worst. 68, 69, &c. Sermons how to be heeded, and why, and with what difference. 345, 346, &c. to the end. Sincerity how to be proved. 253, 254, 255, &c. Sins the worse the more spiritual. 33, 34. the least how damning. 255, &c. to 261. Soul of man of what value. 302, 303, &c. Spirits to be try'd, and by what Touch∣stone. 6, 7, &c. 18, 19, 20, &c. T. TEmptations, how carefully to be shun'd by the best and strongest. 110, 111, &c. 270, 271, &c. how di∣versly to be encountred. 287, 288, &c. Thoughts why damning. 260. Touchstone, how to be tryed before al∣lowed as a Rule of Trial. 8, 9, &c. Tongue, how great an Evil. 257, 259. Trinity of Persons in unity, &c. the chief of Insearchables. 440, 441, &c. why called Persons, and when first. 444, 445, 446, &c. U. UNity among Christians of what consequence to be kept, and by what means. 222, 223, 224, &c. 340, 341, &c. W. WAR lawfull under the Law as well of Christ as of Moses. 204, 205. Wisedom of the Flesh why Devillish. 298, 299. Women why not to be conversed with usually, 268, 269, 270. &c. Words, how damning. 138, 139, &c. 257, 259. Word of God. See Scripture. ERRATA sic corrige. PAg. 85. line 22. r. Dysasters. P. 106. l. 3. from the bottom, for with r. by. P. 113. l. 2. r. Meribibula. P. 154. in Marg. after l. 10. add, [Concil. Flo∣rent. Session. 4. & deinceps. Edit. Bin. Vol. 8. à p. 580. ad p. 593.] P. 156. l. 6. in Marg. r. facturam. P. 171. l. 19. dele but. P. 207. l. 20. r. peace. P. 214. l. 17. after but, del. the seventh is set apart. P. 219. l. 17. for ye, r. the. P. 220. l. 10. r. stamp'd. P. 280. l. 3. dele . P. 283. l. 4. for whereas, r. where, as. P. 284. l. 9. r. Curiosity. P. 286. l. 11. after of, r. our. P. 295. l. 6. from the bottom, after are, r. we. P. 303. l. 17. after is, r. yet. P. 312. l. 10. after Glory, add in the Text what is in the Margin. P. 339. l. 8. for Joshua, r. Jeshua. P. 352. l. 3. for so, r. see. P. 356. l. 9. for How, r. Now. P. 386. l. ult. r. consider. P. 400. l. 4. from the bottom, del. ratio formalis. P. 405. l. 3. after of, r. such. P. 409. l. 12. after as, dele it. P. 410. l. 5. after are, r. therefore. P. 419. l. 12, 13, 14. in Marg. del. [Paulus Ve∣netus, and others.] P. 432. l. 5. after of, r. The. P. 435. l. 4. after doubting, dele or. P. 442. l. 1. dele and. Ibid. l. 6. from the bottom, for only can, r. can only.
