C2403 e110_10 R9596 99873581 126058
KING CHARLES HIS LETTER TO THE GREAT TURK; The High and Mighty Emperour SULTAN MORAT HAN: Chiefe Lord and Commander of the Ottoman Kingdom, Sole and Supream Monarch of the Eastern Empire. LONDON: Printed for H. Blunon. August 11. 1642.
CHARLES. By the grace of the most High God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland; Defender of the Faith, &c. To the High and Mighty Emperour, Sultan Morat Han; Chief Lord and Commander of the Ottoman Kingdome, and sole and Supream Monarch of the Eastern Empire: SENDETH GREETING. WE understand by Our Embassadour Resident with You, with how much Honour and re∣spect, the death of Our dear Lord and Father (of ever glorious me∣mory) was condoled at your Imperiall
Port: and if the signification thereof, and of Our peaceable succession to these Crownes, have not in all this time come unto you immediately from Our self, it hath not been through any default of Our affection, or respect to You, but ma∣ny important affairs upon Our first Access, and the dangerous troubles wherewith Our City of London and many other prin∣cipall parts of Our Kingdome have been (and at this time are) infected with; have diverted Us, and forced Us to defer these offices longer than We intended▪ or desired; and as we hope You will: For these important Reasons, readily and free∣ly excuse those Omissions which in so weighty occasions may well be dispensed withall. So We pray You to be assured, that We are desirous that the Amitie which hath of long time been held between our Pre∣decessors, may be renewed, continued, and confirmed: And the entercourse of Trade between Our Subjects and Yours be main∣tained and preserved, for the good of both
Our Kingdomes and People, and to give You the better proofe of Our Reall and sincere intentions therein; We have rati∣fied, and do ratifie the Treaty made by Sir Thomas Rowe in that Your Imperill Port, with Your Subjects of Algier and Tunis: duly to observe the Articles of that Treaty in all respects towards Our Subjects. We do likewise recommend un∣to You, and pray You in conformitie to Our desire of friendship and good cor∣respondencie, to confirm and ratifie those priviledges which have been formerly granted by your Predecessors to Our Mer∣chants, and to inlarge the same according to present occasions, as shall be most con∣venient for the good of both Our King∣domes; which as We will studie by all good means to keep up in full force, and most advantagious execution: So We may not omit to represent unto You, the Grie∣vances of Our Subjects, when they are most unjustly wronged contrary to the Capitulations between Us, and We pre∣sume, contrary to Your knowledg and con∣sent.
That which we have now to desire your Justice in: is, First, for extream injuries done by in∣feriour Officers, and especially by one Mo∣rat Chaus, a Customer of that Port, who hath not onely broken, but also scorned and contemned the Articles of the Capi∣tulations; and that in the Publik. Di∣van. to your dishonour, and to the great prejudice of our Merchants: Secondly, an open injustice done to our Subjects in Algier, wherein our En∣glish Consul, and the rest of our Nation, were restrained of their Libertie, their goods seized upon, and forced to pay great summes of money, contrary to Justice, and the direct tearmes of the treaty; But if while We on our behalf do observe the Capitulation and all good tearmes of friendship; such mean persons as Cu∣stomers and other Officers, be suffered and born out in these unjust Insolencies and oppressions upon Our Subjects, in a manifest breach of the Capitulations.
We cannot shut our ears against the Petitions of our Subjects, but must ac∣cording to their Humble Suit give Order to withdraw their Persons and Estates from such dangers, wrongs, and injustice; unlesse upon this our Instance, we finde a speedy redresse and exemplary pu∣nishment inflicted upon such as have, or shall transgresse the Rules of Justice, and the Amitie and Contract between Us: Which, We recommend to your judge∣ment and care, as a matter wherein the welfare of Our and Your people and Countries is interessed. We do further particularly pray You, to give expresse Order for the upholding and maintaining of the Article of Pri∣viledge, for the paying but only of one Custome within all the Ports under Your Jurisdiction; with free libertie to export any Commodity (having once paid Cu∣stome) without further Charge: And that Our Subjects be not exacted upon contrary to that priviledge. The further particulars of Our Subjects
grievances, and what else We desire to be negotiated with You, We have given in Charge to Our Embassadour: to whom We pray you to give credit, and to re∣turn Us full Answer to the severall points of this Our Letter: Wherein if You shall give relief to our Subjects, and punish those that violate the Capitulation; We shall reserve it as a singular Testimony of Your Justice, Your good intentions to∣wards Us, Your constancie in your Con∣tracts, and Your Judgement in what hath Relation to the good of Your own Do∣minions: And We shall be ready to answer that Relation of Yours, in whatsoever shall rest on Our parts to perform. Dated the first of August: FINIS.
