C484 E425_19 99864037 161439
Captains BƲRLEY HIS SPEECH AT THE Place of Execution at Winchester, where he was hang'd, drawn, and quartered, for endevouring to raise Forces to take away the KING from the Isle of Wyght. ALSO A Letter from his Majesties Court at Carisbrook-Castle. AND A Great Rising in the City of Worcester; Certified by a Letter to a Member of the House of COMMONS. Feb.7. 1647. Imprimatur Gil. Mabbot. Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, neere the Queens-head Tavern. 1647.
THE Copy of a Letter from his Majesties Court, at Carisbrook Castle. Right Honourable, HIs Majesty (though abridged of that Liberty as formerly) yet is merry sometimes when occasi∣on is offered, There is little of News from Court, onely comments of what comes from other parts, and expectations of the events. Nor is there mourning here for the death of Cap∣tain Burley, who is hang'd, drawn, and quartered, (al∣ready almost forgotten) concerning whom there was used what meanes could be to worke him to sight of his wicked and bloody crime (in that had not God prevented it) this poore Island might have been im∣brued in a bloody and sad massacre, by his wicked designe, but yet he continued obstinate. Divers Ministers were with him before his death severall times, but they could not worke upon him: And in the last Sermon before he was executed, that he heard some passages against that designe spoken off (as before at others) he carried himselfe, as if hee had rather scorned, then been melted at it. And when he was brought our to the place of Ex∣ecution, and the Hangman ready to doe his office, (It
is true, he seemed to have some fear of death, but) was still obstinate: And spoke to the effect of the inclosed paper. And having taken his leave of the world, and prayed a while, he prayed to God to receive his soul, and was then by the Hangman that came downe thi∣ther turned off of the ladder, and after he had hanged a space, cut downe, and quartered, after the usuall manner. Sir, wee have nothing here new: his Majesty is very reserved in his speeches, and chearfull at his meat; we are all quiet, desiring a happy settlement: so prayes, Carisbrooke-Castle, Febru.4.1647. Your affectionate Friend, Fran. Moline. Captain Burleyes Speech, at the place of exe∣cution, imediately before he was hang'd drawn, and quartered at Winchester. CAptain Burley being on the ladder ready to dye, he was moved by a Minister and others to bee humbled, that the Lord might have mercy up∣on him, and confesse his sinnes to God, and particu∣larly the Treason for which he was to dye: hee said, he was a sinner, but no Traytor. It was told him what a faire tryall he had had, and how legally he was condemned; he answered that it was true, the Gentlemen condemned him on the Bench, the Ministers in the Pulpit, and the Gentle∣men of the County in their verdicts, but yet he was no Traitor.
He was told how bloody an act he agitated, in see∣king to take away the King through blood: hee an∣swered he was happy to dye so, and prayed that his blood might be the last. The foulnesse of the act was declared to him, but he continued obstinate still. Afterwards hee prayed, concluding with the Lords prayer. Then the Hang∣man pulling his cap over his eyes, Captaine Burley called upon God, Lord preserve my soule, Lord Je∣sus receive my soule, and so was turned of, and han∣ged, drawn and quartered. A Letter to a Member of the House of COMMONS. Sir. MY service presented unto you, these are to certifie you of the rising among us, you shall understand that about a weeke since there came a pestilent booke to Towne amongst us called Loyalty speakes truth, purposely written against the Excise-men naming them by name, but so soone as the Country Troope was disbanded upon this day being Munday the people in the City rose in very great numbers, and went directly to the Excise house which they most violently ransaked and plundered, from morning till night breaking the windowes and as it was thought they would have laid the House levell with the ground had not some made great in∣tercession, they abused the Mayor and Aldermen, neither could the Mayor get any of the freemen at his
call, to come to his assistance, neither could the cheife Officers of the Souldiery that quarter in the Towne doe any thing for their assistance, but in my sight was assalted by the people and had very much adoe to e∣scape, they did not onely take away Stooles, Bed∣steds, Coffers and all away that was worth a groat; but that Wine and Beere which was in the Cellor which they could not drinke they let run about the Cellor, and lastly tooke away the empty Caskes. About noone they cryed downe with the Commit∣tee, and for God and King Charles, when we heard them at that; at that time all our small Party was out of the Towne, but some of them came home pre∣sently. Some Rogues gave out that the money belong∣ing' to the Excise was carried to Mr.Moores the Mi∣nisters, wherefore Mr, Moore exhorted every one that was or had beene for the Parliament to stand to it. At that, some few of us met in the Colledge Greene and made fast the Gate, some fifteene well-af∣fected Towns-men came in to our assistance, wee charged the Gunnes with small shot, and so we keep a small Garrison yet, about six a clock the Mayor came to us, and informed us of the tumult, hoping that now night was come they begun to go home. They were about 2000. truely they seemed like the muster of a Battaile so many men women and child∣ren about this businesse. We have made a great fire in the Hall in the Deanery and keepe our Court of Guard in that place, I for my part stole from among my fellowes about ten at night, and came as secure as I could to my house to write to you, meaning to returne about one of the clocke after midnight. The
tumulters threaten hard that next Wednesday they shall have the assistance of Witch and other places a∣gainst us, and we as resolutely intend to defend our selves. I heard some inkling of this businesse before, but they spake so mystically that I could not understand them, but now I see what they meant, I do most truely gather that except some part of the Army come downe to quiet those Mutiners, it is very like to bee true which (they say) that not onely this County but Hereford and other places will doe the like, you shall also understand that this businesse was plotted by some prime ones, and divers Souldiers that had beene Cavaliers were with them, and mightily incourag∣ed them, and assisted, there hath some layed wagers and made wonderfull. Protestations that the fate of things (as they call it) will change within these six weekes). I beleeve amongst their party they durst as freely buy the Parliament mens lands when they can get them, as any man the Bishops lands, I judge this to be a thing they looke for, that when they can get a full rising of the people to suprresse grieviances (as they call them) some wise heads amongst them toge∣ther with the supernumeraries (that neither are nor will bee disbanded) they will make a Party againe of their owne. My Reasons are these. 1 Because I am sure by their talke and by private conference they have a wonderfull sure Designe which must suddainly as they say bee brought a∣bout. 2 Divers of them have bought new armes very
lately, giving dangerous words out when they saw the Forces disbanded. 3 The willingnesse of the Souldiers to assist them which quarter in this City (as also in other places here about.) I am now about to go to the Colledge a∣gaine it being two a clock after midnight. Worcester the 1 of Feb. 1647. Your Humble Servant J. SMITH. FINIS.
