C5410 E731_6 R206863 99865961 166852
Collonel MORGANS LETTER Concerning his taking the strong Garrison of Kildrummie from the Highlanders in Scotland: With his Letter and Summons sent to Major Drumond, Major Drumonds Answer thereunto; And the true Copie of the Articles concluded on between them: And the Names of the Hostages delivered for the performance thereof. ALSO, The Highlanders falling down again into the Lowlands, threatning Fire and Sword to all that refuse to joyn with them. And a great Fight at Dunkill, the taking of Captain Thomson, and Col: Ramsies Lieutenant, and 200 more prisoners, one hundred and fifty Horse, and General Glen∣carns and the Earl of Kenmores Ammunition, Arms, Bagg and Baggage. And the blowing up of a strong Castle with Gunpowder. By J. Hill Secretary to Collonel Morgan Commander in Chief of the English Forces in the North of Scotland. LONDON: Printed by F: Neile in Aldersgatestreet. 1654.
A Letter from Coll: Morgans Quartere in the North of Scotland, with the taking of the Garrison of Kildrumain, and the Articles of Agreement betwixt Coll: Morgan, and Major Drummond. SIR, I Thought good to acquaint you that Coll: Thomas Morgan Commander in chief of the Forces in the North of Scotland, under∣standing of the enemies approach within 24 miles of this Town, he drew forth a bout 1100 horse, dragoons, and foot, and upon the 9 instant after a very hard march, met with the Forces under the command of Glencarn, and Kenmore, about the number of 1400 horse and foot: where after a short dispute up∣on most base ground, he put them to a retreat, and for∣ced them to a very strong pass, which 40 resolute men might have kept against , yet so cow'd were the e∣nemy, that in a short time providence ordered it so, that we recovered the Pass, and in time put them to the rout, pursued them through such invincible Hils, (as were the truth of them related would be imagined in∣credible) which never English men marched over be∣fore that time: there was about 120 of the enemy slain, 17 taken Prisoners, about 80 horse, most of their Arms, all their Ammunition, Bag, and Baggage, all which the Lord was pleased to carry on with great facility to us, for there was not so much as one man of ours wound∣ed, and we had only 2 Horses slain: there was indeed one of Captain Merimons Troop shot through the
head by one of his fellow soldiers accidentally before the Ingagement, the next day having intelligence that the enemy had possessed a strong house called Kildrum∣my, where the Earl of Marr dwelt, who afterwards pre∣rended he was surprized by the Enemy, yet so just are Scotchmen that now they begin to appear in their co∣lours, they through our lenity being grown to such a height, as that they mke good thei od charecter, Turks and Scots coequal: We marched thither, and summo∣ned it, an account you may have in the annexed passa∣ges betwixt the commander in chief, and the Governor, as also the Articles for the surrender: after the said Garrison was reduced, we marched to our Winter Quarters to this Town, where we was welcomed with News from Johnstons, that Coll: Daniel with a conside¦rable party out of Johnstons, and Dundee, resolved to make an attempt upon Dunkel, being informed that there was a considerable party of the enemies horse in that Town, and that Athol, and Forbus had setled a gar∣rison of about 60 persons in an old House in that place and victualled it for two months: upon Wednesday being the 15 instant by break of day Col Daniels for∣lorns fel into Dunkel with their Scours, having a quar∣ter of and ower too short of suprizing the Town; And for their escape they were beholding to the nearness of the Hils; yet as quick as they were we took 40 of their Horses, & after  hou & a half won the House, gaining room after room, in which time they were reduced to yeeld upon terms for life, their number with those that were taken belonging to their Horse, is about 10 an 40 killed bsides what is wounded, the enemy look∣ing on, Go Daniel blew up the house, and carried the
prisoners to Johnston. Upon Friday night last 17 Inst. there was one Cap: Thompson, and Lieut: Col: Rases Lieutenant came down with 5 or 6 more into the Lowlands to plunder horses, and Lieut: Hellen Lieut. to Major Bramston having intelligence thereof march∣ed forth with 7 more Dragoons with him, out of the Garrison of Thornston, and after he had pursued them ten miles through the hils, chanced to catch them about 5 a clock in the morning, killed one of them, and brought the rest prisoners to Dunotter Castle. Sir, these blows are very seasonable, for the Enemy were very high, and threatned all with fire and sword, that would not joyn with them, I am apt to believe that the peace with the Dutch wil vanis like smok, though notwithstanding these Bushes they give out high lan∣guage, and say that they resolve to gain their credit. I hope to hear from you, and remain, 27 Febr. 1653. Your affectionate Nepher, J. H. Coll: Morgans Summns to the Governor of Kildrummie. SIR, THe command of the Forces in the North of Scotland being committed to my conduct, I thought good to signifie that yesterday meeting the Forces commanded by the Lord Glencarn, it pleased God that we disperst, and totally Roued them, and un∣derstanding that you had possessed the house of Kil∣drummie, to the great disturbance of the peace of this Nation, I marched hither, and do strictly summon you upon sight hereof to deliver unto me the said house of Kildrummie, with all the Arms, and Ammunition ther∣in for the use of his Highness the Lord Protector of the Common-wealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
and in case you yeeld obedience hereunto, I shall give you liberty to go to your own homes, and live at peace you ingaging that you will act nothing prejudicial to the English Army, but on the contrary, if there happen the least effusion of blood unto any under my com∣mand, then expect no mercy. Your answer I expect within half an hour, and remain, For Major William Dammond Officer in chief within the House of Kildrummy. Yours as I find you, Tho: Morgan. Major Drummonds Answer. SIR, I Received yours, and find your propositions very hard without order from my Lord General, alwaies Sir, if you will be pleased to suffer me to send one to my Lord General, and upon his return we shal render the house if they come not again Monday at night for our relief, we shall march with our horse and arms to a∣ny part of the Kings Army in Scotland, and withal the place be made useles for any garrison, and for the effu∣sion of bloud we take God to witness, yours shall be the fault: no further but Kildrummie 23 Febr: 1654. For Col. Morgan Comman∣der of the English Forces. Yours as time shall produce, Wil. Drummond. SIR, I have considered your Answer, and cannot grant your desires, yet so tender am I of sheding of bloud in case you be not satisfied with the terms I offered, if you please to send 1 or 2 Officers fully authorized to treat in order to your sudden surrender, I shall rather deal honorable, then use cruelty, I expect your answer by this Bearer, and am For Major Drummond Officer in chief in the House of Kildrumie. Yours as occasion shall serve, Tho: Morgan.
SIR, I have received yours, and am as loth to shed blood at this time as any shal be, Sir, I thought you would have suf∣fered me to have sent to my L. Gen: because I being put here by him, and on such a sudden to surrender, I beleeve no man of honor but might esteem me the basest of men, but howe∣ver for the matter of Treaty, if you please to send down to the gate one or two, I shall wait on them there to hear your will; no more but that I am For Coll. Morgan commander in chief of the English Forces in the North of Scotland. Yours to meeting, W: Drummond. SIr, according to your intimation I have sent Lieut. Coll: Simmons, and Major Knight to treat, in order to your sud∣den surrender of the House of Kildrummie, and what ever they conclude, shall be made good by me For Major William Drummond Officer in chief within the House of Kildrummy. Tho: Morgan. The Commissioners could not agree, so that the Treaty broak, but the next morning Drummond sent his Drum with this following Letter. SIR, I thought good to show you that it is but a short time betwixt Monday, and Thursday, and because we have bedding, and some other things which we brought from the Country people, and did ingage to give them back at our lea∣ving the place, before which time we can hardly get done, if you Sir, think this fit, let us meet, and condescend on Articles, and to such time I rest Kildrummie 12 Febr: 1653/4. For Col: Morgan Commander in cheif of the English Forces in the North. These. Yours as occasion offers, Wil. Drummond. SIr, I perceive that you stil persist in your delaies, but this may suffice you that I shal not afford you any longer time to march then too morrow at 10 a clock, and because your re∣delivery of the Countries Goods shall not cause you to Dis∣pute: in case those whom I send to treat, and conclude, and you agree, I shall give you liberty to leave one behind, to see the Goods disposed on according to your ingagement, who shall have free liberty to act accordingly; I expect your im∣mediat
answer, and remain For Major Drummond Commander in chief within the House of Kildrummie. Yours if you be your own, Tho: Morgan. SIr, I received yours, and if we agree on Articles I shal march to morrow by 10 a clock, so expecting those who you, send to treat at the place where we met last night, where I shall attend them. I rest Sir, Kildrummie 12 Febr. 1653/4. For Coll. Morgan Commander in chief of the English forces in the North. These. Yours as before. Upon which these ensuing Articles were agreed upon, and Corner Barhom was sent into the house as Hostage on our part, and Corner Grdon, Kenmores Cornet was delivered as Hostage for the House. Articles agreed upon for the surrender of the House of Kil∣drumie this 26 Feb: 1653/4 betwixt Lieut: Coll. Simmons, and Major Knight on the behalf of the English Forces. And Major W: Drummond Governor of the foresaid House, and Cap: Mathew Hambleton, on the behalf of the Scotch forces. 1. That the said Governor is to march with all the forces in the said House, Arms, Ammunition, Bagg, and Baggage to morrow morning by ten a clock to the nearest place where any of the Scotch Forces are, without molestation, and to have a Pass to that purpose from Collonel Morgan, unto whom he is to surrender the said House without any demolition, for the use of his Highness the Lord Protector of the Com∣mon-wealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland. 2. That the said Governor shall have liberty to leave an Officer to dispose of the Country goods which are in the said House, either belonging to the Earl of Marr, or any other. 3. That the said Governor shall march ten miles a day, with the party under under his command, except the first day, till they come at the forces, and are not to molest or trouble any of the Forces belonging to his Highness the Lord Protector upon their march, upon any account whatsoever; for the performance whereof, each Subscribed. POSTSCRIPT. NOw I shall take the boldnes to acquaint you, that in case the Castle had not been delivered that day, neither our horse nor foot had been able to have continued there one night longer, the season of the year not permitting it; Neither were we able to do any good upon the House without battering guns which could not have come to us in a weeks time, so that after serious Debate at a Councel of War, it was concluded better to allow honorable tearms to them, then with dishonor to leave it, having been before it three nights. FINIS.
