C5653A R228408 99896979 170789
THE COMPLEAT SOLDIER, OR EXPERT Artillery-Man. CONTAINING The several Postures and Exercises of the Pike and Musquet; the various Beats of the Drum; and what else is necessary for a young Soldier to understand. ALSO, Divers ways of Exercising a Company, very useful for all Officers, and others, that delight in Military Affairs. Quanta est armorum gloria! LONDON, Printed by A. G. and J. P. for Thomas Sawbridge, at the Three Flowers-de-Lys in Little-Britain, 1681.
To the Honourable Sir Joseph Sheldon, KNIGHT, Alderman of the Honourable City of LONDON. THE very Title of this BOOK is a kind of Dedication; and you may justly chal∣lenge it, by bearing so emi∣nent an Office in the Artil∣lery. Letters and Arms are the two things that govern the whole World; both seem to have been mono∣polized by your generous
Family, the former by a Learned Archbishop, the latter by your self. And though that great good Man has left this World, a grave and learned Prelate still sur∣vives, a collateral Orna∣ment to the name of Sheldon. The Book I here humbly lay down at your Feet, was compiled by a Cheshire Gen∣tleman, in Commission for that County; his Modesty will not permit him to put his name to it. Modesty! that inherent Virtue in all truly noble and generous Souls. His Labour has been great, for smaller Tracts require more judgment and
industry than greater Vo∣lumes, as translating is more difficult than writing. He has made use of several Authors of the best note upon this Subject among the Ancients, as Plutarch, Ve∣getius, Xenophon, Homer, Justin, Tully, Aelian's Ta∣cticks, &c. the Moderns he has digested in so compen∣dious a method, that this small Book will be certain∣ly most extreamly pleasing; the bulk of other Books of this nature being so large, that they require much Time to peruse, and Money to purchase; of which two things, many persons desi∣rous
of Experience in Milita∣ry Affairs, can spare neither. Useful I presume this small Tract will be, especially in such dangerous Times, wherein no Posture is more convenient than that of De∣fence. Especially considering that many Trades and Oc∣cupations (excepting those of Handicrafts) are seden∣tary, and in expectation, those intervals of time may be herein spent by the Youth of this populous City; by the help of this they may be their own Tutors, and every private Shop seem an Academy for Arms.
To you therefore, Ho∣nourable Sir, I Dedicate this Piece, humbly desiring you to honour it with your Acceptance; and that you may long live the Glory of this great City for your Loyalty, Conduct, and Ex∣perience, both in Arms and Peace, is the Hearty wish of, Your most humble Servant, E. RAWLINS.
THE CONTENTS. Chap. 1. THE Introduction. Pag. 1 Chap. 2. The Definition of Posture. 6 Chap. 3. Of the Posture of the Pike. 7 Chap. 4. The Postures of the Pike in a shor∣ter manner, fit for the Service of the Field. 18
Chap. 5. The Postures of the Musquet, the Caliver, with the Match and Rest, and without. Pag. 15 Chap. 6. More Postures of the Musquet, with or without the Match or Rest. 20 Chap. 7. The Conformity of the Postures betwixt the Musquet and Pike. 25 Chap. 8. The place of Dignity of a Soldier, both in Rank and File. 27 Chap. 9. Reasons for precedency of Dignity in Ranks and Files. 33
Chap. 10. Several Beats and Points of War belonging to the Drum. Pag. 37 Chap. 11. Of several Distances. 43 Chap. 12. What is meant by Facing, with the words of Command belonging thereunto; as likewise several Postures and Figures. 46 Chap. 13. Of marching a Company in Divi∣sions; the Order and Places of the Officers and Drums. 58 Chap. 14. The first days Exercise of a Com∣pany. 63
Chap. 15. Of Conversion and Inversion, with some words of Command and Reducements. Pag. 71 Chap. 16. Of Countermarches, with their several kinds. 81 Chap. 17. Of Wheelings, and their several uses. 89 Chap. 18. The second days Exercise. 96 Chap. 19. Several Firings to be performed with any number of Men upon all occasions, either to the Front, Reer, or both Flanks. 97 Chap. 20. The third days Exercise. 106
Chap. 21. A Doubling to make every Man a File-Leader by Dignity. Pag. 107 Chap. 22. Eighteen several Doublings, with their Reducements. 110 Chap. 23. Twelve several Countermarches, with their Reducements. 112 Chap. 24. Twelve several Wheelings, with their Reducements. 114 Chap. 25. Several Firings, with Figures of Battel, for 72 Men. 117 Chap. 26. The fourth days Exercise, shewing by a Doubling how every Man
becomes a File-Leader by Suc∣cession. Pag. 133 Chap. 27. Several Doublings by Countermar∣ches, with Reducements. 135 Chap. 28. Several Figures of Battel, with Firings upon the same, for 72 Men. 141 Chap. 29. The fifth days Exercise, shewing the several Distances, &c. 165 Chap. 30. Several Figures of Battel, with Firings upon the same. 170 Chap. 31. The sixth days Exercise. 194 Chap. 32. Entire Doublings to the Right Flank. 198
Chap. 33. Divisional Doublings to the Right Flank. Pag. 204 Chap. 34. Entire Doublings to the Right Flank by Wheelings. 206 Chap. 35. Divisional Doublings to the Right Flank by Wheelings. 208 Chap. 36. Figures of Battel, with Firings upon the same. 210
Books printed for Thomas Saw∣bridge, at the Three Flowers-de-Lys in Little-Britain. THE Art of Dyalling; perfor∣med Geometrically, by Scale and Compasses; Arithmetically, by the Canons of Sines and Tangents; In∣strumentally, by a Trigonal Instrument, accommodated with Lines for that purpose, &c. by William Leybourn. In 4o. Multum in Parvo, or the Pen's Gal∣lantry; a Copy-Book, containing 24 Sentences in Prose, in Alphabetical order, and as many in Verse, each Distich comprehending the 24 Let∣ters, and as many Examples of Al∣phabets; written in all the curious Hands now practised in England, and our Neighbour Nations, &c. by Ed∣ward Cocker. In 4o. Hodder's Arithmetick, or the Neces∣sary Art made most easie; being ex∣plained
in a way familiar to the Capa∣city of any that desire to learn in a little time: By James Hodder. In 8o. Campanalogia, or the Art of Ring∣ing improved; with plain and easie Rules to guide the Practitioner in the Ringing all kinds of Changes, &c. In 8o. The Astrological Judgment and Pra∣ctice of Physic, deduced from the Posi∣tion of the Heavens at the Decumbi∣ture of the sick Person; wherein the Fundamental Grounds thereof are most clearly displayed and laid open; shewing by an Universal Method not only the Cause, but the Cure and End of all manner of Diseases incident to Humane Bodies: Also divers notable Experiments, of great use to all the industrious Students in Physic and Astrology, &c. by Richard Saunders. In 8o. The Carpenters Rule made easie, or the Art of Measuring Superficies and Solids, as Timber, Stone, Boards, Glass, and the like: Also an Addition or second way, being the Ground∣work of measuring Timber, Stone, &c. by John Darling. In 12o.
THE COMPLEAT SOLDIER, OR EXPERT Artillery-Man. CHAP. I. By way of Introduction. THE first Rudiments of Education where∣withall a young Sol∣dier ought to be con∣versant in, is first to learn the right use of his Arms, than which nothing can make a Man more compleat, nor fit for to bear the Name of a Soldier; neither can any Man whatever attain to the
least part of the Art-Military (which concerneth Infantry, or Foot-Soldiers) without the well managing, and well handling of their Arms. How de∣lightful is it to those who can perform this first Part? And with what ease, courage, and safety, can they both defend themselves, and offend their Enemies? Where, on the contrary, the chiefest Arms (without Exercise) become not only troublesom Bur∣thens unto the unskilful Bearers, but oftentimes prove hurtful and dange∣rous, both to themselves, and others: Therefore I could wish the necessity of this might be considered by all, who intend any proficiency in this part of the Art Military; first, to be instru∣cted in the Postures, and well handling of their Arms, that like that resolute Spartan Isadas,Plut. in Agesilao. they may with Art and Courage (in time of danger) defend both their King and Country. If this in our Militia (whereof I am a Mem∣ber) were but considered, and that there might be a reasonable time set apart once in every year for a private Exercise, and once every year for a General Muster, o doubt but there
would be given such account to the World, as would make this Kingdom not only famous, but feared by the whole World: What Exercise doth for the making of good Soldiers, Expe∣rience of former Times will teach. It hath been the manner of all famous Generals to bring their Soldiers to per∣fection by Exercise. Vegetius l. 2. c. 3.Vegetius saith very well, It is not length of life, or number of years, that teacheth the Art of War, but continual Discipline, and Exercise of Arms; let a Soldier serve never so many years, so long as he is un∣exercised, he shall still be a raw Soldier. The true knowledge of Postures cau∣seth a neatness in the handling of Arms, which maketh a Soldier; the gain whereof must be by Action. As long as a Soldier handleth not his Arms, he is no Actor, for all Abili∣ties in Arts arise out of a number of Actions; so that no Man can attain to a perfect knowledge of Arms, 'till he hath with care and diligence imploy'd both his study and labour therein, and upon the foundation of Practice, rai∣sed the frame of Sound, and perfect Skill. No man is naturally born a
Soldier, one may more incline to War than another; but the Skill cometh not without industry and pains. Plutarch. in Pelop. Eurotas was a Ri∣ver near Lacede∣mon; Ba∣byx and Gnacion were two Rivers within te City.Plu∣tarch saith, That it is neither Eurotas, nor the place betwixt Babyx and Gna∣cion, that bringeth forth Valiant and Warlike Men: But they are to be found out in all places (in England) where Youth is bred up in shame of Vice, and Boldness to undergo peril for Virtues sake. The Lacedemonians were accounted the most valiant Peo∣ple of Greece. Plutarch. in Lycur.Plutarch speaketh this of the Victory which the Thebans obtained against the Lacedemonians, which 'till that day had no Reputation of Valour; but afterward by Exer∣cise, and use of Arms, under Epami∣nondas and Pelopidas, they became the bravest Soldiers of Greece. Not un∣like was the saying of Pyrrhus to his Muster-Master; Chuse you (said he) good Bodies, and I will make them good Soldiers: A strong Body is most requi∣site in a good Soldier, to undergo the labours of War; Vegetius l. 1. c. 1.but it is Exercise, and the desire to handle Weapons, that giveth the perfect Skill. There∣fore as Cicer. in Brut. a. 22.Demosthenes, being demanded
what was the first and principal thing in the Art Oratory, answered Action; what the second, Action; what the third, Action; so we may truly say, that in the Art Military, Exercise is not only the first, second, and third principal thing to make a Soldier, but also all in all. I could have given you a particular of the Exercise used in ancient time, and likewise of the Vi∣ctories which have been obtained by a small number of Men well exercised, against a multitude unskilful and un∣trained; but being not at all pertinent to my intent, and having too much transgress'd already, I leave the Curi∣ous to peruse those several Authors that have writ at large of this Subject, viz. Xenophon, Vegetius, Cicero, Ho∣mer, Justin, and others, while I pro∣ceed to give a touch upon the Defini∣tion of Posture.
CHAP. II. The Definition of Posture. POSTƲRE is conceived to be a Garb or Figure that a Man stands in for the well handling of his Arms, in which there are Motions attendant unto the same for the better Grace, and becoming of them: Like∣wise by Motion it conveys a neat Agi∣lity of the Body, whereby the right handling of their Arms is atchieved, and so becomes easie; Motion being the working part, Posture the altera∣tion or act, either in circumstance or matter: As to Rest your Musquet, being one Posture; to Shoulder your Musquet, another; so likewise for the rest.
CHAP. III. Of the Postures of the Pike. NOW as to the Postures them∣selves, I shall first begin with the Postures of the Pike, before I begin the Postures of the Musquet, conceiving the Pike (which Mr. Elton, and likewise the Aelian, cap. 12.Tacticks of Aelian makes plain) to be the more an∣cient, and therefore the more ho∣nourable Arms, which hath been the reason (as I conceive) why so many gallant Gentlemen have trailed Pikes of late years, both in Holland, and elsewhere. The Postures of the Pike are as followeth, the Pike lying on the ground. Command. Handle Raise up your Pike. To your Open Order. Order. Close Order.
Order, and Open Order, I conceive only serves as a handsom Posture for the Pikes to be in upon a stand, or when their Arms are to be viewed by the Muster-Master upon a Muster day. It hath been the custom in an∣cient time to Charge to the Horse, by putting the But end of the Pike at the inside of the right Foot, (which is called Close Order) your Pike in the left Hand, drawing your Sword over your left Arm. But it is the received opinion of the best Soldiers, that it is a weak Charge, and of no use for Defence; therefore I omit the Charge, and proceed. Command. From Order Advance Shoulder Port Comport Cheek Trail your Pike. Order as you were. Before I proceed I must tell you, that Silence ought to be commanded, and by the Soldier diligently obeyed.
Command. From your Order Charge to the Front Right Left Reer Order as you were. Note, That Charge to the Reer, is to be understood always To the left about, because it is three times the nearer way. Command. Advance Shoulder Port Comport Cheek Trail your Pike. Advance as you were. Note, That the Advancing of the Pike is useful when the Drum beats a Troop: It is likewise useful upon all Doublings, Counter-Marches, and Wheelings, only remember they con∣form to the standing Party after they are reduced.
Command. From your Advance Charge to the Front Right Left Reer Advance as you were. Command. Shoulder Port Comport Cheek Trail your Pike. Shoulder as you were. Note, This is useful upon a March: It is likewise useful in time of Fight, provided the Pikes be upon a stand; it doth not only preserve the Pikes, but the Soldiers also. Command. From your Shoulder Charge to the Front Right Left Reer Shoulder as you were.
Command. Port Comport Cheek Trail your Pikes. Port as you were. Note, That Port is only fit for the Soldiers to enter a Gate or Sally-Port, and likewise to ease the Reer in time of Battel, when the Front are at Charge. Command. From your Comport Charge to the Front Right Left Reer Comport as you were. Note, That Comport is only neces∣sary for a Soldier upon his March, to ease himself up a Hill. Command. Cheek Trail your Pikes. Cheek as you were.
The Pike Cheeked is the right Sen∣tinel Posture, which ought always to be made use of upon that occasion. Command. Trail your PIKES. From your Trail Charge to the Front Right Left Reer Trail as you were. Note, That this Posture is only use∣ful in a Trench to move for security of any Breach undiscovered, likewise in the Marching through a Wood, and upon Funeral occasions. Command. Order your Lay down your Pikes. Here is to be observed by this me∣thod, That all the Postures of the Pike are performed particularly, not Com∣manding one Twice; and no one, be he never so Skilful, ought to slight any of these Postures, being that at one time or other he will have occa∣sion to use them.
CHAP. IV. NOW that our Soldiers are well Trained, and that they rightly understand the several Postures of the Pike before recited, and are ready to march into the Field before their Ene∣mies; I shall contract the Postures, and Charges of the Pike, into a shor∣ter way, fit for the Service of the Field. The Pikes lying on the ground, the first word of Command will be, Stand to your Handle your Arms. Command. Raise up your PIKES. To your Open Order. Order. Close Order. Note, As before, I shall omit the Charges of Close Order, to the Horse, and with brevity proceed.
Command. Order as you were. Command. Advance Port your Pikes. Charge to the Front. Command. Shoulder your Pikes. Charge to the Front. Command. Comport your Pikes. Charge to the Left. Command. Cheek Trail your Pikes. Charge to the Reer.
CHAP. V. HAving now done with the Pike, in the next place it will be con∣venient to shew you the Postures of the Musket, or Calliver, together with the Rest; which shall be shewed you at large, as it was exercised, and still is, in the Military Gardens; and after, in as short a method as possible, the way shall be shewed you how it is now exercised, both with the Match, and without the Match, and Rest. The Musket lying on the ground, the first word of Command will be, Col. Wil. Barriffe in his young Artillery-Man, p. 2.Stand to your Arms. Take up your Put on your Bandaliers. Take up your Place your Match. Take up your Musket, and Rest. Rest your Musket.
Now if you please, you may per∣form your Saluting Posture. Poyse Shoulder your Musket. Take your Rest into your right Hand, and you are Armed ready to march. Take your Match between the Fingers of your right Hand. Put your Rest String about your left Wrist, and carry your Rest in your left Hand. Return your Match between the Fin∣gers of your left Hand. Ʋnshoulder and Poyse your Musket. Joyn your Rest to the outside of your Musket. Open Clear Prime Shut your Pan. Cast Blow off your loose Corns.
Bring about your Musket to the Sword side. Trail your Rest, and Balance your Musket in your left hand. Charge with Powder. Draw forth Shorten your Scouring-stick. Charge with Bullet. Put your Scouring-stick into your Musket. Ram home your Charge. Withdraw Shorten Return your Scouring-Stick. Bring forward your Musket, and Rest. Poyse your Musket, and recover your Rest. Joyn your Rest to the outside of your Musket. Draw forth your Match. Blow your Coal. Cock and Fit your Match.
Guard your Pan. Blow the Ashes from your Coal. Open your Pan. Present upon your Rest. Give Fire Breast high. Dismount your Musket, joyning your Rest to the outside of your Musket. Ʋncock Return your Match. Clear Shut your Pan. Poyse Shoulder your Musket. Take your Match between the Fingers of your right Hand. Take your Rest into your right hand, clearing your String from your Wrist. Return your Rest into your left hand, the String loose. Return your Match into your left hand. Note: This causes the Soldiers to be in a fit capacity for to March; but
if you are to lay down your Arms upon the Ground, proceed. Ʋnshoulder Poyse Rest your Musket. Set the But-end of your Musket on the Ground. Lay down your Musket and Rest. Lay down your Match. Take off Lay down your Bandaliers. Face about to the left, and march from your Arms. Face about to the right, and stand to your Arms. This is principally used to make the Soldiers apt and ready to find their places, if upon a sudden Alarm they be called. Here endeth the Postures of the Musket, together with the Rest, begin∣ning from the taking them up from the Ground, and by an orderly pro∣ceeding
to make ready, and so to lay them down again. CHAP. VI. NOW having shewed you the Postures of the Musket and Rest, according to the formal way of Exer∣cise of late used, and still is in those learned Schools of Discipline, the Mi∣litary Grounds (which I wish may flou∣rish for ever with good, able, and loyal Soldiers, that may be ready to do their King and Country Service) let us see how we can handle the Musket without the Rest, and like∣wise with and without the Match: The Musket lying on the ground, the words of Command will be as before. Stand to your Handle your Arms. Now you are to take notice, That in taking up the Bandaliers, putting them on; the taking up of the Match, placing of it; and the taking up of the Musket; these or the like are not
Postures, but Motions to the first Posture Therefore I will leave out the words of Command tending to the Motions, and proceed to the Postures themselves. The Mukettier being shoulder'd, Command. Snaphance. Matchlock. Slope Let slip your Muskets.Sloping and Slip∣ping of the Musket is only Mo∣tion, not Posture. Ʋnshoulder and Poyse your Muskets. Palm Rest your Muskets. Secure your Cock. Draw back your Hammer. Clear Prime your Pan. Put down your Steel. Hammer. It is not need∣ful to insert every Command, but on∣ly add such as are now in use for the Matchlock. The Match be∣ing placed in the left hand, Open Clear Prime Shut your Pan with a full hand.
Cast Or Blow off your loose Corns. Bring about your Musket to the Sword side. Handle your Charger. Open your Charger with your Teeth. Charge with Powder. Draw forth your Scourer. Shorten your Scourer to an Inch against your right Breast. Charge with Bullet. Ram home your Powder and Ball. Withdraw your Scourer. Shorten your Scourer to a handful. Return your Scourer. Bring forward And Poise your Musket. Palm Or Rest your Musket.
Fit your Hammer, or Steel. Free Bend your Cock. Present your Mus∣ket. Give Fire. Palm or Rest your Musket Clear Shut your Pan. Poyse Shoulder your Musket. Handle your Match Blow your Coal. Cock Try your Match. Guard your Pan with your 2 fore∣most Fingers. Blow the Ashes from your Coal, or ad∣vance your right Foot. Blow and open your Pan. Advance your left Foot, and to the front Present. Ʋnlock Return your Match. The Musket being shoulder'd, you are ready for a March, or in a fit Po∣sture for any Motion.
That which is called the Saluting Posture, is to be performed from the Resting (or Palming) of the Musket, when a Soldier hath occasion to Salute his Friend, or in honouring any other person deserving. And for the Sen∣tinel Posture, the Musket is to be in the palm of the left hand at his resting Posture, but his Musket to be charged with Powder, and Bullet in his Mouth, his Cock freed, and secur'd with his Thumb, so to be ready to execute his Charge. This Posture rightly per∣formed, is (in my opinion) one of the most becoming Postures that belongs to the Musket, and will as soon disco∣ver a good Soldier Capt. Ven.There is a word of Command some∣times used, Reverse your Musket, which is the marching Funeral Posture: The way to perform it, is to put the But end of the Musket upwards under your left Arm, holding it in your left Hand about the Lock of the Musket.
CHAP. VII. THere is also a conformity of Po∣sture betwixt the Musket, and those of the Pike; the words of Com∣mand to be given, may in many things be received by both Arms; as the Musket and Pike lying on the ground, these words of Command may pro∣perly be implied to both. As for Example. Stand to Handle Order your Arms. That is the But end of the Musket standing on the ground, at the outside of the right Foot, is conformable to the Pike ordered; and in my opinion, the properest Command for this Po∣sture of the Musket, is, Order your Musket, being it is so conformable to their Pike ordered; for the most apt and easiest expressions, are certainly most fittest to be conduced into words
of Command: And I cannot conceive, but the word Order may as aptly be received by the Muskettier as by the Pikeman, (tho' Lieutenant-Collonel Barriffe, and others, be of a contrary opinion.) But to proceed farther in the rest of the Postures, viz. Elton, p. 6. cap. 7.The Musket poised, to the Pike advanced. The Musket shoulder'd, to the Pike shoulder'd. The Musket porting, to the Pike porting. The Musket reverst, (as in the Fu∣neral Posture) to the Pike trailing. The Musket palmed, to the Pike cheeked; which is the proper Senti∣nel Posture for both. The Musket presented, to the Pike charged. As for the Motion of Posture, which conduceth to lading, priming of the Musket, and the Pike, they are all in∣cluded in that general word of Com∣mand, properly belonging to the Mus∣kettiers, which is, to make ready.
CHAP. VIII. THe place of Dignity which every Soldier hath, and ought to have, both in Rank and File, shall be de∣clared. The noble Soldier, being inquisi∣tive after Honour, is much desirous to understand his place of Worth and Dignity, which he ever conceives to be as due to him as his life; which was the reason that caused both the Grecian and Roman Generals to be so exact and curious in bestowing Re∣wards upon all valiant Soldiers who were deserving of the same, and accor∣ding to every Man's Worth and Dig∣nity, gave him precedence of Place and Command over the others, that they might lead and direct them as occasion should require, as you may read at large in several Authors who treat of those Wars;Xenoph. Cyrop. l. 3. c. 85. and l. 8. 203. Ae. Vegat. l. 3. c. 18. which Custom from that time hath ever since been observed, and still is practised by all Nations.
Therefore it is sit that the young Soldier should understand his place of Dignity, which if he would but esteem it of that Credit which all former Ages have done, certainly they would take more care to put in practice all such Duties which is thereby requir'd; it is strange to think there should be so much ignorance, as there is in our Annual Exercises; but finding many very ignorant of the difference be∣tween a File and a Rank, and what Dignity belongs thereto, induces me to shew what is requir'd to the making up of a File, and likewise of a Rank, with the Dignity of each Man as he stands, both in File and Rank. A File.First, Know that a File is a number of Men beginning at one Leader, and continuing in order of followers to the last Man; or from the first, which is termed Protostatai, a File-Leader, to the last, which is termed Epistatai, or Bringer up. For the number of a File, our pre∣sent Discipline only allows six, and no more; so that there needs no farther dispute concerning the number of a File.
A Rank.Secondly, A Rank is a Row of Men composed of Files more or less joyned together, as when one File is laid flankwise to one another, standing shoulder to shoulder from the right hand to the left. A File of it self worketh little effect against an Enemy, for what can a Man alone in front do? Xenoph. Cyrop. l. 6. 167.Cyrus in Xenophon wisheth, That whereas the Egyptians stood 100 in depth, they had been in depth 1000; for (saith he) we should have the fewer Hands to fight against. The Rank bringeth the multitude of Hands to fight; which without doubt the more Hands that are with convenience brought to fight, the more is the advantage to him that bringeth them. V. Ʋrbinus saith, That the File-Leaders make the front, which they call The first Rank: And farther saith, They that run in an even Line betwixt the two Wings, the Right and the Left, are said to be Parastatae, or Sidemen. Capt. B. in his Notes, upon Aeli∣an's Ta∣cticks, c. 47. Likewise the last Rank is called Oura, or The Reer; and the Commander, Ouragos, the Bringer up. So that in all preparations for Exercise, Files must first be made up, which being
drawn forth, and joyned together, Ranks are made. It is ever the pra∣ctice of all judicious Commanders first to draw their Soldiers forth into Files, which being added together, Ranks are made. By this time the Soldier will expect to know his place of Dignity; where∣fore because that Files are first to be drawn forth, I will begin first with the precedence of Files. Therefore con∣ceive their Dignities according to the Figures (or Numbers) hereafter plac'd, first of File; then of Rank; and lastly, of both joyned together. Front Half-File 1 1 A File-Leader. 2 5 Middlemen. 3 4 A Bringer up to the Front Half-File. Reer Half-File 4 3 Half File-Leader 5 6 Middlemen. 6 2 Bringer up.
Number 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Place 2 6 7 3 4 8 5 2 Number 6 5 4 3 2 1 8 3 Place 2 6 3 4 5 2 4 4           4 3 3 5           3 4 7 6           6 5 6 7           2 6 2 8 A Rank 654321 A Rank dignified 263451 Now for as much as several Authors are of several opinions in this point, so I will leave them to their own fan∣cies, and only set down the opinion of Captain Bingham in this point, which is very clear. Aelion's Tacticks, lib. 1. the Notes of cap. 10. His Analogy is thus: That if four Magnitudes be propounded in proportion, that which ariseth of the first and fourth, is equal to that of the second and third; so that the first Tetrarch is allowed the first place of Dignity, and is placed on the right hand Wing; the second is placed on the outside Point of the left hand Wing; the third next him in the left
Wing, on his right hand toward the middle Section; the fourth in the right Wing, on the left hand of the first toward the middle Section, thus: 2 3 4 1 5 5 Which cometh out of a Geometri∣cal Proportion, which Proportion giveth Law to the ordering of the rest of the Commands, be they never so many, and likewise for the Soldiers, be they never so many; the Rule is this: Eucl. l. 7. pr. 19. Four Magnitudes which equally ex∣ceed the one the other being com∣pared together, that which ariseth of the first and the fourth, is equal to that which ariseth of the second and third; and if the Number produced of the first and fourth, be equal to that pro∣duced of the second and third, those four Numbers shall be in proportion.
CHAP. IX. Reasons for precedence of Dignity in Ranks and Files. BEING that perhaps some may stumble at this, and say that it is superfluous, and not necessary in Discipline, I will endeavour to give some Reasons for the several places of Dignity in Rank and File. It is the received opinion of the greatest Commanders, that Geometri∣cal Proportion gives both Life and Being to orderly Discipline; if that be allowed, then consider that all parts of the Body ought to be answerable; for seeing that the joyning of Files and Ranks produce greater Bodies, it is necessary that a true proportion should be kept throughout the whole Battel, so that the left Wing may be equivalent in all respects of worth, skill, and valour, to the Right, the Reer, to the Front, and the Reer half Files, to the Front half Files; and that all parts of the Body be ballanc'd
with true proportion, so far as the knowledge of the Soldiers, and num∣ber of Men, will give you leave: Otherwise it would be very unreaso∣nable, that all the chief Men should be on the right Flank, and all the worst on the left (who must oppose the right Flank of their Enemy); and likewise the Front to have in it all the best Men, and all the worst to be in the Reer (who are principally to defend that part); if that at any time the Enemy approach upon the Reer, it would be certainly thought a very indiscreet thing of that Commander that should so order his Battel. First therefore, the File-Leader ought to be the worthiest, because he not only Commands his File, but makes the first onset against his Ene∣my. Secondly, The Bringer-up ought to be the second place in Honour, because he is the last Man in the Field march∣ing in the Reer, which upon all occa∣sion of danger he ought to defend. Thirdly, The Half File-Leader is the third place of Honour, because he is the Leader of the Reer half Files
upon several Motions, as doubling the Front, either intire, or divisional; or upon any other doubling to the Front. Fourthly, The last Man (or Bringer up) of the Front half Files, is the fourth Man in Dignity; for when the Reer half Files are commanded off, he hath the Honour of defending the Reer. Fifthly, The next Man to the File-Leader hath the fifth place of Honour, for one Doubling brings him to the Front. Sixthly, The next and last place of Honour is before the Bringer up, for if the Body be faced about, one Dou∣bling brings him into the accidental Front; or keeping his proper Front, by once doubling he becomes Bringer up to the File-Leader. So that it is plain by this Geometri∣cal Proportion, the whole Body is equivalent in skill and worth, and as it were (and indeed ought to be) Se∣conds the one to the other, so long as life endureth. And then it may be said of them, as Plutarch writeth of the holy Band of the Thebans,Plutar. in Pelop. A. That it was never beaten
until the Battel of Cheroea; after which Battel, Philip the Father of Alexander surveying the dead Bodies, and coming to the place where these 300 lay, all close mingled one with another, and struck through with the Macedonian Pikes, he wonder'd great∣ly; but hearing that it was the Band of Lovers, and belov'd, wept, and said, Evilly may they perish, that suspect any filthiness in deed or suffering to have been practised amongst such Men. So that you see, that in all Ages care hath been taken to bestow Ho∣nour upon those Soldiers who have made it their employ to deserve it; and on the other hand, what indign Punishment hath been inflicted upon all those, who either carelesly, or wil∣fully neglect their Duty. I might have inserted the several Punishments that have been inflicted upon the dis∣obedient Soldier, but being not mate∣rial, I shall wave it, and proceed.
CHAP. X. Of the DRƲM. IT is requisite in the next place that care be taken, that every Sol∣dier be rightly instructed in all Mili∣tary Signs and Directions; for Expe∣rience hath sufficiently taught, that the neglect and errour in the right understanding thereof, hath not only brought great inconveniencies, but the overthrow of great Enterprizes: Therefore the Captain ought to be very circumspect, that his Soldiers be well acquainted with all the signs of War, which are only these three used, viz. a Vocal, a Semivocal, and a Mute. First, A Vocal Sign is, that when a Captain, or some other Officer, so im∣mediately Commands, that every Sol∣dier shall hear him distinctly. A Semivocal Sign is that which is distinguished by a Drum, or other Warlike Instrument, in which, as to Foot-Service, according to modern
Discipline, the Drum is the only In∣strument that the Soldier is to take notice of, and ought well to under∣stand these several Beats, or Points of War, viz. 1. A Call. 2. A Troop. 3. A March. 4. A Preparative. 5. A Battalia. 6. A Retreat. Besides these, there are two other Beats of the Drum, viz. 7. A Tato. 8. A Revally. The Tato, (as some call it) but ra∣ther Tapto, that is, to shut or make fast your Doors, for when this is bea∣ten, all persons ought to repair to their private rest, whether in Leaguer or Garison. The Watch being then set, and the Tapto being returned to the Corps due Guard, there is a Warning-piece discharged; after which, no person ought to be out of their Quarters, or from their Posts, without the Word be given them; by which means the Garrison or Leaguer will be in quiet.
So that all private Watches and Sen∣tinels may more distinctly perform their Duty to the safety of the Gar∣rison or Leaguer. A Revally is beaten in the Morning by break of day, (I suppose it comes from the French word Reveiller, to awake from Sleep) at which time the Sub-Officers usually take off their out Sentinels. These two last spoken of (as I sup∣pose) cannot be said to be Points of War, but only private Directions for a Garison or Leaguer; the one to give notice at what time the Garison or Leaguer ought to be at rest and quiet, the other to shew the hour that the Gates shall be set open for all Commerce. Now as you may learn for what end these six several Beats of the Drum are made use of, observe Barriffe.Barriffe in his Mili∣tary Disci∣pline, p. 5. First, By a Call, you must understand to hear present Proclamation, or else to repair to your Ensign. Secondly, By a Troop, understand to shoulder your Musket, to advance your Pike, to close your Ranks and Files to order, and troop along with
(or follow) your Officer to the place of Randezvouze, or elsewhere. Thirdly, By a March you are to understand, to take your Open Order in Rank, to shoulder both Musket and Pike, and to direct your March either quicker or flower, according to the Beat of the Drum. Fourthly, By a Preparative you are to understand, to close to your due distance for Skirmish both in Rank and File, which distance you shall under∣stand hereafter, and then to make ready, that so you may execute upon the first Command. Fifthly, By the Battel or Charge understand, the continuation or pres∣sing forward in order of Battel, with∣out laging behind, rather boldly step∣ping forward in the place of him that falls dead or wounded before thee. Sixthly, By a Retreat understand, an orderly retiring backward, either for Relief, advantage of the Ground, or for some politic end; as to draw the Enemy into some Ambushment, or such-like: So that for the Drum, it is the Voice of the Commander, the Spur of the Valiant, and the Heart of the Coward. So far Barriffe.
As for the Antiquity of the Drum, is is said, that Bacchus was the first Inventor of it, and so from Age to Age it hath been thought a fit Instru∣ment for the Service of the Foot; as you may read at large in these several Authors mentioned in the Margin.Polyd. lib. 1. in Bac. §. 1. Curtius, lib. 8. 372. Plutarch. in Crasso. App. in Parthicis 143. And not only the Drum was thought a fit Instrument alone for the Foot, but they were allowed some other pleasing Instrument to delight and transport the Spirits of the Sol∣diers; as the Flute, Harp, and Pipe. Plutar. in Lycurgo.Plutarch much commending the Lacedemonian manner of joyning with their Enemy, saith, When the King hath offered the Goat (that was the Lacedemonian Sacrifice when they were to give Battel) he streight Com∣mands all the Army to Crown their Heads, and the Flutes to sound the Measure of For this Measure, see Jul. Pollux, l. 4. c. 10. §. 2. Castor; and himself with∣all beginneth the Paean is a Hymn proper to Apollo, Jul. 1. Pol∣lux, l. 1. c. 1. §. 33. fifth Paean, the Song they used when they went to Charge, at the first advancing against the Ene∣my. So that it is a brave, and no less fearful thing (saith he) to behold them pacing according to the measure of the Flute, neither disturbing their
Order, nor shewing any astonishment of Mind, but mildly and joyfully ap∣proaching the danger of Conflict, divi∣ding out their March to the sound of the Flute; for it is not likely, that Men so demeaning themselves, can be transported with Fear or Choller; nay, rather they must needs have a setled Mind full of Hope and Assu∣rance, as if God were on their side. Thus Plutarch. Thucyd. l. 5. 393 A.The Lacedemonians likewise used Flutes, and made them their Instru∣ments to measure out as it were the steps of War, for they used an easie and slow pace, framed to the cadence of the sound. Athenaeus Deipno∣soph, l. 12. 517 A.Athenaeus rehearseth out of Herodo∣tus, that the Lydians used the like Instruments to Dance as it were the Measures of War by. And he ad∣deth, that the Cretians made choice of the Harp for their Instruments of War, as though it had been peculiar to that Nation. Pausan. in Lacon. 193.Pausanias testifieth the like of the Lacedemonians, that they brought in Flutes and Measures into the War; and we are not ignorant, that in our
late unhappy Wars, both in Ireland and Scotland, how much the Northern Pipe was used, being a very shrill and loud Pipe, and much surpassing the Flute for its shrilness, in pacing out the Measures of War with delight to the Soldiers; for I have heard some judi∣cious Commanders affirm, That they did believe, the Pipes did much trans∣port the Valour of the Soldiers: So that they had a sufficient Pay allowed them, even equal with the Drum. CHAP. XI. NOW that our Soldiers have at∣tained some small knowledge in the use of their Arms, and rightly un∣derstand the Beats of the Drum; it will be expedient in the next place to shew them the several Distances, which are these four, viz. Close Order which is both in Rank and File 1 Foot ½. Order 3 Foot. Open Order 6 Foot. Double Distance 12 Foot.
There is several Distances to be performed in, First, March. Secondly, Motion. Thirdly, Skirmish. The distance of March between File and File is 3 Foot, and between Rank and Rank 12 Foot. The distance of Motion between File and Rank is 6 Foot. The distance for intire Doublings and Skirmishes between Rank and File is 3 Foot. The distance for prevention of Can∣non Shots, is between File and File 12 or 24 Foot, which is the Double-Double Distance. For to deliver unto you the opi∣nions of several ancient Commanders concerning Distance, will be needless, it being sufficiently made plain by se∣veral eminent Authors; but to pro∣ceed with all brevity possible to the words of Command, which are as followeth.
The Company being upon the Ground, at their Open Order you may Command. Ranks, Close forward Files, Close inward to Order. Ranks, Close forward Files, Close inward to Close Order. Ranks, Open backwards Files, Open to the Right to Order. Ranks, Open backward Files, Open to the Left to Open Order. Ranks, Open backward Files, Open outward to Double Distance. Ranks, Close forward Files, Close inward to Open Order. Note, That Close Order is useful for the Pikes to be at upon the Charge to the Horse, or for any manner of Wheeling; or when the Commander is to deliver somewhat of Concern∣ment to the Soldier. But if any one have a desire to be farther satisfied concerning Distance,
let them read Barriffe, Ward, Ven, and Elton, who have sufficiently treated of this Subject at large; it being my design only to model an Exercise with as much abreviation as possible, being it is only intended a Pocket-Book for the benefit of the young Soldier. CHAP. XII. BEfore I come to shew the variety of Facings in the Action, I think it will not be amiss to define unto you what is meant by Facing. Facing is a particular turning of the Aspect from one part to another, whereby the Front proper becomes the Front accidental, and a Front acci∣dental may be reduced to his proper Front. The words of Command take as followeth. Command. Face to the Right Left Reer Front Center or midst As you were.
Command. Face to the Front and Reer Right and left outward Right and left inward Midst of Files Midst of Ranks As you were. Command. To the Right Right Right Right Right about Left about As you were. Command. To the Left Left Left Left Left about Right about As you were.
Command. Half Files Face to the Right Left Right and left outward Right about Left about Right and left inward As you were. There is also a Facing which cau∣seth the Body to Face to the Front, Reer, and both Flanks, which some call Facing square; of which I will prick some few Figures of Facings, which will be sufficient to demonstrate all the rest to an ingenious fancy. Command. Face square, and March. The Direction is, Two first Ranks stand, the two last Ranks Face about, the rest of the Body Face to right and left, then March all.
diagram of military formation or battle array Proper Front Front accidental Front of the Reer When your Soldiers begin any Mo∣tion, let them Advance their Pikes, and Shoulder their Muskets. Now to reduce this Figure to its first Order, Command. Face all about to the Right. March, and Close your Divisions. To your Leader; who stands at the proper Front. To Face Square another way, and March upon it.
Command. Face Square, and March. The Direction is, Muskettiers Face to both Flanks; half Files of Pikes Face to the Right about; March all. Now you must understand, when the Command is, Half Files, it is al∣ways to be understood the Reer half Files; otherwise the word Front half Files is commanded. diagram of military formation or battle array Proper Front Front of the Reer To reduce this Figure to its for∣mer Order,
Command. Face all to the Right about. March, and Close your Divisions. To your Leader; and they are re∣duced. Take another Figure of Battel pro∣duced by Facing. Command. The two first Ranks stand; the rest Face outward, and move clear of the standing part. The two last Ranks move outward sideways two Paces. To your Leader. diagram of military formation or battle array
They may give Fire to the Front, or to the Reer, or to both Flanks, or to all four at once, falling in the Reer of their own Divisions; this accor∣ding as the Captain pleaseth to Com∣mand. Command. Front Division advance forward three paces; the two next Divisions move out∣wards one pace; Pikes in each Division face about, and move two paces; to your Leader. Divisions of Muskettiers in the Reer advance forward, and range even in Front and Reer, with the middle Divi∣sions of Pikes; the first Rank of Pikes in the front Division move three foot clear of the standing part. diagram of military formation or battle array
They may give Fire in the Front, or in the Reer, or to both Flanks, or to all four at once. Command. The first and last Rank of the first Division of Pikes, Face about, and move down clear of the Reer, and close Ranks forward to Order. Outmost Divisions of Muskettiers face about, move down, and slank your own Divisions of Pikes. The first Division of Pikes move for∣ward, and range even a Breast with your own Division of Muskettiers. The front Division of Muskettiers close into the midst to Order. diagram of military formation or battle array
As for firing upon any of these Figures, the Captain may use his own discretion, either to Front Reer, or both Flanks, or to all at once. Command. The outmost Divisions face outward, and move two paces. Face to your Leader. Move up, until you range even a Breast with the second Divisions next the Front. Reer Division, move streight forward two paces. diagram of military formation or battle array Command. Front Division advance forward three paces. The outmost Division upon the Flanks move up, and range even with the Front.
diagram of military formation or battle array DIRECTION. For the first Firing upon this Fi∣gure, let them all face to the Reer, and the middle Division of Muskettiers move forwards, and flank the Reer Division of Pikes: After, let all the Muskettiers advance forwards three Foot clear of their own Divisions of Pikes, and give Fire, falling in the Reer of themselves; and after facing about, move into their places again. The second Firing may be to both Flanks, or to all four, as the Comman∣der pleaseth, falling in the Reer of themselves. The third Firing: Let the Musket∣tiers upon the Flanks move down even with the Reer, and give Fire, and fall
in the Reer of themselves; and after, move up into their places again, and face to their Leader. The fourth Firing: Let them Fire on the Ground they stand, and fall in the Reer of themselves; and the Pikes in the Reer may Charge on, and after, facing to their Leader. You may proceed to the next Com∣mand, which will be as followeth. Command. The outmost Divisions face inward, and march three paces. The next two Divisions face outward, and move two paces. To your Leader. Reer Division, move outward, until you stand streight with the front Di∣visions. diagram of military formation or battle array
You must note, That the Front and Reer Divisions of Muskettiers by Firing, have interchang'd Ground, which causes this Reducement. Front Divisions face about. Front and Reer Divisions march, and interchange Ground. To your Leader. The outmost Divisions face inward, and close your Divisions. To your Leader. Even your Ranks, and streighten your Files, and close to Order: They are re∣duced. CHAP. XIII. NOW our Soldiers being some∣what expert in the true use, and handling of their Arms, and like∣wise in the several Beats of the Drum, together with the Distances, Facings, and other Dignities of Place there∣unto belonging, it will be convenient to draw them into the Field; but it
will be convenient to shew, 1. How to march a Company to the Field. 2. How to draw them up into a Body. Lastly, To instruct them in the several Doublings, Counter-marches, and Wheelings. All which shall be per∣formed by six days Exercise, every days Exercise being digested into several Figures and Forms of Battel, with their several ways of Firing, Doubling, Counter-mar∣ches, and Wheeling, upon every Form and Figure of Battel. Of Marching a Company in Divisions: The Order and Places of the Officers and Drums. diagram of military formation or battle array IN Marching, the Officers are to observe the Ranks to be at 12 Foot distance, and that the Files be closed to Open Order. The Soldiers must always begin to march with their right Foot first, which is
observed to conduce most to the kee∣ping of due Order in Ranks. The Captain is to march with his Pike shoulder'd. A Lieutenant to march with a Par∣tizan: And an Ensign to march with his Pike comported, which is the distin∣ction between the Captain and other Officers. The Serjeants have no place assign'd them in marching, but are to be mo∣ving up and down, to observe that the Ranks and Files be at their due Di∣stance. diagram of military formation or battle array
The Drums are to fall in behind the two first Ranks of each Division of Muskettiers, and to Beat between the second and third Rank. When drawn up into a Body, they are to place themselves in the first Rank even with the Front, between the interval of Muskets and Pikes. The Ensign is to place himself six Foot before the Body of Pikes, both upon a March, and when drawn up into a Body. So long as the Drum beats a March, they are to be drawn up with their Arms shoulder'd, the Colours flying; but if the Drum beat a Troop, the Pikes are to be advanced, the Colours furled. diagram of military formation or battle array It is very necessary that every Sol∣dier be acquainted throughout with
all the parts of a Body of Men drawn up, with their several Extents and Bounds, and with the true understan∣ding of the same: Where first note, although you have been shewed the description both of File and Rank, with their Number, Place, and Dignity belonging to each; yet there is more Parts belonging to a Body of Men drawn up, than only Ranks and Files. As first, a Front, a Reer, a Right Flank, and a Left Flank: There is also Front Half-Files, and Reer Half-Files, Right Half-Ranks, and Left Half-Ranks: There is the length and depth of the Battel, every one of which have their particular Extents and Bounds, according to their number of Men. All which is plainly set forth in the following Figure.Vide Cap. Of Facing The Front of which Figure is first of all to be taken notice of: There are in all Exercises a Proper Front, and an Accidental Front, which is, when all the Company faces to the left, or the like.
diagram of military formation or battle array FRONT. REER. The Right Flank. The Left Flank. A File. Dignity in File. Front half Files. Reer half Files. A Rank. Dignity in Rank. File-Leaders. Bringers up. Left half Ranks of Muskets. Right half Ranks of Muskets.
CHAP. XIV. The first Days Exercise. HAving brought your Company into a place convenient, where you intend to Exercise them, you may cause the File-Leaders, Corporals, or Serjeants, to instruct them in the Po∣stures, and true handling of their Arms; which being performed, upon the Summons of the Drum, each File-Leader with his File is to march into his place. The Captain (or other Comman∣der) being at the Head of his Com∣pany, Commands them to even their Ranks, and streighten their Files, and to stand to their Open Order both in Rank and File. If your Ensign be not already in the Field, Command a Serjeant with a Drum, and either two or more Files of Pikes, with two Files of Shot, if necessary, that the Colours be far off, to guard the Ensign to the place of Rendezvouz. This being performed, and every Man in his place,
the Captain (or other Commander) after silence, begins first to instruct the Soldiers in their several Distances be∣twixt Rank and File, with the ways to open and close to them; next in the Facings, then in the Doublings; which shall be these following. The Ranks that double are to ob∣serve their Right-hand Man, to move at the same time with him. They begin their Motion with the Foot, next the Hand named, which Motion is to be performed at three Steps; in doubling the even Ranks, double the odd. Files doubling is performed in the same manner, and is the same thing with Reduction of doubled Ranks. The Reduction of doubled Files is the same thing with doubling Ranks. To double half Files upon a March, let your Reer half Files move into the Front with a quicker Motion, the Front half Files continuing theirs. For Reduction, let the Reer half Files stand without Facing, 'till the Front half Files have passed them, and then fall after their proper Leaders. Note, That the Letter C. stands for Command, the Letter R. for Reduce∣ment.
Note, That no Leader is tied to observe all these Doublings in his Ex∣ercise at once, but to use as many of them as he shall think fit. The words of Command for all entire Doublings to the Front. C. Ranks, to the Right double. March. R. Files, to the Left double. March. C. Ranks, to the Left double. March. R. Files, to the Right double. March. C. Ranks, to the right and left, double outward. R. Files, to the right and left, double inward. C. Ranks, to the right and left, double inward. R. Files, to the right and left, double outward. C. Ranks, as you were. C. Half-Files, double your Front to the right. R. Files, double your Depth to the left.
C. Half-Files, double your Front to the left. R. Files, double your Depth to the right. C. Half-Files, double your Front to the right and left outward. March. R. Files, double your Depth to the right and left inward. March. C. Half-Files, double your Front to the right and left inward. March. R. Files, double your Depth to the right and left outward. March. C. Bringers up, double your Front to the right. March. R. Files, double your Depth to the left, every Man falling behind his Bringer up. C. Bringers up, double your Front to the left. R. Files, double your Depth to the right, every Man falling behind his Bringer up. March. C. Bringers up, double your Front to the right and left outward. March. R. Files, double your Depth to the right and left inward, every Man falling behind his Bringer up. March. C. Bringers up, double your Front to the right and left inward. March.
R. Files, double your Depth to the right and left outward, every Man fal∣ling behind his Bringer up. March. C. Double your Ranks to the right entire. R. Right half Ranks, double your left Flank. C. Double your Ranks to the left entire. March. R. Left half Ranks double your right Flank. C. Double your Ranks inward en∣tire. R. The inmost Files double your Flanks to the right and left outward, and after, close. C. Double your Ranks to the right entire, every Man placing himself on the outside of his right hand Man. March. R. Right half Ranks double your left Flank, every Man placing himself on the inside of his left hand Man. March. C. Double your Ranks to the left entire, every Man placing himself on the outside of his left hand Man. March.
R. Left half Ranks double your right Flank, every Man placing him∣self on the inside of his right hand Man. March. C. Half Files, double your Front to the right entire. March. R. Right half Ranks, double entire the depth of your left Flank. March. C. Half Files, double your Front to the left entire. March. R. Left half Ranks, double entire the depth of your right Flank. March. C. Half Files double your Front inward entire. March. R. The inmost Files double entire the depth of the outmost Files, and after, close. March. Note: Every even Rank from the Front face outward, and double the odd. March. Next follows, to shew some Divisional Doublings by the same. C. Double your Ranks to the right and left by Division. March. R. The outmost Files upon each Flank that moved, face inward, and strengthen the Body. March.
C. Double your Ranks to the right and left by Division, every Man pla∣cing himself on the outside of his right and left hand Man. March. R. The outmost Files upon each Flank that moved, double the inmost Files to the right and left inward, every Man placing himself on the inside of his right and left hand Men. March. C. Half Files, double your Front by Division. March. Half Files face outwards, and march clear of the Body, face to your Leader, move up, and double the Front. R. The outmost Files upon each Flank that moved, double entire the depth of the inmost Files. March. Entire Doublings to the Front by Wheelings. C. Wheel off your Reer half Files, and double your Front to the right entire. March. Half Files, face about, and wheel to the left.
R. Wheel off your Right half Ranks, and double your left Flank en∣tire to the left. C. Wheel off your Reer half Files, and double your Front to the left entire. Face outward, and Left half Ranks wheel about to the left. R. Wheel off your Left half Ranks, and double your right Flank to the right entire. C. Wheel your Reer half Files in∣ward into the midst, and double your Front inward entire. March. R. The inmost Files that doubled, wheel about to the right and left out∣ward, and double entire the depth of the outmost Files; after, face to your Leader, and close Files to the midst to order. Divisional Doubling to the Front by Wheeling. C. Wheel off your Reer half Files, and double your Front by Division. March. R. The outmost Files upon each Flank that doubled, wheel about to
the right and left inward, and double entire the depth of the inmost Files; face to your Leader. March. CHAP. XV. Of Conversion and Inversion, with some few words of Command, and Reducements. THE difference betwixt Inversion and Conversion is this; Inversion doth always produce File or Files, and Conversion Rank or Ranks: Inversion consists of Files filing, or of Ranks filing; Conversion of Ranks ranking to the right, or to the left, or by increase of Files, ranking by even or uneven parts. Note: That what is commanded to the Right, the same may be performed to the Left. The words of Command for Inversion, are as followeth. C. Files, file to the right. R. Files, file six to the left.
C. Files, file to the right and left by Division. R. Files, file six to the right and left. C. Files, file to the right entire advancing. R. File six to the right towards the Front. C. Files, file inward into the right Flank.The right hand File stands, the rest move away, pla∣cing them∣selves in a direct File before the Front. R. Front half Files, file three to the left; Reer half Files, face about, and file three to the right; face to your Leader, and close your Divi∣sions. C. Files, file to the right by Di∣vision. R. Front half Files, file three to the right, and Reer half Files face about, and file three to the left; face to your Leader, and close your Di∣visions. C. Files, file inward into the right and left Flank by Division. R. Half Files, face about to the right; Front and Reer half Files, file three to the right and left inwards; face to your Leader, and close your Divisions.
[For filing inward, the half Files are to face about, and so the left hand File of the Reer, and right of the Front, are to move away 'till they be∣come one File. Filing by Division is the same, only the right hand File stands, the rest move away. Filing inward into the right Flank by Division, half Files are to face about; then the File-Leaders, and Bringers up of the right and left, are to lead, and so successively fall into the Reer of each other.] Of Ranks filing. Ranks filing is sooner performed and reduced, than Files filing, and will be more ready to make resistance against any opposition in the Front. C. Ranks, file to the right, or to the left, placing your selves behind your right hand Men. Direction. If they be upon a stand, they may open to their distance each Ranke, and so place themselves be∣hind their right hand Men.
If upon a March, as to pass some narrow Defile, the readiest way to perform it, and draw up in order again as soon as past, is to make the Ranks file; if to the right, the right hand Man files first, and the rest of his Rank follow him, 'till the Defile be past. For larger Defiles, the Commander draws off as he judges the way will easily receive. R. Files, rank as you were. C. Ranks, file to the right and left by Division.Tacticks of Aelian, c. 30. p. 6. Direction. It is the same with the last, differing only in this; the half Ranks to the left, fall behind their left hand Men to the left; the half Ranks to the right, behind their several right hand Men. R. Files, rank to the right and left inward, as you were. The words of Command for Conver∣sion, are as followeth. C. Files, rank three to the right. Direction. In this Motion the File-Leader is first to move to the Hand
commanded, and the half File-Leader is to advance the same way. R. Ranks, file as you were. C. Files, rank six to the left. March. Direction. In this Motion close Ranks forward to order, and open Files to double Distance; then let every Man in his File move up to the left of his File-Leader, so every File will become one Rank: This, if the Company be small, will make it seem more large, Battalion like. C. Ranks, rank outward into the Front. Direction. The first Rank stand, the rest face outward, placing your selves successively into the Front; after, face to your Leader. R. Ranks, rank twelve to the right and left inward, as you were. C. Ranks, rank inward into the Front.The twelve middlemost men stand, which is the first Rank, the rest move successively after the first Rank. Direction. The first Rank is to move away to the right and left, the next Rank moving up into his ground, doing the like, and so all the rest, until the last Rank be come up entire into the Front.
R. Ranks, rank six to the right and left outward. Direction. The first six upon the right, and the first six upon the left, stand, the rest move outward, falling in the Reer of the first Rank, ranking six to the right and left; and after, closing their Divisions. C. Files, rank to the right into the Front. Direction. Open to the left to your double Distance, and Ranks close for∣ward to close Order, and move up to the right into the Front. R. Ranks, file six to the left. Direction. To perform which, the first six upon the left are to fall into a File, the rest doing the like, until they are all converted into Files. C. Ranks, rank outward into the Front, every Man placing himself on the outside of his right and left hand Man.This Ran∣king is by Counter∣march. Direction. The first Rank stand, the rest move forth to the right and left successively, and advance into the Front, every Man placing himself on the outside of his right and left hand Man.
R. Ranks, rank twelve to the right and left inward, every Man placing himself on the inside of his right and left hand Man.Note: The twelve middle men are to stand, the rest to move six to the right hand, and six to the left in∣ward. C. Ranks, rank inward into the Front, every Man placing himself on the inside of his right and left hand Man. Direction. Right and left half Ranks open from the midst to twice double Distance, the first Rank of each Divi∣sion is to stand, the rest are to move to the right and left inward into the Front. R. Ranks, rank six to the right and left outward, every Man placing him∣self on the outside of his right and left hand Man; and after, to close their Divisions. C. Files, rank to the right, by wheeling into the Front. Direction. Files, open to the left to your double Distance; Ranks, close forward to your close Order; face to the right, and wheel 'till all the whole Body be brought into one en∣tire Rank. R. Ranks, file as you were. C. Files, rank into the Front and Reer by Division.
Direction. Files, open to the left to your open Order; Ranks, close forward to your close Order; half Files face about to the right and left; then move all in Front and Reer, and make two entire Ranks. R. Front half Files, face about to the left; Reer half Files, face about to the right; then wheel half Files into the midst as they were; then face them to their Leader, and close their Files at discretion.Observe that those in motion are to face to the right Flank. C. Ranks, rank two to the right.This may be observ'd with any even num∣ber. Direction. The two first in Rank advance forwards to the right; the next two in the Reer of them, until the first Rank have performed the Command; all the rest of the Ranks is to perform the like. R. Ranks, rank as you were. C. Ranks, rank two to the right and left outward. Direction. The two outmost Men upon the right and left hand advance forwards; the next in the same Rank are to follow, dividing themselves two to the right hand, and two to the left, 'till the Motion be finished.
R. Ranks, as you were: Or Rank twelve to the right and left inward. C. Ranks, rank two to the right and left inward. Direction. The two inmost Men of the right and left hand in the midst of the Battel, advance forwards; the next in the same Rank are to follow two from the right hand, and two from the left, until all have performed the Command. C. Ranks, rank 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, &c. by increase and decrease, as they stand in a Body. Direction. The right hand Man of the first Rank march forth; then the three next of the same Rank follow him; then five more out of the same Rank to make the third; and what is wanting in the first Rank of the Body, to make good the fourth in Figure, must be taken out of the second in Body; and so to proceed in the re∣mainder, both for its increase and decrease, until your Command be pro∣duced. R. Right hand Men, Rank as you were.
C. Ranks, rank to each Flank, by wheeling to the right and left into the same by Division.Observe, they are to be at dou∣ble Di∣stance in Rank, and at Order in File. Direction. Face them to the Reer, and then let them wheel into their places. R. Ranks, rank as you were; face to your Leader. But if you would avoid mixture of Arms, you may place all your Musket∣tiers, either in Front and Reer, or else wheel only the Muskettiers first, and leave the Pikes standing: Otherwise it may be performed in marching, and then the Reducement as before, Rank as you were. C. Ranks of your Front and Reer half Files, wheel outwards to your right and left Flank by Division.Note: They are to observe the same di∣stance as in the former Command. Direction. Half Files, face about; Ranks, open to your double Distance; then Front and Reer half Files, wheel to the right and left outwards into both Flanks. R. Front and Reer half Files, face to the right and left inwards, and Rank as you were; and close Ranks forward to order.
C. Files, rank three first, then by increase to the Right two, in each Division of Muskettiers and Pikes.These are termed half Rhombs, or Wedges. R. Ranks, file as you were. C. Files, rank first two, and by in∣crease two from the whole Body.You may make a Wedge of all together. R. Ranks, file as you were. Note: You may alter the mixture of Arms at pleasure. C. Files, rank first two, and by in∣crease and decrease two in each Rank divisionally, both of Muskets and Pikes.Tacticks of Aelian, pag. 108. R. Ranks, file as you were. CHAP. XVI. Of Countermarches, with their several sorts and kinds. THE next branch of Discipline which offers it self, are Counter∣marches, which we read (in the Ta∣cticks of Aelian)Tacticks of Aelian, cap. 28. were of use amongst the Grecians and Persians, only these three kinds, to wit,
1. The Chorean, maintaining ground. 2. The Lacedemonian, losing ground. 3. The Macedonian, gaining ground. The distance for Countermarch is open Order in Rank and File. Note: When there is a Counter∣march commanded without any other addition, then it is always intended a Chorean Countermarch. The Chorean. C. Files, to the right hand Coun∣termarch. Direction. The word of Command being given, all the File-Leaders step forwards with their right Legs, and face about to the right, every File-Leader with his File following him towards the Reer, passing through the interval on his right hand, observing to keep even in Rank with his right hand Man, and not to turn, until he come to the ground where at first his File-Leader began the Motion: The Command is performed when the Bringers up have attained unto the
place where before their File-Leaders stood. R. Files, to the left hand, Counter∣march. C. Ranks, to the right hand, Coun∣termarch. Direction. Face them to the right, then the right hand File is to turn off to the right, and to march even to the Ground of the left hand File. R. Ranks, to the left hand, Coun∣termarch. Note: That any entire Counter∣march of Files and Ranks will be re∣duced, by making another entire Countermarch to what hand soever; but if you desire to have them not only reduced to the same Aspect, but also precisely to the same place; then if the Countermarch be to the right, Countermarch again to the right, so to the left. C. Countermarch Front and Reer into the midst. Direction. Half Files face about, and turn off to the left; Front half Files turn off to the right, and face to your Leader.
R. Countermarch your Front and Reer into the midst again, will reduce the last Command; or else by any other Divisional Countermarch of Files. C. Front and Reer half Files Coun∣termarch to the right. Direction. Front half Files Counter∣march to the right, following your File-Leaders; Reer half Files Coun∣termarch to the right, following your Half File-Leaders. R. Countermarch Front and Reer into the midst; then face to the first Front, and they are reduced. C. Countermarch your Flanks into the midst. Direction. Face to the right and left outwards; the right Flank turn off to the right; the left Flank turn off to the left; March, and close your Divisions. R. Countermarch your Flank into the midst again, and they are reduced. C. Right and left half Ranks inter∣change your Ground. Direction. Face to the right and left inward; March, and interchange your Ground; face to your Leader.
R. Interchanging of Ground back again, will reduce them; or Divisio∣nally to Countermarch their Flanks into the midst of the Battel. The Lacedemonian Countermarch losing Ground. C. Files, to the right hand Coun∣termarch, placing your selves before your Bringers up; to your Leader. Direction. Bringers up, face about to the right; the rest Countermarch to the right, every Man turning on the Ground he stands, following their Leaders, placing themselves before their Bringers up. R. Bringers up, stand; the rest pass through to the right, and place your selves before your Bringers up. C. Files, to the right hand Coun∣termarch, every Man turning on the Ground he stands. Direction. The File-Leaders of each File are to step sideways to the right, and so march even in Rank together, every Man following his Leader, and turning on the Ground he stands.
R. Files to the left hand Coun∣termarch, every Ma turning on the Ground he stands. C. Bringers up, face about to the right; the rest pass through to the right, and place your selves before your Bringers up. Direction. Face all to the right about; Bringers up, stand; the rest of the Body pass through the right, and place your selves before your Brin∣gers up. Note: This Motion is begun by the Rank, next the Bringers up, and so continued successively by the rest, 'till the Command be ended. R. This Countermarch may be redu∣ced, by doing the same to the contrary hand; or if you please, C. Bringers up, stand; the rest pass through to the right, and place your selves behind your Bringers up. Note: This Command is performed by the Rank, next the Reer, until the File-Leaders become the Bringers up; then face them to the proper Front, and they are reduced. Direction. The last Rank (or Brin∣gers up) are to stand; the rest of the
Body to face to the Reer, and pass through to the right, placing them∣selves behind their Bringers up; then face them all about after their proper File-Leaders, and they are reduced as at first. C. Ranks, to the right hand Coun∣termarch, every Man turning after his right hand Man on the Ground he stands. Direction. Face all to the right, which being performed, the right hand File, together with all the rest, becomes Ranks, and so begin the Countermarch, every Rank turning after his right hand Man on the Ground he stands, and so marcheth forth-right beyond that which was the left Flank. R. Right hand File, face to the right; the rest pass through to the right, and place your selves before your right hand Men. The Macedonian Countermarches gaining Ground. C. File-Leaders, face about to the right; the rest pass through to the
right, and place your selves behind your Leaders. Note: This Motion beginneth with that Rank, next the File-Leaders. Direction. File-Leaders, face about to the right; the rest pass through the intervals to the right, and place themselves behind their Leaders, eve∣ry Rank successively passing through, and taking their places. R. File-Leaders, face to the Reer; the rest pass through the left, fol∣lowing your Bringors up, placing your selves behind your Leaders. Note: This Countermarch may be reduced as the rest, by doing the same to the contrary hand, or by an entire Countermarch of Files. Direction. File-Leaders, face to the Reer; then the Bringers up begin the Countermarch, passing forward be∣tween the intervals, turning on the Ground they stand, the (5) following the (6), and so likewise the rest until the Countermarch is ended; then face them to their first Front, and they are reduced as at first. R. For Reducement, observe this for all, That any entire Countermarch of
File or Rank, may be reduced by ano∣ther entire Countermarch by File or Rank, of what kind, or to what hand soever. This may suffice to be spoken of all the several sorts and kinds of Counter∣marches, they being the least useful of any part of the Art Military, and of late not so much as practised upon Service, either abroad, or at home, very little in any of our Annual Exer∣cises: Therefore in the next place I come briefly to treat of Wheelings, being a Subject more profitable for the intelligible Soldier. CHAP. XVII. Of Wheelings, with their seve∣ral Uses. BEfore you begin to wheel, close both Ranks and Files to their Order. Two things are to be observed in all Wheelings by the Soldier: 1. That they keep their due Distance, which is in all Wheelings three Foot, both in
Rank and File. 2. That upon all Wheelings, you must be sure to ob∣serve your Leader, and follow him, keeping your due Distance, your Muskettiers being all either shoulder'd or palmed, which is the Sentinel Po∣sture; your Pikes to be either shoul∣der'd or advanced, conformable to the Muskettier; for if he be palmed, the Pike may be advanced, and then he is ready either for Port or Charge. Entire Wheelings. C. Wheel your Battel to the Right. Left. Right about. Left about. Direction. The right or left hand Men in the Front are the Hinges of these Motions, who with a small Mo∣tion move to the right or left; the rest, the more their places are remote from the right or left Angle, the more swift must every Man's Motion be to bring their Aspects unto the place commanded, following their Leaders, and keeping their due Distance.
R. For Reducement, if you wheel your Battel to the right, wheel it again to the left, and they are redu∣ced, but not to the same Ground; if to the right about, wheel to the left about; but if you would reduce them as well to the first Ground, as their first Aspect, face them to the right, and then wheel them to the left about; which being done, face them to the left, and they are perfectly reduced as at first. But the nearest Reducement of Aspect and Place is, If you wheel to the right about, then wheel to the right about again; if to the left about, then to the left about in like manner. C. Wheel your Battel on the same Ground to the Right. Left. Right about. Left about. Direction. Left half Ranks move forwards, and wheel to the right; right half Ranks contrariwise face to the left sideways, falling backward, moving still unto the place comman∣ded.
C. Wheel off your Front by Di∣vision. Direction. File-Leaders of the right Flank wheel about to the right, the rest of each File following their Lea∣ders; File-Leaders of the left Flank wheel about to the left in the same manner, and then close your Divi∣sions. C. Wheel the Battel off by Divi∣sion from the Reer. Direction. Face to the Reer, and turn off to the right and left. C. Wheel the Battel inward to the Reer. Direction. Open from the midst to convenient Distance, and turn off to the right and left. C. Wheel the Battel inward to the Front from the Reer. Direction. Face to the Reer, open from the midst, and wheel inward to the Front. C. Wheel off the Body by Division from the right Flank. Direction. Face to the right. C. Wheel off the Body by Divi∣sion from the left Flank. Direction. Face to the left.
C. Wheel the Body inward to the left Flank from the right. Direction. Face to the right, and open to convenient Distance outward, and wheel inward to the left Flank. C. Wheel the Body inward to the right Flank from the left. Direction. Face to the left, and open outward to convenient Distance, then wheel inward to the right Flank. C. Wheel off your Front and Reer half Files by Division. Direction. Half Files face about; Front and Reer half Files turn off by Division. C. Wheel your Front and Reer half Files inward to the midst of Ranks. Direction. Half Files face about; Front and Reer half Files open out∣ward to convenient Distance; then wheel inward to the midst of Ranks. C. Wheel off your Front and Reer half Files by Division from the midst of Ranks. Direction. Front half Files face about; Front and Reer half Files wheel off to the right and left by Division.
C. Wheel Front and Reer half Files inward, both to Front and Reer from the midst of Ranks. Direction. Front half Files face about; Front and Reer half Files open from the midst to convenient Distance, and wheel inward into Front and Reer. C. Wheel off your right and left half Ranks by Division. Direction. Face outward, and wheel off to the right and left by Di∣vision. C. Wheel your right and left half Ranks inward to the midst of Files. Direction. Face outward, and open to the right and left; then wheel in∣ward to the midst of Files. C. Wheel off your right and left half Ranks by Division from the midst of Files. Direction. Face inward, then move backward to a convenient Distance, and so wheel off by Division from the midst of Files. C. Wheel your right and left half Ranks inward to both Flanks from the midst of Files.
Direction. Face inward, and open to the right and left to a convenient distance, and then wheel inward to both Flanks. These are all the entire and divi∣sional Wheelings that have hitherto been practised by any, there are other Wheelings which may properly be termed Doublings, which I have placed amongst the Doublings, which is most proper. As for the Reducement of every particular Wheeling, you may observe as before in the Countermarches, so in these; for unto what hand soever they wheeled, Command them to wheel to the contrary hand, and they will be reduced unto the first Front; or what part is wheeled off by Divi∣sion, wheel them inward again from that place, and it will easily reduce them.
CHAP. XVIII. The second Days Exercise. YOUR Soldiers being Comman∣ded the second time into the Field, and the Body drawn up into the ordinary Square, every Officer vigi∣lant in his place, the Captain may command Silence, with some other general terms of Observation, both for the Leaders, and the Right hand Men; then to even their Ranks, and streighten their Files; which being performed, he may proceed (as for∣merly) to shew the Distances, Facings, Doublings, Countermarches, and Whee∣lings, instructing them in all, or so many of them as the time will permit, and he thinks convenient. In the next place, that which fol∣lows for this days Exercise are Firings, which shall be performed five ways, that is to say, To the Front, to the Reer, to the right or left Flank, Oblique or Angular, as shall be fully demon∣strated.
So soon as the Drum beats a Prepa∣rative, the Muskettiers are to begin to make ready to perform all Firings as they shall be commanded. CHAP. XIX. Several Firings to be performed with any number of Men upon all occasions, either to the Front, or to the Reer, or to both Flanks, as followeth. THE Front being the most Ho∣nourable part, challengeth Su∣periority; therefore to begin your Firing, draw all your Shot before your Pikes; These are Firings to gain ground. when done, command 2 Ranks to advance ten Paces, make ready, Present, give Fire, wheeling both off together, and falling in the Reer of themselves, the rest doing the like, advancing into their Leaders ground. You may do the same with two Ranks advancing ten Paces, or with one Rank advancing three Paces.
You may likewise Fire by Files, ad∣vancing what Paces you please; first, single; then double; or ranking in∣ward 1, 2, 3, or more at pleasure, falling down into their places again. Likewise you may fire by Ranks filing and advancing, moving down, and ranking in the Reer of their own Divisions. Fire by Divisions drawn off as many Paces as you think convenient, retur∣ning again into their places. To Fire by way of Introduction, thus: The first Rank fires, and stands; the last Rank passeth up between the Files, and placing themselves before the File-Leaders, stand, and give Fire; the rest doing the like, 'till they have all fired over. To Fire by Introduction another way. The first Rank stands, and fires; the next Rank moves up, and places them∣selves before the first, then stands and Fires; the rest moving up, and doing the like, until they have all fired twice.
Firings maintaining Ground.The Muskettiers continuing still before the Pikes, command the five first Ranks to kneel, the last Rank make ready, Present, give Fire, stan∣ding fast, and charging again; then command the fifth Rank to stand up, Present, and give Fire, standing fast as before: Likewise the fourth to do the same, and so all the rest, 'till they have all fired over. Then if your please, you may fire two Ranks together; likewise four Ranks together, two kneeling, and two standing upright, falling off. If you think fit, you may fire all six Ranks together, two knee∣ling, two stooping, and two standing upright. To maintain the same Ground still, you may fire them by single Ranks, falling off to the right and left by Division, placing themselves in the Reer of the Pikes. This Firing is termed the Street-Firing.Then you may Fire by Extradu∣ction, which is, The first Rank passes from the Reer upon the outside of the Pikes upon the right, until they have placed themselves in a Rank before the Pikes, Note: The Pikes must be at Charge. falling off to the left into the Reer, the rest successively doing
the like, until they have fired all over; which being done, you may face them to the right and left outward; then facing them to the Front proper, you may cause them to march up, and even the Front of Pikes. Next you may Fire by Ranks ranking into the Front, or Files ranking into the Front, and filing or ranking as they were. After you have fired them by Ranks, you may do the same by Files, wheeling outward or inward into the Front, and filing again as they were. Then you may fire by the outmost Files wheeling or ranking outward into the Front, falling off likewise, being lead off by Bringers up, leading up next the Pikes; this done twice, reduceth. The proper Firings to lose ground are these following. Firings to lose ground.The Muskettiers being supposed to be all in the front, command the first Rank to make ready, Present, give Fire, falling off to the right and left by Division, each part falling Fileways down close by their Flanks of Musket∣tiers, until the Leaders of the Ranks
of Muskettiers have ranked even with the first Rank of Pikes, observing al∣ways to leave an interval between the innermost Files of Shot, and the outer∣most Files of Pikes: So soon as the first Rank hath given Fire, and wheeled away, the second Rank is to do the like, passing down between the inter∣vals on the Flanks, placing themselves after their Leaders. The same is every Rank successively to do, until they have all fired over, and flanked their Pikes. The Muskettiers being now all upon the Flanks, command the first Rank to make ready, Present, and give Fire; after they have fired, com∣mand the first Rank, both Muskets and Pikes, to Countermarch to the right, every Man turning on the ground he stands; the second Rank is to give Fire as they stand, observing to turn after their Leaders to the right hand on the ground they stand, placing themselves behind their Bringers up, following their Leaders. If you please, you may Fire even with the half Files, and fall in the Reer of themselves.
Thus much briefly of Firings to the Front. Firings to the Reer.The Reer challengeth the next place, where suppose all the Musket∣tiers to be in the Reer of the Pikes, the Body marching; Fire, 1. To the right or left about, which is thus per∣formed: If the Enemy appear in the Reer, let the last Rank of Muskettiers face about, and give Fire, wheeling off by Division Fileways, falling in the Front of their own Divisions. When the first Rank are giving of Fire, the next Rank are to be in readi∣ness, observing always that so soon as the first Rank hath fired, they imme∣diately blow and open their Pans, stepping forward with their right Feet, (a little inclining to that hand to which you are to face about) advan∣cing your left Feet, and to the Reer Present, giving your Body a nimble turn, and so give Fire to the rest suc∣cessively, doing the same at three Motions. Note: That in this Firing the Reer must be kept full, leaving a vacancy of one Rank in the Front for the Rank that fired to place it self, still keeping
along with the Body; the Muskettiers observing always to advance their right Legs, and blow; advancing with the left, open their Pans; then tur∣ning upon the Ball of their left Foot to the right about, cast their right Leg backward, and Fire: This is the nim∣blest way for this Firing. 2. Fire, and fall off to the right and left, and rank with the first Rank of Pikes into the Front. 3. Fire even with the Reer, and fall off before the Front of your own Divisions. 4. Fire even in the Reer, or last Rank, falling off to the right and left with a swift Motion, placing your selves 10 or 20 paces before the Front of Pikes still facing to the Body, and making ready again whilst the Pikes make good the Retreat, observing al∣ways to open to the right and left to give room for the Pikes; then sud∣denly closing again, you may, 5. Fire, losing ground, falling off to the right and left about just before the Front of Pikes, still facing to the Body as before, and making ready as before, the Pikes still continuing the Charge.
6. Fire by Introduction to the Reer, until they come down even with the Reer, and stand, making ready again. 7. Fire, by commanding the first Rank to Present, and give Fire, both Muskettiers and Pikes turning on the ground they stand (by way of Counter∣march) sleave down the intervals, pla∣cing themselves before the Front of their own Divisions, the rest keeping their own ground; and after having given Fire successively, turn down after their Leaders on the ground they stand on. Lastly; If you are pursued eagerly, so that you cannot make a safe Retreat by marching, face all about, and Fire by way of Extraduction: If you be hard pressed upon by the Enemies Horse, command the Muskettiers to double their Pikes, and Fire, falling off to the right and left, placing them∣selves in the Reer of their own Divi∣sions. And thus much for Firings in the Reer. In the next place, it will be conve∣nient to shew some Firings to the Flanks, whereby the ingenious Com∣mander
may defend that part, if at∣takced by an Enemy, either upon a March, or other ways. Firings to the Flanks upon a March.1. Fire to the right, File-Leaders leading up their Files next to the Pikes. 2. Fire to the right, Bringers up Leading away next the Pikes, and their own Division, which being twice done, reduceth them. 3. Fire to the right, leading up on the contrary Flank, either by the File-Leaders, or Bringers up. 4. Fire, by facing to the right, and doubling the Pikes to the right, and so fall off to the right and left by Divi∣sion as before, the rest still moving up, and evening the Front of Pikes. 5. Fire by Extraduction to the right, or by half Ranks drawn forth, and falling Rank after Rank in the Reer of the Pikes: After to reduce them, cause them to double their Front by Division, so they will be as at first. These Firings may be performed as well to both Flanks as to one, the Body being faced accordingly; like∣wise to Front and Reer at the same
time, or to Front, Reer, and both Flanks, as shall be shewed in their proper places: But these already may be sufficient to explain the ordinary way of Firings, which any ingenious Capacity may augment or alter accor∣ding as time and place will give leave. And so much for plain Firings to the Front, Reer, and both Flanks, and likewise for the second day's Exer∣cise. CHAP. XX. The third Days Exercise. HAving the third time brought your Soldiers into the Field (as formerly), it will be very necessary in the first place that they be taught the Postures of each Arms, either by the File-Leaders, or some other of the Officers, which must be careful to see the same decently and neatly perfor∣med, and in a comely manner, which is not only the Ground-work of all Exercise; but it is a means whereby many are brought in to be true Lovers
of Military Exercise, as being well pleased with the sight thereof; which being performed, every File-Leader ought to lead up his File, and to joyn into a Body, upon expectation of far∣ther Command from his Captain, who being at the Head of the Company, commands Silence, the Officers being all at their several Posts, he may pro∣ceed to instruct them in their several Distances and Facings; which being performed, the next thing requisite will be to gratifie the deserving Sol∣dier, who earnestly desires to under∣stand his place of Dignity and Ho∣nour: To perform which, the Captain Commands as followeth. CHAP. XXI. A Doubling to make every Man a File-Leader by Dignity. C. HAlf Files, double your Front to the left. Files, double to the right entire advancing, every Man placing himself before his Leader.
This Doubling causes the Bringers up to become the File-Leaders, being second Man in Dignity. C. Front half Files, double your Reer to the left. Double your Files to the left entire advancing, every Man placing himself before his Leader. This Doubling makes the half File-Leaders of the Reer half Files to be∣come the File-Leaders, being the third Man in Dignity. C. Bringers up, double your Front to the right. Files, double your Depth to the right, every Man falling behind his Bringer up. This Doubling causes the Bringers up of the Front half Files to become the File-Leaders, being the fourth in Dignity. C. Half Files, double your Front to the right. Files, double to the left entire ad∣vancing. Files, to the right, double. Files, to the right, double. This Doubling causes the second Rank to become the File-Leaders, be∣ing the fifth in Dignity.
C. Bringers up, double your Front to the left. Files, double your Depth to the left, every Man falling behind his Brin∣ger up. This Doubling causes the Rank next before the Bringers up to become the File-Leaders, and are the sixth and last in Dignity. R. Ranks, to the left double. Files, to the left double: And they are reduced. The Soldiers being satisfied now they know each his place of Dignity, the Captain may proceed to shew these Doublings, or such other as the time will permit, and he shall think convenient.
CHAP. XXII. Eighteen several Doublings, with their Reducements. C. HAlf Files, double your Front to the left. C. Double your Files to the right entire, advancing. C. Front half Files, double your Reer to the right entire. C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank to the left. Direction. Face all to the right, and left half Ranks move forward, and double your right Flank to the left: To your Leader. C. Double your Ranks to the left entire. C. Right half Ranks, double your left Flank entire, advancing. C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank inward entire. Direction. Half Files of the right half Ranks, face about; right half Ranks, move clear of the standing part; face all to the right: Left half
Ranks, move forward into the right Flank; to your Leader. C. The three first, and the three last Ranks, double the six middlemost entire to the left Flank. Direction. The three first, and the three last, face to the left; march clear of the standing part; face in∣ward; move, and close your Divi∣sions; to your Leader. C. Right half Ranks, double your left Flank to the right. Direction. Face all to the left, and right half Ranks move forwards, and double your left Flank to the right; to your Leader. C. Double your Ranks to the right entire. C. Right half Ranks, double your left Flank inward entire. C. The three first, and the three last Ranks, double the six middlemost Ranks entire to the right Flank. C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank entire, advancing. C. Front half Files, double your Reer to the left entire. C. Half Files, double your Front to the right.
C. Double your Files to the left entire, advancing, every Man placing himself before his Leader. C. Front half Files, double your Reer to the right, following your Leaders. Direction. Half Files, face about; File-Leaders, turn off to the left, and move down upon the right of the Reer, the rest following successively; to your Leader. C. Files, double your Depth to the left entire; and they are reduced, being faced to their Leader. CHAP. XXIII. Twelve several Countermarches, with their Reducements. C. FIles to the right hand Counter∣march, losing ground. C. Ranks to the right hand Coun∣termarch, losing ground. Direction. Face all to the right. C. Front and Reer half Files, inter∣change ground.
Direction. Front half Files, face about to the left. C. Right and Left half Ranks, inter∣change ground. Direction. Face inward. C. File-Leaders, face about; the rest pass through to the right, and place your selves behind your Lea∣ders; face to the Front. C. Countermarch your Front and Reer into the midst. C. Countermarch your Flanks into the midst; face outward. C. File-Leaders, and Half File-Leaders, stand; the rest pass through to the right, and place your selves before your Leaders, and Half File-Leaders. Direction. The second Rank from the Front, and from the Half File-Leaders, are to begin the Motion. C. The outmost File upon the right, and the second File from the left, stand; the rest pass through to the right, and place your selves on the outside of your right hand Men. C. Files to the left hand Counter∣march, losing ground.
C. Front and Reer half Files, Coun∣termarch to the right. Direction. Front and Reer half Files, turn off distinctly by your selves on the ground you stand; face to your Leader. C. Right and Left half Ranks, Coun∣termarch to the right. Direction. Face to the right; and right and left half Ranks turn off di∣stinctly to the right; face to your Leader, and they are reduced. CHAP. XXIV. Twelve several Wheelings, with their Reducements. C. VVHeel your Reer half Files inward into the midst, and double the Front inward entire. Direction. Right and Left half Ranks, open from the midst to double Distance; Reer half Files, face about, and wheel your Reer inward into the midst, moving forward, doubling the Front inward entire.
C. Wheel off your Right half Ranks, and double your left Flank to the left entire. Direction. Face outward; Right half Ranks, wheel about to the right, and double your left Flank to the left; to your Leader. C. Right and Left half Ranks, dou∣ble the length of your Battel by wheeling outward into the Front. Direction. Face outward, and Right half Ranks wheel to the left, and Left half Ranks wheel to the right, and after, close Files into the midst to order. C. Wheel off your Right half Ranks, and double your left Flank by Division. Direction. Face outward; Right half Ranks, wheel about to the right and left outward, moving forward, and doubling the left Flank to the right and left outward. C. Wheel your Left half Ranks in∣ward into the right Flank. Direction. Face outward, and open from the midst to double Distance; the Front and Reer half Files, and after, the Left half Ranks may wheel
inward, and double the right Flank inward entire. C. Wheel off your Reer half Files, and double your Front to the left en∣tire; half Files, face about. C. Wheel your Right half Ranks into the midst, and double your left Flank inward entire. Direction. Face outward; and Front and Reer half Files that were, are to open from the midst to double Distance; and Right half Files wheel inward, and move forward into the left Flank. C. Wheel off your Reer half Files, and double your Front to the right entire; half Files, face about. C. Wheel off your Left half Ranks, and double your right Flank by Di∣vision. C. Wheel off your Front half Files, and double the Reer to the right en∣tire; half Files, face about. C. Double the depth of the Battel, by wheeling Front and Reer into the midst of each Division. Direction. Front half Files, move forward four paces; then the last Rank of each Division face about, and
wheel into the midst of Front and Reer of each Division; face to your Leader. C. Wheel off your Front half Files, and double your Reer to the left en∣tire; half Files, face about. C. Wheel your Battel off by Di∣vision from the Reer. Direction. Face all about; and Right half Ranks wheel about to the right and left outward to the Front, and closing Files into the midst to order, they will be reduced as at first. CHAP. XXV. Several Firings, with Figures of Battel for this days Exercise of 72 Men. This Fi∣ring is a Firing by Files.THE two outmost Files of Mus∣kettiers advance forward 'till clear of the standing part; then rank inward to order, Present, and give Fire all together; the next File march∣ing up in the Reer of the first, and so ranking inward as before, the rest suc∣cessively
doing the same. Observe the Figure. diagram of military formation or battle array Fig. 1. Having fired, they are to wheel off to the right and left, being led off by their respective File-Leaders, placing themselves next the Pikes, the rest of the Body moving to the right and left outward, to give room for them that have fired to place themselves. Command. Muskettiers, advance forward 'till you are six Foot clear of your stand of
Pikes; then face inward, and close your Divisions; to your Leader. Half Files of Pikes, double your Front by Division. The first Rank make ready, Pre∣sent, and give Fire, wheeling off to the right and left, placing your selves in the Reer of your own Divisions. Observe the Figure. diagram of military formation or battle array Fig. 2. Command. Reducement of the last Figure by way of firing, which is this: The first Rank is to fire, and wheel off by Di∣vision, placing themselves even with the first Rank of Pikes, the rest suc∣cessively doing the like 'till they have all fired over.
Note: That by this Figure they have all fired but the last Rank. diagram of military formation or battle array Fig. 3. You may Fire a second way upon this Figure, that is, either by two Ranks, the one kneeling, the other standing upright; or else by three Ranks, the one kneeling, the other stooping, the third standing upright. After they have all fired over, the Pikes may Charge, and then advan∣cing their Pikes, Command the Reer half Files of Pikes that doubled, to face to the right about; march, and take your places; to your Leader; which brings me to the next Firing, which is, Ranks advancing from the
diagram of military formation or battle array Fig. 4. Ranks ad∣vancing from the Front of a standing Battalia. Front, led up by two Serjeants, who are to fire either by single or double Ranks, wheeling off to the right and left, placing themselves in the Reer of their own Divisions, which will pro∣duce the next Figure of Ranks firing even with the Front. Command. The first Rank of Muskettiers ad∣vance with your right Feet, blow and open; advance with your left Feet, and to the Front Present, give Fire, wheeling all off to the right and left
by Division, placing your selves in the Reer of your own Divisions; the rest observing to do the like, always kee∣ping an even Front. diagram of military formation or battle array Fig. 5. Ranks fi∣ring even with the Front. You may if you please fire two or three Ranks together, and if press'd upon, the Pikes may Charge home, and Muskettiers may give Fire even with the half Files; if the Enemy give on so fast that they force a Re∣treat, then they are to Fire upon the ground they stand, wheeling off as before; but if the Enemy give ground, then you may proceed to give Fire upon the Horn Battel.
diagram of military formation or battle array Fig. 6. Ranks fi∣ring even with the Half Files. The way to perform the Horn Battel is as followeth. Command.The Horn Battel. Pikes, double your Ranks forward The Horn to the right, and open outward to Battel. Order; stand. Muskettiers, March, until the Brin∣gers up rank even with the Front.
diagram of military formation or battle array Fig. 7. There is several ways to Fire up this Figure; as, 1. By single Ranks: 2. By two Ranks: 3. By three, fal∣ling in the Reer of their own Divi∣sions: Or you may fire by Files ran∣king inward, or wheeling into the Front, being led off by their Bringers up on the inside of their own Divi∣sions. Note: If Files Rank inward into the Front, they may fall off to the right and left by Division. Command.A triple Firing to the Front. Front half Files of Muskettiers, double your Front of Pikes by Divi∣sion.
Pikes, advance forward, and range even a Breast with the Reer half Files of Muskettiers. Reer half Files of Muskettiers, to the right and left outward; march six paces; face all to your Leader. diagram of military formation or battle array Fig. 8. To fire upon this Figure, cause both the Muskettiers of the Front, and both Flanks, to Present and give Fire together; the Muskettiers of the Front Division are to wheel off to the right and left between their inter∣vals, and place themselves even in Rank
in the Reer of the Reer Divisions of Muskettiers: Then the Muskettiers that fired in the Flank march directly down to the right and left, and place themselves six foot below the last Rank of Pikes, always observing to leave a sufficient place for the Front Division to place themselves. A second way of Firing will be to fire all three Ranks together, the first kneeling, the second stooping, the third standing upright; then cause the Front Division of Muskettiers to face to the right and left outward, and march 'till they have given the Pikes sufficient room to march; then cause the Ranks of Pikes that doubled, to face to the left, and take their places; after, face to their Leader, march up, and even their Front; Reer Divisions of Muskettiers face to the right and left inward, and close your Divisions, so they are reduced as at first. Wheel your Flanks by Division into the Front.
diagram of military formation or battle array Fig. 9. The broad-fronted Battel. As for firing upon this Figure, cause the first Rank to fire, then to march down through the intervals to the right, and place themselves in the Reer of their own Divisions, the rest successively performing the same. For a second firing, they may fire, and fall off to the right or to the left (as before), and place themselves in the Reer of the Pikes. The Pikes here may Charge either at hand or foot, and the Muskettiers may also fire over their heads, if they Charge at foot; if at hand, the Muskettiers may face either to the right or left, and march up through the intervals, and
place themselves before each Division of Pikes, and so give fire, turning off to the contrary hand, placing them∣selves in the Reer of their own Di∣visions. To Reduce them, if it be upon the first firing, Command the Body to close their Divisions, and wheel their Flanks into the Reer; then face to their Leader. But if you fire a second time, and Muskettiers be in the Reer of the Pikes, Command them by Division to double their Front entire, and then wheel both Flanks into the Reer, as before. Command. Muskettiers, march, 'till clear of the Body of Pikes. Front half Files, face to the right and left inward, and close your Divi∣sions; to your Leader. Reer half Files, open to the right and left. Front half Files of Pikes, face to the right and left outward; march, and flank your Wings of Shot; to your Leader.
diagram of military formation or battle array Fig. 10. For to Fire upon this Figure, Com∣mand the first Rank of Muskettiers, both in Front and Flanks, to Present altogether, and give Fire, falling off to the right and left, placing them∣selves in the Reer of their own Di∣visions. Command. Half Ranks of the Reer Division of Pikes, wheel to the right and left out∣ward;
march up, and flank your Front of Muskettiers. diagram of military formation or battle array Fig. 11. You may Fire upon this Figure to Front and both Flanks, or to Reer and both Flanks, by commanding the Front Division, both of Muskettiers and Pikes, to face to the right about; march down, and even the Reer. But to reduce this Figure as now it stands, Command the two Divisions of Pikes in the Front to face to the right about; then wheel your Front into the midst, and march down and take your places; to your Leader.
Front half Files of Muskettiers, face to the right and left outwards, and march 'till you file even with your Reer half Files of Muskettiers, then stand; to your Leader. Front half Files of Pikes, face to the right and left inward, and close your Divisions; then move all up, and even the Front of Muskettiers: So they are reduced as at first. Command. Muskettiers, march all, until your half Files range even with the Front of Pikes. Front half Files, march forward three paces, then stand. Reer half Files of Muskettiers, face to the right and left outward, and march clear of the Front half Files. Reer half Files of Pikes, open to the right and left outward, and march clear of the Front Division of Pikes; to your Leader.
diagram of military formation or battle array Fig. 12. For the first Firing, let all the Divi∣sions of Muskettiers fire by Ranks as they stand, falling to the right and left outward into the Reer of their own Divisions. And for the second Firing, cause the four Divisions of Muskettiers in the Front and Flanks to make ready; then let the first Rank of each Divi∣sion Present, and give Fire, wheeling off to the right and left as you were, each Division flanking their own half Files of Pikes; then Reer half Files of Pikes face to the right and left inward, and march into your places; after,
close Files inward to order, and Ranks close forward to order, and they will be reduced as at first. So much shall suffice for the third days Exercise, and now we'll lodge our Colours, until the bellowing Drum give a forth Summons into the Field. CHAP. XXVI. The fourth Days Exercise. HAving the fourth time brought your Soldiers into the Field compleatly Armed, according to Bel∣lona's Summons, and every Man in his place of Dignity, the Captain may proceed in commanding the File-Lea∣ders (which is the first place of worth) to Exercise every one their File; which being performed, and every File-Leader having brought up his File into its proper place, the Officers being all there present, the Captain considers (after he hath shewed them their Distances and Facings) which way farther to delight them, being the last Exercise he shewed them was a
Doubling, which produced every Man a File-Leader by Dignity; so in this he may go farther, in shewing how by a Doubling every Man becomes a File-Leader by succession. The words of Command are as followeth. C. Ranks, to the left double. C. Files, to the left double. C. Half Files, double your Front to the left. C. Files, double your Depth to the left. C. Bringers up, double your Front to the right. C. Double your Files to the left entire, advancing. C. Bringers up, double your Front to the left. C. Double your Files to the right entire, advancing. C. Ranks, to the right double. C. Files, to the right double. For Reducement. C. Files, rank to the left into the Front. C. Ranks, File fix to the left; and they are reduced.
The Commander, if he please, (and have time) may proceed farther in variety of Doublings, either entire or divisional; but for this days Exer∣cise, it will be convenient that the Sol∣diers be shewed some variety of Dou∣blings by Countermarches, which altho' they are something difficult, yet they will afford much delight unto the Soldiers. CHAP. XXVII. Several Doublings by Countermar∣ches, with their Reducements. C. BRingers up, double your Front to the left. C. Double your Files to the left entire, advancing, every Man placing himself before his Leader. C. Front half Files, double your Reer to the right and left outward, following your Leaders. C. Double your Files outward en∣tire, advancing, every Man placing himself before his Leader.
C. Bringers up, double your Front to the right and left inward. C. Double your Files inward en∣tire, advancing, every Man placing himself before his Leader. C. Front half Files, double your Reer to the right and left inwards, following your Leaders. C. Files, double your Depth to the right and left outward, following your Bringers up. C. Double your Files to the right by Division, every Man placing him∣self before his Leader, and his Brin∣ger up. Direction. Half Files of the even Files from the right, face about; even Files advance forward, and double the odd; to your Leader. C. The three first, and the three last, double the six middlemost Ranks to the right and left inward, following your Leaders, and your Bringers up. Direction. The three first, and the three last Ranks, are they that double, and the File-Leaders, and Bringers up, begin the Motion; the rest following according to Command, always con∣forming to the same Posture of those
they are to double, and then face to their Leader. C. Double your Files to the left by Division, every Man placing him∣self before his Leader, and his Brin∣ger up. Direction. The six middle Ranks double your Front and Reer to the right and left outward, following the half File-Leaders, and the Bringers up of the Front half Files: The three last Ranks of the Front and Reer half Files face about; the middle Ranks are to begin this Motion, turning off to the right and left, every Rank fol∣lowing them until they have doubled the Front and Reer; then face all to the Front, and close their Divisions forward to open Order. C. Double your Files inward by Division, every Man placing himself before his Leader, and his Bringer up. Direction. Half Files of the out∣most Files face about, and move for∣ward, placing your selves before your Leaders, and your Bringers up; face to your Leader. C. The three first, and the three last Ranks, double the six middlemost
Ranks to the right and left outward, following your Leaders, and your Bringers up. Direction. The three first, and the three last Ranks, march away to the right and left, and double the six mid∣dlemost Ranks; to your Leader. C. Front half Files, double your Reer to the right, following your Leaders. C. Double your Files to the left entire, advancing, every Man placing himself before his Leader. C. Double your Ranks to the right entire, every Man placing himself on the outside of his right hand Man. C. Right half Ranks, double your left Flank, every Man placing him∣self on the inside of his left hand Man. C. Double your Ranks to the left entire, every Man placing himself on the outside of his left hand Man. C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank, every Man placing him∣self on the inside of his right hand Man. C. Double your Ranks to the right and left by Division, every Man pla∣cing
himself on the outside of his right and left hand Man. Direction. Every even Rank from the Front move forth to the right and left outward, and double the odd, pla∣cing your selves on the outside of your right and left hand Man. C. The outmost Files upon each Flank that moved, double the inmost Files to the right and left inward, every Man placing himself on the in∣side of his right and left hand Man. C. Right half Ranks, double your left Flank to the right, following your right hand Men. Direction. Right half Ranks face outward, and turn off to the left, and double the left Flank to the right; to your Leader. C. Double your Ranks to the right entire, every Man placing himself on the outside of his right hand Man. C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank to the left, following your left hand Men. C. Double your Ranks to the left entire, every Man placing himself on the outside of his left hand Man.
These or the like Doublings may be very proper to be used in Exercise sometimes to the younger Soldier, which will not only delight him, but cause him to understand the use of them, though perhaps many old Expe∣rienced Officers will condemn these sort of Doublings, and say, that they are needless as to our present Mode of Discipline: But because that Knowledge is no burden, and that at some time or other they may be not only useful, but serviceable, I have here inserted them to delight the young Soldier in his private Exer∣cises. Having reduced your Men as at first upon these Doublings by Coun∣termarches, in the next place it will be requisite to proceed to Firings, wherein shall be shewed several Fi∣gures of Battel, and the several ways of Firing upon each.
CHAP. XXVIII. Several Figures of Battel, with Firings upon the same, for this days Exercise of 72 Men. Command. FRont half Files of Muskettiers, and the two first Ranks of Pikes, march three Foot. The four last Ranks of Pikes wheel your Flanks into the Front by Di∣vision. Face to the right and left, and march even in the Reer of the Front Division of Muskettiers. Reer half Files of Muskettiers, face to the right and left, and march clear of the Division of Pikes; face to your Leader, and march up, and even the Flanks of Pikes.
diagram of military formation or battle array 1. For the first Firing, let the Front Division fire, and fall off to the Reer of themselves. 2. Command the Reer Divisions, both of Muskets and Pikes, to face to the right and left, and march 'till clear of their Front Divisions; then face to their Leader, and march up, and even the Front; and so Fire all four Divisions, falling off to the right and left in the Reer of their own Divi∣sions. 3. Command the three middle Di∣visions, both of Muskets and Pikes, to advance forward six paces; then fire, and wheel into the Reer of Pikes, the Pikes maintaining the Retreat 'till they fall even a Breast with the Reer Divisions of Pikes; which so soon as they are fallen into the Body, the Reer Divisions of Muskettiers are to
fire, and fall off as before, placing themselves in the Reer of their own Divisions, which will produce this following form. Note: That upon this Firing, the Front Divisions of Muskettiers are to place themselves in the Reer of the Reer Division of Pikes. diagram of military formation or battle array Reducement. The middle Division of Pikes ad∣vance six Foot. The two Divisions of Pikes that are upon the Flanks, face in opposition, and close your Divisions; then wheel your Flanks inward into the Reer, and face to your Leader.
Muskettiers, march up, and Flank your Pikes; and they are reduced as at first. Command. Reer half Files of Pikes and Mus∣kettiers, to the right about. Muskettiers, march all, until your Bringers up be even in Breast with the Front and Reer of Pikes; to your Leader. diagram of military formation or battle array For to Fire upon this Figure, 1. Cause the two Divisions, both in
Front and Reer, to make ready, and fire, falling off to the fight and left in the Reer of their own Divisions. 2. Command the Reer Divisions to face to the Front, and march up even a Breast with the Reer of Pikes; then let the Front Divisions Fire, and wheel off to the right and left, and place themselves in the Reer of the Reer Divisions of Shot; the Reer Divisions of Shot at the same time advancing into their Leaders ground, and so give Fire, falling off as before, which will reduce them. Next, if the Enemy appear in the Reer, cause the whole stand of Pikes to face to the Reer, and likewise all the Shot; then command the two Reer Divisions to fire, falling off to the right and left, placing themselves in the Front of the Front Division of Muskettiers, they at the same time marching down even with the Reer, and firing, and falling off as before; which done, reduceth them, being faced to their Leader.
Command. Reer half Files of Muskettiers, to the right about. The two outmost Files of both Front and Reer half Files, march, 'till clear of your own half Files; then stand; which produceth this following Figure. diagram of military formation or battle array
For the first Firing, let them Fire to Front and Reer, every Division falling off to the right and left, placing them∣selves in the Reer of their own Di∣visions. For the second Firing, command the two outmost Files of Pikes to face to the right and left, and march 'till they stand even a Breast with the in∣most Divisions of Muskettiers. Reer half Files of the two inmost Files of Pikes, face about; inmost Files of Pikes, wheel your Flanks into the Front and Reer, and march up, and even the four inmost Divisions of Muskettiers; face all to the right about, and they will stand as in the Figure following. Upon this Figure you may Fire to the Front or Reer alone, or to both, as in the other, or to the right or left Flank, or to both Flanks, or to all four at once, as occasion offers, every Divi∣sion falling off to the right and left, placing themselves in the Reer of their own Divisions. But if the Enemy give on upon the right Flank, you may face the whole Body to the right, and cause the Divi∣sions
upon the right to Fire, falling off to the right and left, falling in the Reer of the left Division, they at the same time advancing into the right Flank, who are to fie, and so to re∣turn into their places; you may do the same to the left Flank, or to Front and Reer, as occasion shall be given. Observe the Figure, which is to both Flanks at once. Note: The two outmost Divisions are to fire first, and to be relieved by the two outmost of the left; then the two inmost Divisions are to fire, and to be relieved by the two inmost Divisions of the left, who are to do the like, and so to return into their places. Note also, That in this Figure the half Files of the two outmost Files were doubled to the right and left in∣ward, before they faced, and begun their Motion.
diagram of military formation or battle array Reducement. Pikes, face to the right about; in∣most Files of Pikes, wheel your Flanks into the midst, and close forward to order. The two outmost Files of Pikes face to your Leader. Half Files of the two outmost Files of Pikes that doubled face to the Reer, and march forth, and take your places; the two outmost Files ad∣vance, and even the two inmost Files, and close Files into the midst to order.
The four inmost Divisions of Mus∣kettiers face to the right and left, and close your Divisions. The four outmost Divisions face in opposition, and close your Divisions; then face them to their Leader, and close Files into the midst to order; and Ranks close forward to order, and they will be reduced as at first. Command. Front half Files, advance forwards three paces. The middle Rank of each Division face outward, and move clear of the standing part; face to your Leader. diagram of military formation or battle array
The first Firing. Let the four first Divisions in the Front fire, and fall off to the right and left into the Reer; the rest at the same time moving up, firing, and inter∣changing Ground with them in the Reer, 'till they have all fired over, and are in their places. The second Firing. Let them face to both the Flanks. Divisions of Pikes in the midst open outward, until you be clear of the standing part; then Port. Muskettiers, give fire on the same ground you stand on; then let the Pikes Charge on until the Muskettiers have made ready again, and then re∣treat into their places: The Mus∣kettiers may give fire as before is men∣tioned, the Pikes still in like manner Charging on; then retreating into their places, face all to their Leader.
Command. Reer Divisions of Pikes, both in Front and Reer Divisions, face to the right about, and double your Depth to the right and left inward, advan∣cing three paces; to your Leader. Divisions of Pikes, both in Front and Reer Divisions, double your Front to the right and left inward, advancing three paces. Or thus, as in the third Figure. Command the inmost Divisions of Pikes to move to the left one pace, and double to the right Fileways, and face to the Front and Reer, and march three paces; middle Files of Front and Reer Divisions, open from the midst to double Distance; face to your Leader.
diagram of military formation or battle array The first Firing. Face to the Front and Reer, and then give fire, and fall in the Reer of themselves. The second Firing. Inmost Division move forwards, and rank outwards into Front and Reer, and then give fire all together,
and file as you were, the Pikes at the same time charging whilst they still make ready; then whilst they fire they may fall into their places, and so continue as often as the Comman∣der pleases. The third Firing. Command the Muskettiers, and the two outmost Divisions of Pikes, to face to both Flanks. The Front and Reer, and two mid∣dle Divisions of the inmost Division of Pikes, face to the right; the four other Divisions face to the left; march and even the two inmost Divisions of Shot to both Flanks; then give fire, falling off in the Reer of their own Divisions; then let the Pikes face in∣ward, and take their places as they were, and face to their Leader. This is so plain it needs no Figure. Command. The outmost Divisions of Mus∣kettiers in the Front Division face about.
The two outmost Divisions of Mus∣kettiers, both of Front and Reer Di∣visions, move forward, and close to Order; to your Leader, and close inward to open Order. diagram of military formation or battle array
diagram of military formation or battle array
For the first Firing upon the two foregoing Figures, let the Front Division of Muskettiers advance, and even the Front of Pikes; then give fire, and fall off to the right and left, placing themselves in the Reer of the Reer Division of Muskettiers; the rest of the Divisions at the same time moving up into their Leaders ground, and firing, falling off as before, 'till they are all reduced into their places as at first. A second Firing may be to both Flanks, or to Front and Reer at the same time. Command. Front and Reer Divisions of Pikes, move to the right one pace. The second Division of Pikes from the Reer, face to the right about. The second Divisions of Pikes, both in Front and Reer Divisions, move forward, and double both Front and Reer to the left; to your Leader. Middle Divisions of Muskettiers, open outward to twice double Di∣stance; face all to the Center, and march three paces; to your Leader.
diagram of military formation or battle array For the first Firing, the four last Divisions face to the Reer. The two outmost Divisions, both of Muskets and Pikes, face to both Flanks; likewise the four Divisions in the Front face to both Flanks; then give Fire, falling off to the right and left in the Reer of their own Divi∣sions.
For the second Firing, command the Front and Reer Divisions of Pikes to wheel their Flanks into the Front and Reer. The Reer Divisions, both of Mus∣kettiers and Pikes, face to the right about; then give fire to both Front and Reer, the Front Division falling off in the Reer of the second Divi∣sion, the second at the same time mo∣ving up into their Leaders ground, and so firing, falling off as before, the Reer at the same time doing the like; after, command the Pikes to wheel their Front and Reer into both Flanks, and face all to their Leader. For the third Firing, let them give fire by Extraduction, and fall in the Reer of the Pikes. For the fourth Firing, let the Pikes charge to the Horse, and the Musket∣tiers give fire all together over their heads; then move forth into their first places, and face to their Leader. Command. Front and Reer Divisions of Mus∣kettiers, open outward to double Di∣stance.
The outmost Divisions of Pikes close inward to open Order. The second Division of Pikes from the Front face about. The third Division of Pikes from the Front, and the second Division of Pikes from the Reer, move forwards to order; face to your Leader. Front and Reer Divisions stand, the rest face outward, and move two paces; to your Leader. diagram of military formation or battle array
For the Firings, let the first be to the Front, by commanding the two first Divisions in the Front to fire, falling off to the right and left into the Reer of the Reer Divisions, they at the same time moving up into their File-Leaders ground; after the second Di∣visions have fired, the two outmost are to fire, and are to be relieved by the two outmost in the Reer: This firing is to be continued 'till they have all fired over, and are returned into their places. For the second Firing, let them fire on the ground they stand, both to Front and Reer, every Division falling off in the Reer of themselves. For the third Firing, face the Mus∣kettiers and Pikes to both Flanks; then cause them to give fire unto both Flanks as they stand, falling in the Reer of their own Divisions, the Pikes at the same time charging; which being ended, face them to their Leader, and proceed. Command. The two Divisions of Pikes in the Front, wheel your left Flanks into
the midst of the Battel; face to your Leader. The two Divisions of Pikes in the Reer wheel your right Flanks into the midst, and face to your Reer; then let the Front and Reer Division of Pikes move three paces, then face to their Leader. Middle Divisions of Pikes face out∣ward, and move three paces; then face to Front and Reer; then move forward, until you range even a Breast with the midst of the Front and Reer Divisions of Pikes; to your Leader. diagram of military formation or battle array
Command. Middle Division of Pikes next the Reer, face to the right about. Middle Divisions of Pikes move for∣ward six paces; to your Leader. Divisions of Muskettiers face to the right and left, and move three paces; to your Leader. diagram of military formation or battle array For the first Firing, command the Muskettiers to face to Front and Reer,
and so give fire and fall in between the Pikes, the Pikes at the same time ma∣king room for the Muskettiers to fall in betwixt them, the Pikes all the while charging, 'till the Muskettiers have made ready again. For the second Firing, let them face to both the Flanks, and give fire, falling into their places in the Reer of their own Divisions; after, face to their Leader. By these Firings already set down, any ingenious Commander may alter and form many others, which may be more pleasing, and more advantagious, than can be expressed in Writing, by reason of several Accidents which may fall out at the time of forming any Figure of Battel; so that I shall leave every one to his own best Expe∣rience and Practice, and so proceed to reduce the former Figure into its pro∣per Square. Reducement. Command the outmost Divisions of Muskettiers upon the Flanks to face to Front and Reer, and move forward,
and place your selves in the midst of your own Divisions. The outmost Divisions of Pikes face to the right and left inward, and close your Divisions. Muskettiers and Pikes advance for∣wards, and even your Front of Pikes, and close Ranks forward to order; and Files into the midst to order, and they will be reduced as at first. And now it will be high time to lodge our Colours, and repose our selves, until by the Beat of the Drum we shall be commanded into the Field. And so much for the fourth days Ex∣ercise. CHAP. XXIX. The fifth Days Exercise. HAving the fifth time brought your Soldiers unto the place of Rendezvouz, and all Officers at their respective Commands, it will not be amiss to cause the Soldiers to be instru∣cted (in the first place) in the Postures of the Pike and Musket, which will
cause the Soldiers, by often practice of their Postures, to grow so perfect, that they will not only manage their Arms with ease and safety, but with a great deal of celerity; when on the contrary, the unpractised Soldier will not only be a trouble to himself, but a danger to his Fellows, and an encou∣ragement to his Enemies. After the Postures, the next thing that they are to be instructed in, is the several Distances, and these are truly the ground of all Motion, for without Distance the Motions cannot be exe∣cuted: So that this, as well as the former, should truly be observed in all Exercises, therefore we will proceed as followeth. The Company standing in their Close Order, both in Ranks and Files, then first, Command. Ranks, open backward to Order. Files, open to the right to your open Order. Ranks, open backward to open Order.
Files, open to the left to open Order. Ranks, open backward to double Distance. Files, open outward to double Di∣stance. Ranks, close forward to open Order. Files, close inward to open Order. Ranks, close forward to your Order. Files, close to the left to your Order. These Commands being sufficient to declare each several Distance, we will gradually proceed to the rest of the Command intended for this days Ex∣ercise. Command.Note: The same Command may be gi∣ven to the left. Face to the Right Right Right Right Right about Left about As you were.
Command. Face to the Front & Reer Face to the Right & left outward Face to the Right & left inward As you were. Ranks and Files being at open Order, Command. Ranks, to the right double. Files, to the left double. Ranks, to the left double. Files, to the right double. Half Files, double your Front to the right. Files, double your Depth to the left. Half Files, double your Front to the left. Files, double your Depth to the right. Bringers up, double your Front to the left. Files, double your Depth to the right, every Man placing himself be∣hind his Bringer up.
Bringers up, double your Front to the right. Files, double your Depth to the left, every Man falling behind his Bringer up. Double your Ranks to the right or left entire. Right half Ranks, double your left or right Flank. Half Files, double your Front to the left entire. Left half Ranks, double entire the depth of the right half Ranks. Half Files, double your Front to the right entire. Right half Ranks, double entire the depth of the left half Ranks. Files, to the right hand Counter∣march, and maintain ground. Files, to the left hand Counter∣march, and maintain ground. The same may be done in Ranks and Files, either maintaining, gaining, or losing Ground, as hath been shewed. Wheel your Battel to the Right. Left. Right about. Left about. Files, file to the right.
Files, file six to the left. Files, file to the left. Files, file six to the right. Ranks, file to the right and left. Files, rank as you were. CHAP. XXX. Several Figures of Battel, with Firings upon the same: For per∣formance whereof, Command. FIles, to the right and left double inward. The three first Ranks wheel your Front into the midst. The three last Ranks wheel your Reer into the midst. The rest of the Body face to the right and left, then march all; face all to the right about, and march, and close your Divisions. Note: You may by doubling Files to the right in each Division, make the Cross Battel.
diagram of military formation or battle array For the first Firing, let them give fire either to Front or Reer, or to both Flanks, falling in the Reer of their own Divisions. For the second Firing, let them fire to all four at once, falling off to the right and left, placing themselves in the Reer of their own Division of Pikes, the Pikes at the same time charging to the Horse. For the third Firing, they may fire by way of Introduction, thus: Every Rank of Muskettiers is to pass through their Division of Pikes, placing them∣selves
before the Pikes; then stand, present, and give fire, the next moving up as before, which will reduce them. Note, That this last Firing must be performed with the last Rank first, and so the next to the last, so that the first Rank must be last in this Fi∣ring. Command. The first Rank of Muskettiers, both in Front, Reer, and both Flanks, face to the right, and move two paces. The next Rank of Muskettiers of each Division face to the left, and move likewise two paces; then wheel to the right and left outwards Oblique before each Division of Pikes, as in the following Figure.
diagram of military formation or battle array For firing upon this Figure, the Muskettiers being faced all outwards, are to stand, and present, and fire all together in one Volley; or if you would have the Muskettiers give fire one after another, then the Vollies by succession (which is commonly called The Peal) will be best beginning at the right hand of the Front, and so taking it round from one another 'till
they have fired over, the rest in the interim making ready again. Reducement. 1. Cause all the Ranks of Musket∣tiers to face to the right and left in∣ward, and take their places, the left hand Ranks being the first beginners of the Motion. 2. Command the Front and Reer Divisions to wheel Front and Reer in∣wards into both Flanks, and face to their Leader. 3. Divisions on the right and left Flank face inwards, and close your Divisions; after, cause Ranks to dou∣ble to the right and left outward; Files closing inwards to order, and and Ranks closing forward to order, and they will be reduced as at first. Command. Half Files of Pikes face to the Reer, and march, until you are clear of the last Rank of Muskettiers. Half Files of Muskettiers face out∣wards, and wheel your Reer to the
right and left by Division, and march between the Division of Pikes. Left half Ranks of the first Division of Muskettiers face to the Reer, and march between the Reer Divisions of Pikes; then even your Ranks, and streighten your Files, and close your Divisions to an equal distance, and face all to the right about, they will stand as in the Figure. diagram of military formation or battle array Note: That all the Muskettiers must be in the midst, and the Pikes on the Flanks, when you begin to make this Figure; if your Muskets be on the Flanks when you make it, then the Cross will be Pikes, and the Angles Muskets, and your Command must be
contrary; as now you Command Half Files of Pikes, in this you must Com∣mand Half Files of Muskettiers to face to the Reer, as aforesaid. The manner of Firing upon the aforesaid Figure may easily be appre∣hended; every Division is to fire by Ranks, wheeling all off to the right, placing themselves in the Reer of their own Division. For the second Firing, if your Reer be secure, you may reserve the Front half Files entire, and so fire either to Front alone, or to Front and both Flanks, or to each at pleasure. For a third Firing, if your Musket∣tiers be in the Angles, (which will be very advantagious) you may then give fire which way soever the Enemy ap∣proaches, each Division being ready to assist the other. Command.Reduce∣ment of the Plinthium into the So∣lid Square flanked with Pikes. Reer Division of Muskettiers face about; march up on the left of your own Division of Muskettiers in Front, the Pikes being first opened to give them place.
Divisions of Muskettiers upon each Flank face inwards, and close your Divisions by wheeling into the midst; face to your Leader. Reer Divisions of Pikes face about; march up, and place your selves right after your Leaders. Reer Division, or Reer half Files, of Muskettiers, face to the Reer. Muskettiers, march all, 'till clear of your Pikes; then face to your Leader, and close your Divisions, which pro∣duceth this Figure. diagram of military formation or battle array
For the first Firing, let them fire to the Front, every Rank of the Front Division after they have fired, to fall off to the right and left into the Reer of the Reer Division of Muskettiers; the rest advancing into their Leaders ground, and so firing and falling off as before, the Reer Division at the same time moving up into the Front, and fire, falling off into their places. For the second Firing, if your Reer be secure, Command the Reer Divi∣sion of Muskettiers to open to the right and left, and sleeve upon the outside of the Pikes into the Front; then presenting and firing at the same in∣stant with those Muskettiers of the Front Division, each part wheeling off, and placing themselves in the Reer of their own Divisions, the rest mo∣ving forwards into their Leaders ground; or the two outmost Divi∣sions may fall off to the right and left into the Reer: You may likewise fire to both Front and Reer at discretion, or to both Flanks, as the discreet Com∣mander shall think fit. But the firing to both Flanks at this present time shall be a Reducement,
by commanding the Muskettiers, both in Front and Reer, to face outwards; Pikes, face inwards; march, and close your Divisions; which being perfor∣med, they will be reduced to their proper Square flanked with Musket∣tiers, as at first. Command. Half Ranks of the left, double your right Flank. diagram of military formation or battle array Front Proper. Front of the Reer. Front of the right Flank. Front of the left Flank.
You may fire upon this Figure to Front and Reer, by commanding the two last Ranks of the Division of Mus∣kettiers upon the right Flank, to wheel to the right and left into Front and Reer. For a second Firing, let them fire as now they stand, either to the right or left Flank, or to both at once, as occasion shall serve, falling of in the Reer of their own Divisions. Reducement. Command Half Ranks that dou∣bled to face to the left; march, and take your places; to your Leader. Command. Half Files of Muskettiers, face to the Reer; Muskettiers, march to the Angles of your Pikes. The two first, and two last Ranks of Pikes, stand, and double Files to the right. The rest face to the right and left, and march, 'till clear of the other Pikes.
Note: If you Command the two last Ranks of the Front and Reer Divi∣sion of Pikes to wheel to the right, the other to the left, the Cross will be equal in Pikes. diagram of military formation or battle array Reducement. After the two last Ranks have wheeled into their places, and the Front and Reer Divisions have doubled to the left, they will stand as in the following Figure.
diagram of military formation or battle array Note: These two foregoing Fi∣gures are both as one, only the two first and two last Ranks are not dou∣bled to the right, according to the word of Command. For Firing upon these two fore∣going Figures, you may produce seve∣ral, with some little alteration, either to Front or Reer alone, or to either Flank, or to both Front and Reer at the same time, by commanding the one half, both of Muskets and Pikes, to face to the right about, and so give fire; these of the right Flank to wheel off to the right, the left Flank to the left, in the Reer of their own
Divisions; the rest moving up into their Leaders ground. Reducement. Face them all after their proper File-Leaders; then cause the Pikes to face in opposition, and close their Di∣visions. Muskettiers of the Front Division, face to the right about. Muskettiers, both of Front and Reer, close your Divisions; face all to your Leader. Command. The two outmost Files of Musket∣tiers march forth, being led by four Officers, two of which are to return into their places; the Serjeants that led forth the outmost Files, are to stand to see them do their Execution; the two inmost Files face inwards Ob∣lique, cross the Front of Pikes; the outmost Files face outwards in an Ob∣lique manner; then to your Leader. Observe the Figure.
diagram of military formation or battle array For to fire upon this Figure, let the Muskettiers present all together, as now they stand, and give fire; and then suddenly facing after their Brin∣gers up, march down into their places; then next two Files of each Flank in the interim moving forwards into their Leaders ground, and so fire, and fall off as before, which reduceth them.
Command. Muskettiers, march, until your half Files range even with the Front of Pikes; then stand. Half Files (of each Arms) face out∣ward, and march until you are clear of the Angles of your Arms; then stand; face all to your Leader. diagram of military formation or battle array This Figure fit to fire to the Front and both Flanks; if to the Front, and that you would preserve your Figure, then the Muskettiers must move for∣wards into their Leaders ground.
If you please, you may move for∣wards your Reer Division of Musket∣tiers, and make Wings of them, when having fired once or twice over, may retreat into their places; the Pikes in the mean time are to Advance, Move forwards, Port, Charge, Stand, or Retreat. If you would give fire to both Flanks, and to the Front, at one and the same time, then the Front Divi∣sions, both Muskettiers and Pikes, are to stand, and fire to the Front, falling off to the right and left in the Reer of their own Divisions, the rest mo∣ving up into their Leaders ground; the Reer Divisions, as well Muskets as Pikes, face to the right and left, and fire to both Flanks, falling off as be∣fore, the rest moving up into their Leaders ground. Reducement. Command the Reer half Files, both of Muskets and Pikes, to face inwards, and close their Divisions. Pikes, march up, and even your Front of Muskettiers; face to your Leader, and they will be reduced.
Command. Files, to the right double; then wheel your Flanks into the Reer; then face the Body to one of the Flanks, and wheel your Battel into a Convex Half Moon. diagram of military formation or battle array For to fire upon this Figure as now they stand, let the Pikes Charge over-hand, and the Muskettiers give fire as they stand, presenting all to the Front.
For a second Firing, if the Enemy press upon either of the Flanks or Reer, you may cause the whole Body to face outwards, and then let the Muskettiers give fire, falling off to the right and left through their intervals, placing themselves in the Reer of their Pikes, the Pikes at the same time charging over-hand. Command. Wheel your Flanks to the right and left into an even Front, then face to your Leader; which being perfor∣med, they will stand three deep in File; then Command Files to file to the right into a Ring, being led away by some Officer, until the File-Leader of the right Flank falling just in the Reer of the Bringer up of the left Flank; then face them all to the Center, and let them close forwards to order; then face them to the right about, as in the following Figure.
diagram of military formation or battle array For to fire upon this Figure, com∣mand the Pikes to charge round, and the Muskettiers give fire all together; then let the Commander go to the place where the File-Leader of the right Flank filed first away, and com∣mand them to file as they were; which being performed, they will stand three deep, the Pikes being all in
Front, and thereupon become the File-Leaders. Next, command the Reer to wheel into both Flanks, and Ranks to double to the left, and they will be reduced. Command. Wheel your Front into the midst: By this Command the Pikes will be all in the Reer, and the Muskettiers in Front, and they will stand six deep. Then command Files to file to the right into a Ring, by causing the File-Leader of the right Flank to march away, the rest filing after him 'till they make one entire File, and close in a Ring. Observe the Figure fol∣lowing.
diagram of military formation or battle array Fire upon this Figure, if you please, as now they stand, the Pikes at the same time porting: This may be con∣tinued so long as you think fit, round. For a second Firing, you may cause every Division of Muskettiers to give fire, then fall down even with their Front of Pikes, and so fire again, the Pikes at the same time charging over-hand
to the Horse; or they may fall behind the Pikes, and then give fire over their shoulders. Reducement. Command File-Leaders to lead up their Files as they were, and then to wheel their Reer into the midst, and face to their Leader, and they will be reduced as at first. Command. Muskettiers of the left Flank, and the whole, stand off; Pikes, face to the right and left inwards, and inter∣change ground, which being done, the Muskettiers will be all upon the right Flank; then cause each Division, both Pikes and Muskets, to file to the right, the Pikes within the Muskets at the same time making two Rings, as in the following Figure.
diagram of military formation or battle array For to fire upon this Figure, com∣mand both Muskets and Pikes to face to the right about; then let the Mus∣kettiers all present as they stand, (the Pikes at the same time charging) and give fire; then let them make ready a second time, and give fire, falling off between the intervals of their Pikes, placing themselves behind their Pikes; the Pikes falling to their close Order, by putting the But end of the Pike at the inside of the right Foot, the Pike in the left hand, drawing their Swords over their left Arms. Then the
Muskettiers (the Pikemen stooping) may give fire over their heads as often as the Commander pleases; after, they may pass through again into their places: After which, the Ensign, in sign of Triumph, may Display his Co∣lours in the midst of the Circle; which being performed, command the File-Leaders to lead up their Files as they were; then let the Pikes and Muskets interchange ground, and they will be reduced as at first. And herewith we will conclude this days Exercise, and leave our Sol∣diers to their Rests, until the morrow's Sun, and the thundering Drum shall call us into the Field again. CHAP. XXXI. The sixth Days Exercise. HAving the sixth time brought your Soldiers into the Field, according to the accustomed manner; and being (doubtless) well expe∣rienced by their former Exercises, in the well managing and handling of
their Arms, and likewise in all other Commands, as Distances, Facings, Doublings, Countermarches, and Whee∣lings, which will not only encourage the Commander, but much delight him, to see that they are not unmind∣ful of his Commands; and likewise will cause him to study some new Commands farther to delight them with; so after he hath seen them per∣form all, or most of his former Com∣mands, such as he shall think fit, he may proceed to these or the like Dou∣blings; as, 1. To make them all File-Leaders by Succession: 2. By Dig∣nity; with such words of Command as they have not yet had in any of their former Exercises. Command.Note: That these Commands make every Man File-Leader by Succession. Ranks, to the left double. Files, to the left double. 2d Man. Half Files, double your Front to the right. Files, to the right double. 3d Man. File-Leaders, stand; the rest pass through to the right, and place your selves before your Leaders. 4th Man.
Ranks, to the left double. 5th Man. Files, double your Depth to the left. Ranks Files to the right double. 6th Man. File-Leaders, stand; the rest pass through, and place your selves before your Leaders. 1st Man. Command.These Commands make every Man File-Leader by Dignity. Bringers up, double your Front to the right. Files, double your Depth to the right. 2d Man. File-Leaders, and Half File-Leaders, stand; the rest pass through to the left, and place your selves before your Leaders. 3d Man. Front and Reer half Files, inter∣change ground. 4th Man. Ranks to the right double. 5th Man. Files to the right double. 5th Man. File-Leaders, stand; the rest pass through to the left, and place your selves before your Leaders. 6th Man. Ranks to the left double. 1st Man. Files to the left double. 1st Man. Half Files, double your Front to the right.
Bringers up, face about to the right, and march forth into your places. After you have ended these Dou∣blings, you may proceed farther with these or the like sort, for the inge∣nious Commander may find out variety still to delight the Soldier; but for this days Exercise, we will proceed with these ensuing Commands. Command. Reer half Files, double your Front by Division. The six outmost Files upon each Flank, double entire, advancing the twelve middle Files. Front half Files, double your Reer inward entire. The twelve inmost Files double the depth of the six outmost Files, and after, close. Front half Files, double your Reer to the right entire. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank entire, advancing. Half Files, double your Front to the right.
Double your Files to the right entire, advancing. Half Files, double your Front in∣ward entire. The six outmost Files upon each Flank, double entire the depth of the twelve middle Files; to your Leader. CHAP. XXXII. Entire Doublings to the right Flank. C. FIles, to the right double. R. Ranks, to the left double. C. Files, to the right and left, dou∣ble outward. R. Ranks, to the right and left, double inward. C. Double your Files to the right, advancing. Direction. Every even File from the right move forwards, and by three steps double the odd. R. Ranks, to the right double. C. Double your Files outward, ad∣vancing.
Direction. Even Files from the Flanks move forward, and double the odd. R. Ranks, to the right and left, double outward. C. Double your Files to the right and left inward, advancing. Direction. Even Files from the midst move forward, and by three steps double the odd. R. Ranks, to the right and left, double inward. C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank to the right. R. Double your Ranks to the left entire. C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank to the right and left out∣ward. R. Front and Reer half Files, dou∣ble your Ranks entire to the left Flank. Direction. Even Ranks from the midst march forth, and double Ranks entire towards the left Flank; to your Leader. C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank to the right and left in∣ward.
R. Front and Reer half Files, dou∣ble your Ranks entire to the left Flank. Direction. Half Files, face about; even Ranks from the Front and Reer march forth, and double your Ranks entire to the left Flank; face to your Leader. C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank to the right by Counter∣march. Direction. Right half Ranks, face to the right; Left half Ranks, turn off to the left; march, and double your right Flank; to your Leader. R. Double your Ranks to the left entire, every Man placing himself on the outside of his left hand Man. C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank to the right and left out∣ward by Countermarch. Direction. Right half Ranks, face to the right; Left half Ranks, face to the left, and turn off to the right and left outward; march, and double your right Flank; to your Leader. R. Front and Reer half Files, dou∣ble your Ranks entire to the left Flank, every Man placing himself on
the outside of his right and left hand Man. Direction. Front half Files, face about; and every even Rank from the midst march, and double the odd, pla∣cing your selves according to Com∣mand; and every even Rank of the Reer half Files march forth to the left Flank, and double the odd according to Command; to your Leader. C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank to the right and left in∣ward by Countermarch. Direction. Face all to the right and left outward; Left half Ranks, turn off to the right and left inwards; march, and double the right Flank; to your Leader. R. Front and Reer half Files, dou∣ble your Ranks entire to the left Flank, every Man placing himself on the outside of his right and left hand Man. Direction. Half Files, face about; then even Ranks, both from the Front and Reer, march forth to the left Flank, and double the odd according to Command; to your Leader. C. Double your Files to the right entire, advancing.
R. Half Files, double your Front to the right. C. Files, double your Depth to the right entire. R. Half Files, double your Front to the left. C. Double your Files inward en∣tire to the right. Direction. Half Files of every even File from the left, face about; even Files from the left, march, until you are clear of the standing part; after, face all to the right, and then even Files from the right march, and double entire the odd; face to your Leader. R. The three first, and the three last Ranks, double the six middlemost Ranks to the right. Direction. The three first Ranks face about, and move down to the midst by their own left hands; and the three last Ranks move forward to the midst, to their own right hands; to your Leader. C. Double your Files to the right entire, advancing, every Man placing himself before his Leader.
R. Front half Files by Counter∣march, double your Reer to the right; to your Leader. C. Files, double your Depth to the right, every Man falling behind his Bringer up. R. Bringers up, double your Front to the left. C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank entire, advancing. R. Front half Files, double your Reer to the right entire; face to your Leader. C. Left half Ranks, double entire the depth of the right Flank. R. Half Files, double your Front to the left entire; face to your Leader. C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank inward entire. R. The three first, and the three last Ranks, double the six middlemost Ranks entire to the right Flank; face to your Leader.
CHAP. XXXIII. Divisional Doublings to the right Flank. C. DOuble your Files to the right by Division. Direction. Half Files of the even Files from the right, face to the Reer; even Files, march clear of the standing part; after, move to the right and left, and double the odd Files; to your Leader. R. The three first, and the three last Ranks, double the six middlemost Ranks to the left. Direction. The three first Ranks face about; march down by your own right hands into the midst of Ranks; the three last Ranks move forward to the midst to your own left hands; to your Leader. C. Double your Files to the right by Division, every Man placing him∣self before his Leader, and his Brin∣ger up.
Direction. Half Files of the even Files from the right, face to the Reer; the even Files march, and double the odd according to Command; to your Leader. R. The three first, and the three last Ranks, double the six middlemost Ranks to the left, every Man placing himself before his Leader, and his Bringer up. Direction. The three first Ranks face about to the left; move down to the midst of Ranks by your own right hands, placing your selves before your Bringers up; and the three last Ranks march forward into the midst, pla∣cing your selves before your Leaders; to your Leader. C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank by Division. Direction. Half Files of the left half Ranks face about to the right; the left half Ranks move clear of the standing part; face all to the right Flank, and march, until they have ranged even a Breast with the right Flank; face to your Leader.
R. The three first, and the three last Ranks, double the six middlemost Ranks entire to the left Flank. Direction. The three first, and the three last Ranks, face to the left Flank, and move clear of the standing part; after, face inward; march, and close your Divisions; to your Leader. CHAP. XXXIV. Entire Doublings to the right Flank by Wheelings. C. VVHeel off your left half Ranks, and double your right Flank entire to the right. Direction. Face outward; left half Ranks, wheel about to the left; march, until you have doubled the right Flank entire to the right; face to your Leader. R. Wheel off your Reer half Files, and double your Front to the left en∣tire. Direction. Half Files, face to the Reer, and wheel about to the right;
march forward, until you range even a Breast with the Front. C. Wheel off your Left half Ranks, and double your right Flank entire to the left. Direction. Left half Ranks, face outward; wheel about to the right; march, until you have doubled the right Flank entire to the left; face to your Leader. R. Wheel off your Front half Files, and double your Reer to the right entire. Direction. Half Files, face about; Front half Files, wheel about to the left; march, and double your Reer to the right; face to your Leader. C. Wheel the Left half Ranks in∣ward into the midst, and double your right Flank inward entire. Direction. Half Files of the right half Ranks, face about; Right half Ranks, march clear of the standing part, then face to the right, and Left half Ranks face to the left, and wheel inward into the midst; then march, 'till you have doubled the right Flank inward entire; face to your Leader.
R. Wheel off the six middlemost Ranks, and double your Front and Reer entire to the left Flank. Direction. The six middle Ranks face to the right, and wheel about to the right and left; march, until you are clear of the standing part; then face to the Front and Reer, and march, doubling the Front and Reer towards the left Flank; face to your Leader, and close your Divisions. CHAP. XXXV. Divisional Doublings to the right Flank by Wheelings. C. VVHeel off your Left half Ranks, and double your right Flank by Division. Direction. Face outward; and Left half Ranks wheel off to the right and left about, and march, until you have doubled the right Flank; to your Leader. R. Wheel off the three first, and the three last Ranks, and double the six middlemost Ranks entire to the left Flank.
Direction. The three last Ranks face about, and wheel to the right about; march up towards the midst of the left Flank, the three first Ranks at the same time wheeling about to the left, moving down to the midst of the left Flank; to your Leader. C. Wheel off your Front and Reer half Files into the right Flank by Di∣vision. Direction. Face all to the right, and wheel off to the right and left, until the Bringer up of the right hand File meet with the right hand File-Leader. R. Wheel Front and Reer into the left Flank; face to your Leader.Note: Ʋpon this Command they must be all faced to their proper Front be∣fore the Motion. Thus I take leave of all Doublings, leaving the ingenious to make use of so many as may fit the opportunity, both of Time and Season, and so pro∣ceed to Firings and Figures of Battel: The Ranks being even'd, and the Files streighten'd, the Captain commands, the Drum beats, and the Muskettiers make ready for Skirmish, upon these Figures following.
CHAP. XXXVI. Figures of Battel, with Firings upon the same, for this sixth days Exercise. Command. FIles, to the right and left, double inward. The three first Ranks wheel your Front into the midst. The three last Ranks wheel your Reer into the midst. The rest of the Body face to the right and left, and march all three paces; and after, double Files to the right in each Division, and they will stand as in this following Figure.
diagram of military formation or battle array The Cross Battel. For the first Firing, let them give fire as now they stand, falling in the Reer of their own Divisions all to the right: Thus they may fire twice. For a second Firing, command the first Rank of each Division to fire, and fall off to the right Fileways, and Flank their own Division of Pikes to the right; the next Rank of each Di∣vision present, and give fire, falling off
to the left File ways, being led off by their left hand Man, and so flank their own Division of Pikes to the left; and as the first falls off to the right, and the second to the left; so the third falls off to the right, and the fourth to the left, until they have flanked each their own Division of Pikes to the right and left, which will produce this following Figure. You must note, That after the two first Ranks have fired, and flanked their own Division of Pikes to the right and left, they must open to the right and left outwards, to give room for the next two Ranks to sleeve down betwixt them and their own Division of Pikes. diagram of military formation or battle array
You may fire upon this Figure seve∣ral ways; as, 1. To Front and Reer, falling in the Reer of their own Divi∣sions. 2. To both Flanks, still falling off as before, in the Reer of their own Divisions. 3. You may cause them to fire to both Front and Reer, and both Flanks, falling off to the right and left by Division, placing themselves in the Reer of their own Division, still moving forwards into their Leaders ground, still preserving the Figure in the same order. Reducement. Muskettiers of each Division face inwards; and Files rank to the right and left into the Front of each Divi∣sion, and take your places as you were; the inmost File of the left hand of each Division is to begin the Motion; then the inmost right hand File is to follow, and to rank as before; then the left hand File of each Division; and lastly, the right hand File, until they have all ranked as they were. 2. Command Ranks to the left dou∣ble in each Division.
3. Command the Front and Reer Divisions to wheel their Front and Reer inwards into both Flanks, and face to their Leader; after, cause the right and left Flank to face in opposi∣tion, and march, and close all their Divisions; then cause Ranks to dou∣ble to the right and left outward, Files closing inward to order, and Ranks closing forward to order, and they are reduced as at first. Command. Files, to the right double; Pikes, to the right and left outward; Mus∣kettiers, to the right and left inward; march, and interchange ground; to your Leader. The three first Ranks wheel your Front into the midst. The three last Ranks wheel your Reer into the midst. The rest of the Body face to the right and left; then march all three paces; and after, double Files to the right in each Division, and they will stand as in the Cross Battel, the Pikes being in the head of each Division of Muskettiers.
Next, command the Pikes of each Division to wheel to the right, and move into the space between the An∣gles of the Muskettiers, which produ∣ceth this following Figure. diagram of military formation or battle array For the first Firing, cause the first Rank in each Division to give fire, fal∣ling off all to the right, placing them∣selves in the Reer of their own Divi∣sion, the rest at the same time moving up to their Leaders ground, still pre∣serving the Figure.
For a second Firing, command the two first Ranks of each Division of Muskettiers to march forwards six paces; then stand. Command. Pikes, face to the right and left out∣ward, and wheel inwards, and flank your Muskettiers, which will produce this following Figure.Note: Ʋpon this Firing, you must cause the Mus∣kettiers in the midst to close to the Front, Reer, and Flanks. diagram of military formation or battle array
For this Firing, let them fire as now they stand, by Ranks falling off to the right, placing themselves in the Reer of the Reer Divisions, they at the same time moving up into their Leaders ground, and so preserve the Figure: This may be done twice or thrice at the discretion of the Commander. You may face them to the Front, and only fire them to that part by Di∣visions, every Division relieving each other, 'till they have fired all over; then let them return into their pla∣ces. For a third Firing, they are to rank even with the Pikes. For a fourth Firing, cause the Pikes to move a little forward, and the Mus∣kettiers to lose ground; after, let the Pikes face inward, and close Files to order, and wheel to the left into the Front of each Division; which being performed, they will stand as before in the Cross Battel. If you will pro∣ceed to reduce them into the first form,
Command.Reduce∣ment to the last Fi∣gure. Ranks, to the left double in each Division. Front and Reer Divisions, wheel your Front and Reer inwards into both Flanks, and face to your Leader. The right and left Flank face in op∣position; march, and close your Divi∣sions; then cause Ranks to double to the left; after, command Muskettiers to face to the right and left outward; Pikes, to the right and left inward; march, and interchange ground; then face all to your Leader, and close Files into the midst to order, and Ranks close forward to order, and they will be reduced as at first. Command. Reer Division of Muskettiers, (or Reer half Files) face to the right about. Front and Reer half Files of Mus∣kettiers, wheel off by Division your Front and Reer into both Flanks, and march 'till you are clear of your stand of Pikes; then stand.
The two first Ranks of Muskettiers, both of Front and Reer Division, face outwards, and march until your are clear of the other Muskettiers; then stand. The two first, and the two last Ranks of Pikes, face to the right and left outwards, and march 'till clear of the Muskettiers; then face to Front and Reer, and move 'till you range even a Breast with the inmost Divi∣sions of Muskettiers; then face all to their Leader, and they will stand as in the following Figure. diagram of military formation or battle array Upon this Figure, let the first Divi∣sions of Muskettiers give fire, and fall off to the right and left in the Reer of
themselves; then face to the right about, and move down, and inter∣change ground with them in the Reer, they at the same time moving up into the Front, and so fire, falling off as before in their places, the in∣most Divisions performing the like Motion. You may fire to the Reer after the same way, or to Front and Reer, fal∣ling in the Reer of their own Divi∣sions; the Pikes may Charge on, and after, retreating back again into their places. Command. The middle Division of Pikes face to the right and left, and march three paces. The two outmost Files of the mid∣dle Division of Pikes (or the two out∣most Men) move clear of the standing part; then let the two first Ranks face about, the two first, and two last Ranks, move forward to order; face all to your Leader.
diagram of military formation or battle array For the first Firing, let the Front Divisions fire, and fall in the Reer of themselves; then wheel off to the right and left in the room of them in the Reer, they at the same time mo∣ving forward into their places, firing, and falling off in like manner; next, let the inmost Divisions of Muskettiers do the same, who may be relieved by the inmost Divisions of Muskettiers in the Reer. For the second Firing, let them all face to the Reer, and give fire, as they did to the Front. For the third Firing, let them face to Front and Reer, and give fire, and fall in the Reer of themselves; then
let the Pikes charge on to Front and Reer, and after, retreat back into their places. For the fourth Firing, let the four inmost Divisions of Muskettiers face to the right and left outwards; the two inmost Divisions of Pikes upon both Flanks face inwards, march, and inter∣change ground, and so give fire to both Flanks, falling off to the right and left in the Reer of their own Di∣visions; after, they that were the in∣most Divisions may fire, and fall off into their places, the Pikes at the same time moving up into their places, still preserving the Figure. Command. Inmost Divisions of Muskettiers, move forward, until you be two Foot clear of the standing part; then let them face all inward, and move three paces; after, face them to their Lea∣der, which will produce this following Figure.
diagram of military formation or battle array For the first Firing, let them fire to the Front, by Ranks falling off to the right and left, placing themselves in the Reer of their own Divisions. For the second Firing, let them give fire, falling off to the right and left, and march, and interchange ground with them in the Reer, they at the same time moving up into their Lea∣ders ground, and so firing, falling off as before into their places. The same may be done to the Reer, or to both Front and Reer, still preserving the
Figure, and falling into the Reer of themselves. For the third Firing, let it be to both Flanks, by facing the whole Body to the right and left outward; then let every Division give fire, and fall in the Reer of themselves; after, face all to your Leader. Command. Front and Reer Divisions of Mus∣kettiers, face to the left, and move two paces, and double to the right File∣ways. The two middle Divisions of Pikes face outward, and move two paces; to your Leader. The Reer Division of the Front Divisions of Muskettiers, face to the right about. Front and Reer Divisions of Mus∣kettiers, move streight forwards, until you range even a Breast with the Front and Reer Division of Pikes; face to your Leader, and they will stand as in the following Figure.
diagram of military formation or battle array Upon this Figure, having faced both Pikes and Muskets to Front and Reer, let the first Divisions give fire, and fall in the Reer of themselves, and stand; let the rest move forward, until they be clear of the Front Divi∣sions of Muskettiers; then let them fire, and fall in the Reer of themselves; and after, face about, and move down into their places again: Then let the Pikes open outward, and Charge all
to Front and Reer; after, retreat back again into their places. diagram of military formation or battle array Command.Note: Ʋpon this Command, the Body must be fa∣ced to Front and Reer, before you give the word of Command. Front and Reer Divisions of Musket∣tiers, face to the right, and move three paces. Middle Divisions of Muskettiers, advance right forwards, and double your Front and Reer to the left Rank∣ways; after, face all to the right and left, and march three paces; or to
such convenient distance, that if the Commander pleases, he may cause his Colours to be displayed. Observe the foregoing Figure. As for firing upon the aforesaid Figure, it will be the same as in pag. 223. so that if you look back to that Figure, there you will be instru∣cted in the several ways of Firing, which to repeat again here were needless; therefore we will proceed to reduce them into their proper Square as at first. Reducement. Pikes, to the right and left in∣ward; march, and close your Divi∣sions; to your Leader. Front Divisions of Muskettiers, face to the right about; Front and Reer Divisions of Muskettiers, march to the Angles of your Pikes; after, face in opposition, and close your Divisions; to your Leader.Note: That if you wheel them before they close, it will be the bet∣ter; then let them march, and even their Pikes. Outmost Divisions of Muskettiers, face to the right and left inwards, and close your Divisions; after, let your Muskettiers wheel their Front and
Reer (by Division) into the midst, and march, and even their Front of Pikes; then let them close Files in∣ward to order, and Ranks close for∣ward to order, and they will be redu∣ced as at first. Command. Files, open outward to open Or∣der. Ranks, open backward to your open Order. Then let every two Files close out∣ward to order; and Ranks close to Front and Reer to order; after, let every Division wheel to the right, and they will stand in twelve Divisions. diagram of military formation or battle array
Command. The two inmost Divisions of Mus∣kettiers in the Reer, face to the right about. Inmost Divisions of Muskettiers in Front and Reer, move forward clear of the standing part; then stand. Pikes, face to the right and left out∣ward. Muskettiers upon the Flanks, face to the right and left inward; the rest face about to the right; march all two peaces; to your Leader. diagram of military formation or battle array For the first Firing, command Front Divisions of Muskettiers to give fire, and fall in the Reer of your selves;
after, fall off to the right and left, and march down into the Reer, they at the same time moving up into their ground, firing, and falling off in like manner as before; then let the Flank Divisions of Muskettiers observe the same order in relieving each other; after, let the Pikes charge on, and re∣treat again into their places. Note: The Pikes are to Charge to Front and Reer, and after, to Retreat into their places.For the second Firing, let them face to Front and Reer; when faced, let the first Divisions give fire, and fall in the Reer of themselves; then imme∣diately let the outmost Divisions move up even a Breast with the Front and Reer Divisions; then let them give Fire, and fall off in the Reer of them∣selves into their places. A Firing to both Flanks at one and the same time.For the third Firing, let them face to both Flanks; then let the outmost Divisions of Muskettiers give fire, and fall off to the right and left, placing themselves in the Reer of the Pikes, the Pikes at the same time moving out∣wards, maintaining the ground the Muskettiers first fired on, by charging with their Pikes over hand; then let the Front and Reer Divisions that stand faced to the Flanks give fire, and
fall off in the Reer of their own Divi∣sions, still preserving their ground; having fired all over, command the Pikes and Muskettiers to interchange ground, and face all to their Leader. Command. The four last Divisions next to the Reer, both of Pikes and Muskettiers, face about; move down, and range even a Breast with the Reer; Reer Divisions of Muskettiers that are faced to the Front, move forward, and place your selves three Foot short of the next Divisions that stand before you; to your Leader.Note: The Pikes should be closed more to the right and left in∣ward, and not so great an interval as is in the Figure diagram of military formation or battle array For to fire upon this Figure, let the Front Divisions give fire, and fall in
the Reer of themselves; then let them fall off to the right and left, placing themselves in the Reer, the middle Divisions at the same time mo∣ving up, possessing themselves of the ground the Divisions last fired on, and then let them give fire, and fall in the Reer of themselves; after, let the outmost Divisions in the Front move up, give fire, and fall off to the right and left, placing themselves in the Reer of the Reer Divisions, they at the same time moving up into their ground, and so firing, and falling into the Reer of themselves, and so stand. For the second Firing, let them face all to the right about, and perform the same to the Reer as they did to the Front, and it will reduce them, both to their first Aspect and Place; you may fire them to either Flank, or to both, as you please; but being all faced to their proper Front, as in the last Figure,
Command. Divisions of Pikes move forward, until your Reer Divisions range even a Breast with the outmost Divisions of Muskettiers; Reer Divisions of Mus∣kettiers face inward, and move streight in the Reer of the Reer Divisions of Pikes; face all to your Leader. diagram of military formation or battle array For the first Firing, let it be to the Reer and both Flanks, by comman∣ding the two last Divisions of Musket∣tiers to face to the right about, the
rest to face to the right and left out∣ward; then let them give fire on the ground they stand, and fall in the Reer of themselves, until they have all fired over, and taken their places as at first. For the second Firing, let the four first Divisions of Muskettiers, and the two first Divisions of Pikes, face to the Front; then let them give fire to Front and Reer, and fall in the Reer of themselves; then face all to the Front, and so proceed to farther Com∣mand. Command. The Front and Reer Divisions move outward two paces; Reer Division of Pikes upon the left, face about; Reer Division of Pikes, move three Foot before the Front and Reer Divisions that moved outward; close inward to your first ground; then face all to your Leader.
diagram of military formation or battle array Command. The two inmost Divisions of Mus∣kettiers in the Reer move forward, until they range even a Breast with the outmost Divisions of Muskettiers, then stand.
Reer Division of Pikes, march for∣ward three Foot short of your own Divisions which stand before you, and they will stand as in this follow∣ing Figure. diagram of military formation or battle array Then let the four Divisions of Mus∣kettiers upon the right move away, and let the Divisions of Pikes fall in the Reer of them, and the four Divisions of Muskettiers on the left to fall in the Reer of the Pikes; then standing streight in their Divisions, both Rankways and Fileways, and they will stand as followeth.
diagram of military formation or battle array As for firing upon the foregoing Figures, it may be according to the Officers discretion in point of advan∣tage, either in Ground, Wind, or what other advantage may be then
found necessary; but in plain Exer∣cise, the Figures themselves do suffi∣ciently demonstrate. Reducement. Command every Division to wheel to the right, and stand. Command. Reer Divisions of Pikes, face to the left, and move, until you file streight with your own Files of Pikes; then stand. Front Divisions of Pikes, face to the right about; march down, and take your places; to your Leader. Right and Left Division of Pikes, face in opposition, and close your Di∣visions; face all to your Leader. 2. Command the right hand Divi∣sion of Muskettiers in the Front, and the left hand Division of Muskettiers in the Reer, to march up, and even their Front of Muskettiers. 3. Command the left hand Divi∣sion of Muskettiers in the Front to face to the right, and the right hand Divi∣sion
of Muskettiers in the Reer to face to the left, then march, and take their places; to your Leader. Lastly, Command Reer Divisions of Muskettiers to march, and take their places; then left them even their Ranks, and streighten their Files, and they will stand in three Grand Divi∣sions, ready to march; or if you please, to draw them up into a Square as at first. Command the Pikes, and the Reer Division of Muskettiers, to face to the left, and march 'till they be clear of the first Division of Shot, then face to your Leader; march up, and even your Front to the left; which being performed, they will stand as at first: So that upon the Reduction of the last Figure, you may either march them away as they stand, in three Grand Divisions; or draw them up into the Square as at first, and march them after. FINIS.
ERRATA. PAge 26. Line 22. read and priming. l. 23. for and the Pike, read and the like. p. 32. l. 10. for Commands, read Commanders.
