D66B 99899349 153166
AN ANTIDOTE Against MELANCHOLY Made up in PILLS. Compounded of Witty Ballads, Jovial Songs, and Merry Catches. Hellicon Aristippus ondon, Printed for John Playford at his Shop in the Temple. 1669
To the Reader. THere's no Purge 'gainst Melancholy, But with Bacchus to be jolly; ll else are but Dregs of Folly. aracelsus wanted skill, hen he sought to cure that Ill; o Pectorals like the Poets Quill. ere are Pills of every sort, or the Country, City, Court, ompounded and made up of sport. 'gainst Sleep, and Fumes impure, hou, thy Senses would'st secure, ake this, Coffee's not half so sure. ant'st thou Stomach to thy Meat, nd would'st fain restore the heat? his does it, more than Chocolet. ures the Spleen, Revives the Blood, uts thee in a merry Mood, ho can deny such Physick good. othing like to Harmless Mirth, is a Cordial on earth, hat gives Society a Birth. hen be wise, and buy, not borrow, eep an Ounce still for to Morrow, etter than a pound of Sorrow.
The Stationer to the Reader. HAving formerly published this Book of Merry Ballads and Songs, in fewer sheets, yet under this Title, the Impression (not being large)▪ was soon bought up: And since finding it much enquir'd for, I was willing (for two Reasons) to give it a Second Birth, which I hope (by my large Addition, and a more perfect Coppy) will ap∣pear to the World much fairer. First some Cove∣tous persons, who endevouring to immitate that former Book, did publish things of that nature, and out of it stole here and there a Ballad and  Song, and also out of my late Printed Musick Book of Songs, and Catches, hopeing thereby the rest of their Rediculous stuff might vend the better But sure I am they have Printed most of my Song false, and some but in part and pieces. My second reason was to answer the desire of several Friends and most to vindicate my former Book, and  make it now more complete; by endeavouring  to publish true Coppies, and those that were Inge∣nious both for Wit and Fancy: And though som object these are Old, to such who love New Win there is enough abroad, but the Old agrees bes with the Palet, and stomach of those who under sand the difference.
The Table of the Ballads, Poems, Songs and Catches in this Book. THe Ex-ale-tation or Praise of Ale. Pag. 1. The Ballad of Arthur of Bradley. Pag. 9. The Ballad call'd the Gelding of the Divel. Pag. 12. The Ballad of the Green Gown. Pag. 15. The Ballad of Sir Egle-Moore. Pag. 17. The Ballad call'd Blew Cap for me. Pag. 19. The Ballad in praise of the Caps. Pag. 20. The Ballad of the Nose. Pag. 23. The Ballad of the Blacksmith. Pag. 25. The Ballad of the Brewer. Pag. 28. The Ballad call'd the Wedding, by Sir John Sucklyn. Pag. 31. The Ballad of Saint George for England. Pag. 35. The Ballad call'd the Bulls Feather. Pag. 37. The Ballad call'd Old England turn'd New. Pag. 39. The Ballad call'd a view of London Sights. Pag. 41. The Ballad Call'd News and no News. Pag. 43. The Ballad of the Old Courtier and the New. Pag. 45. The Ballad call'd the New Souldier. Pag. 47. The Ballad in Praise of the Beard. Pag. 49. The Ballad in Praise of a Red Nose. Pag. 51. The Ballad of the Maying at Rumford. Pag. 53. The Ballad call'd the Man in the Moon. Pag. 55. The Ballad call'd Colins Adventure. Pag. 57. The Ballad of the Good Wife and the Bad. Pag. 58. The Ballad call'd the Faries Farwel by Dr. Corbet. Pag. 60.
The Ballad of the Pig, by Dr. Corbet. Pag. 62. The Ballad call'd the Tunbridge Doctor. Pag. 65. The Ballad of the German Doctor. Pag. 68. The Ballad call'd the Angler. Pag. 71. The Ballad on two Amorous Swains. Pag. 73. The Ballad call'd the Jovial Bear-ward. Pag. 75. The Ballad of the Famous Signe at Skoal in Norfolk. Pag. 77. The Ballad of Old Simon the King. Pag. 81. The Ballad of the Maid and the Fryer. Pag. 83. The Ballad call'd the Politick Drinker. Pag. 8. The Ballad call'd the Reformed Drinker. Pag. 87. The Ballad of a Courtier and a Country Clown. Pag. 89. The Ballad call'd Cresada's Lamentation. Pag. 9. The Ballad call'd the Medly of Wooers. Pag. 9. The Ballad or the Welshmans praise of Wales. Pag. 94. The Ballad of Cooklorrel by Ben. Johnson. Pag. 9. The Ballad of Tom a Bedlam. Pag. 99. A Letany. Pag. 101. On the Downfal of the Mitre-Tavern in Cambridge. Pag. 10. On the Excellent vertue of Sack By Dr. Edwards. Pag. 10. On the Combate of Cocks by Mr. Tho Randolph. Pag. 10. On a Fart in the Parliament house by S. J. Sucklin. Pag. 111. The Amorous Welshmans Letter to his Mistress. Pag. 11. On the Choice of a Wife. Pag. 11. On the decay of good Hospitalitie. Pag. 11. Captain Squiers Letany. Pag. 12. A York-shire Trialogue in York-shire Dialect. Pag. 12. The Tobacco takers Song. Pag. 12. The Merry Coblers Song. Pag. 12. The Needy-mans Song. Pag. 12. The Pedlers Song. Pag. 12. The Cut-purse Song. Pag. 13. The Hay-makers Song. Pag. 13. The Scholars Song. Pag. 13.
e Beggers Song, Pag. 133. e Tavern-Song. Pag. 134. Song call'd the Healths. Pag. 135. Glee to Bacchus, by Ben. Johnson. Pag. 136. other Glee to Bacchus. Pag. 137. a Pint of Sack, By Mr. Tho. Randolph. Pag. 138. Praise of Wine, By the Lord Broghill. Pag. 139. Glee in Praise of Sack. Pag. 140. saken Philits Lamentation. Pag. 141. a Cold Chyne of Beef. Pag. 142. a Rosted Chyne of Beef. Pag. 143. uncel to Batchellors. Pag. 144. vice to a friend upon his Marriage. Pag. 145. e married mans Diet. Pag. 146. lias Complaint. Pag. 147. e Mad Lover. Pag. 148. Old Knight to a Young Lady. Pag. 149. ins and his Love. Pag. 150. Coy Lady to a Young Courtier. Pag. 151. e Bashful Lover. Pag. 152. eedom in Love. Pag. 153. vice to Cloris. Pag. 154. uncel to a Maid. Pag. 155. e Doubtful Lover Resolv'd. Pag. 156. berty in Love. Pag. 158. Clown to his Mistress. Pag. 159. a Wife. Pag. 159. Tobacco. Pag. 160. on a Welshman. Pag. 160. e Tinkers Song. Pag. 161. e last part of this Book contains 49 merry Catches which begin Folio Pag. 162.
In the Praise or Ex-Ale-tation of ALE. Not drunken, nor sober, but neighbour to both, I met with a Friend in Ales-bury Vale; saw by my Face, that I was in case To speak no great harm of a Pot of good ALE. en did he me greet, and said, since we meet, (And he put me in mind of the name of the Dale) Ales-bury's sake some pains I would take, And not bury the praise of a Pot of good ALE. e more to procure me, then he did adjure me f the Ale I drank last were nappy and stale, do it its right, and stir up my sprite, And fall to commend a pot, &c. oth I, to commend it I dare not begin, est therein my credit might happen to fail; many men now do count it a sin ut once to look toward a pot, &c. I care not a pin, for I see no such sin, or any thing else my courage to quail: this we do find, that take it in kind, uch vertue there is in a pot, &c. I Mean not to tast, though thereby much grac'd, or the Merry-go-down without pull or hale, ming the throat, when the stomach's afloat ith the Fragrant sweet sent of a pot, &c. yet the delight that comes to the Sight o see how it flowers and mantles in grail, een as a Leeke, with a smile in the cheek, e true Orient colour of a pot, &c.
But I mean the Mind, and the good it doth find; Not onely the Body so feeble and frail; For, Body and Soul may bless the black bowle, Since both are beholden to a Pot, &c. For, when heaviness the mind doth oppress, And sorrow and grief the heart do assail, No remedy quicker then to take off your Liquor, And to wash away cares with a Pot, &c. The widow that buried her Husband of late, Will soon have forgotten to weep and to wail; And think every day twain, till she marry again, If she reads the contents of a pot, &c. It is like a belly-blast to a cold heart, And warms and engenders the spirits vital; To keep them from domage, all sp'rits owe their homage To the Sp'rit of the buttery, a pot, &c. And down to the legs the virtue doth go, And to a bad Foot-man is as good as a sail; When it fills the Veins, and makes light the Brains; No Lackey so nimble as a pot, &c, The naked complains not for want of a Coat, Nor on the cold weather will once turn his tail; All the way as he goes, he cuts the wind with his nose, If he be but well wrapt in a pot, &c. The hungry man takes no thought for his meat, Though his stomach would brook a ten-peny nail; He quite forgets hunger, thinks on it no longer, If he touch but the sparks of a pot, &c. The Poor man will praise it, so hath he good cause, That all the year eats neither Partridge nor Quail, But sets up his rest, and makes up his Feast With a crust of brown-bread, and a pot, &c. The Shepherd, the Sower, the Thresher, the Mower, The one with his Scythe, the other with his Flail; Take them out by the poll, on the peril of my soll, All will hold up their hands to a pot, &c.
The Black-Smith, whose bellows all Summer do blow, With the fire in his Face still, without e're a vail; Though his throat be full dry, he will tell you no lye, But where you may be sure of a pot, &c. Who ever denies it, the Pris'ners will praise it, That beg at Grate, and lye in the Goale: For, even in their Fetters, they think themselves better, May they get but a two-penny black pot of Ale. The Begger, whose portion is alwayes his prayers, Not having a tatter to hang on his tail, Is as rich in his rags, as the Churle in his bags, If he once but shakes hands with a pot, &c. It drives his poverty clean out of mind, Forgetting his brown-bread, his wallet and mail; He walks in the house like a six-footed Louse, If he once be inricht with a pot, &c. And he that doth dig in the ditches all day, And wearies himself quite at the plow-tail, Will speak no less things then of Queens and Kings, If he touch but the top of a pot, &c. Tis like a Whetstone to a blunt wit, And makes a supply where Nature doth fail: The dullest wit soon will look quite through the Moon, If his temples be wet with a pot, &c. Then DICK to his dearling, full boldly dares speak, Though, before (silly fellow) his courage did quail, e gives her the smouch, with his hand on his pouch, If he meet by the way with a pot, &c, nd it makes the Carter a Courtier straight-way, VVith Rhetorical termes he will tell his tale; VVith Courtesies great store, and his Cap up before, Being school'd but a little with a pot, &c. he Old man, whose tongue wags faster than his teeth, (For old-age by Nature doth drivel and drale) Will frig and will fling, like a Dog in a string, If he warm his cold blood with a pot, &c.
And the good Old Clerk, whose sight waxeth dark, And ever he thinks the Print is too small, He will see every Letter, and say Service better, If he glaze but his eyes with a Pot, &c. The Cheeks and the Jaws to commend it have cause; For where they were late but even wan and pale, They will get them a colour, no Crimson is fuller, By the true die and tincture of a pot, &c. Mark her Enemies, though they think themselves wise, How meager they look, with how low a wail, How their cheeks do fall, without sp'rits at all, That alien their minds from a pot, &c. And now that the grains do work in my brains, Me thinks I were able to give by retail Commodities store, a dozen and more, That flow to Mankind from a pot, &c. The MUSES would muse any should it misuse; For it makes them to sing like a Nightingale, With a lofty trim note, having washed their throat With the Caballine Spring of a pot, &c. And the Musician of any condition, It will make hime reach to the top of his Scale: It will clear his Pipes, and moisten his lights, If he drink alternatim a pot, &c. The Poet Divine, that cannot reach Wine, Because that his mony doth many times fail, VVill hit on the vein to make a good strain, If he be but inspir'd with a pot, &c. For ballads ELDERTON never had Peer, How went his wit in them, with how merry a Gale; And with all the Sails up, had been at the Cup, And washed his beard with a pot, &c. And the power of it showes, no whit less in Prose, It will file one's Phrase, and set forth his Tale: Fill him but a Bowl, it will make his tongue troul, For flowing speech flows from a pot, &c.
And master Philosopher, if he drink his part, Will not trifle his time in the husk or the shale, But go to the kernel by the depth of his Art, To be found in the bottom of a pot, &c. Give a Scholar of OXFORD a pot of Sixteen, And put him to prove that an Ape hath no tail, And sixteen times better his wit will be seen, If you fetch him from Botley a pot, &c. Thus it helps Speech and Wit: and it hurts not a whit, But rather doth further the Virtues Morale; Then think it not much, if a little I touch The good moral part of a pot, &c. To the Church and Religion it is a good Friend, Or else our Fore-Fathers their wisedome did fail, That at every mile, next to the Church stile, Set a Consecrate-house to a pot, &c. But now, as they say, Beer bears it away; The more is the pity, if right might prevail: For with the same beer, came up Heresie here, The old Catholick drink is a pot, &c. The Churches much owe, as we all do know; For when they be drooping and ready to fall, y a Whitson or Church-ale, up again they shall go, And owe their repairing to a pot, &c. ruth will do it right, it brings Truth to light, And many bad matters it helps to reveal: or, they that will drink, will speak what they think: TOM tell-troth lies hid in a pot, &c. is Justices Friend, she will it commend, For all is here served by measure and tale: ow, true-tale, and good measure are Justices treasure And much to the praise of a pot, &c. nd next I alledge, it is Fortitudes edge For a very Cow-head, that shrinks like a Snail, ill swear and will swagger, and out goes his Dagger, If he be but arm'd with a pot, &c.
Yea, ALE hath her Knights and Squires of Degree, That never wore Corslet, nor yet shirt of Maile, But have fought their fights all 'twixt the pot and the wall VVhen once they were ub'd with a pot, &c. And sure it will make a man suddenly wise, E're-while was scarce able to tell a right tail: It will open his jaw, he will tell you the Law, As made a right Bencher of a pot, &c. Or he that will make a bargain to gain, In buying or setting his goods forth to sale, Must not plod in the mire, but sit by the fire, And seal up his Match with a pot, &c. But for Soberness needs must I confess, The matter goes hard; and few do prevail Not to go too deep, but temper to keep, Such is the Attractive of a pot, &c. But here's an amends, which will make all Freinds, And ever doth tend to the best avail; If you take it too deep it will make you to sleep; So comes no great harm of a pot, &c. If (reeling) they happen to fall to the ground, The fall is not great, they may hold by the Rail: If into the water, they cannot be drown'd, For that gift is given to a pot, &c. If drinking about they chance to fall out, Fear not that Alarm, though flesh be but frail, It will prove but some blows, or at most a bloody Nose, And Friends again straight with a pot, &c. And Physick will favour ALE as it is bound, And be against Beer both tooth and nail; They send up and down all over the town To get for their Patients a pot, &c. Their Ale-berries, Cawdles and Possets each one, And Sallabubs made at the Milking-pale, Although they be many, Beer comes not in any, But all are composed with a pot, &c.
And in very deed, the Hop's but a Weed, Brought o're against Law, and here set to sale: Would the Law were renew'd, and no more Beer brew'd, But all men betake them to a pot, &c. The Law that will take it under his wing, For, at every Law-day, or Moot of the hale, One is sworn to serve our Soveraign the KING, In the ancient office of a CONNER of ALE. There's never a Lord of Mannor or of a Town, By strand or by land, by hill or by dale, But thinks it a Franchise, and a Flow'r or the CROWN To hold the Assize of a pot, &c. And though there lie Writs, from the Courts Paramount To stay the proceedings of the Courts Paravaile; Law favours it so, you may come, you may go, Their lyes no Prohibition to a pot, &c. They talk much of State both early and late, But if Gascoign and Spain their Wine should not fail, No remedy then, with us English-Men, But the State it must stand by a pot, &c. And they that sit by it are good men and quiet, No dangerous Plotters in the Common-weal Of Treason and Murther: For they never go further Than to call for, and pay for a pot, &c. To the praise of GAMBRIVIUS that good Brittich King That devis'd for his Native (by the Welshmen's tale) Seventeen hundred years before CHRIST did spring, The happy invension of a pot, &c. The North they will praise it, and praise it with passion, VVhere every River gives name to a Dale: There men are yet living that are of th' old fashion, No Nectar they know but a pot, &c. The PICTS and the SCOTS for ALE were at lots, So high was the skill, and so kept under Seal, The PICTS were undone, slain each mothers son, For not teaching the SCOTS to make Hether Eale.
But hither or thither, it skills not much whether, For Drink must be had, men live not by Keal, Not by Havor-bannocks, nor by Havor-jannocks, The thing the SCOTS live on is a pot, &c. Now, if you will say it, I will not denay it, That many a man it brings to his bail: Yet what fairer end can one wish to his Friend, Than to dye by the part of a pot, &c. Yet let not the innocent bear any blame, It is their own doings to break or'e the pale: And neither the Malt, nor the good wife in fault, If any be potted with a pot, &c. They tell whom it kills, but say not a word How many a man liveth both sound and hale, Though he drink no beer any day in the year, By the Radical humour of a pot, &c. But to speak of Killing, that am I not willing; For that in a manner were but to rail: But beer hath its name, cause it brings to the Biere, Therefore well-fare say I to a pot, &c. Too many (I wis) with their deaths proved this, And therefore (if ancient Records do not fail) He that first brew'd the Hop was rewarded with a Rope, And found his beer far more bitter than ALE. O ALE ab alendo, the Liquor of LIFE, That I had but a mouth as big as a Whale! For mine is too little to touch the least tittle, That belongs to the praise of a pot, &c. Thus (I trow) some Virtues I have mark'd you out, And never a Vice in all this long trail, But that after the pot there cometh a Shot, And that's th' onely blot of a pot, &c. VVith that my Friend said, that blot will I bear, You have done very well, it is time to strike sail, VVee'l have six pots more, though I dye on the score, To make all this good of a pot of good ALE.
The Ballad Of Arthur of Bradley. SEE you not Peirce the Piper, His cheeks as big as a Miter, Piping among the Swains That danc't on yonder plains; Where Tib and Tom do tread it, And Youths their Horn-pipes lead it; With every Man his carriage To go to yonder Marriage, Not one would stay behind But go with Arthur a Bradley. Oh fine Arthur of Bradley, Oh fine Arthur of Bradley, Oh fine Arthur of Bradley, Oh, &c. Arthur had got him a Lass, A bonnier never was; The Chief youths of the Parish Came dancing of the Morris, With Country Lasses trounsing, And lusty Lads bounsing; Dancing with Musick pride And every one his Wench by his side, They all were fine and gay For the Honour of Arthur of Bradley, Oh fine Ar∣thur of Bradley, Oh, &c. But when that Arthur was Married, And his Bride home had carryed; The Youngsters they did wait To help to carry up meat: Francis Carried the Furmety, Mihil carryed the Mince-Pye, Bartholomew the Beef and the Mustard, And Christopher carryed the Custard: They every one went in this Ray For the Honour of Arthur of Bradley, Oh fine Arthur of Bradley, Oh, &c.
But when that Dinner was ended, The Maidens they were befriended; For outstept Dick the Draper, And he bid pipe up scraper; Better be dancing a little, Then into the Town to tipple; He bid play him a Horn-pipe That goes fine on the Bag-pipe: Then forward Piper and play, For the Honour of Arthur of Bradley, Oh fine, &c. Then Richard he did lead it, And Margery she did tread it; Francis followed then, And after courteous Jane. Thus every one after another As if they had been sister and brother, That't was a great joy to see How well they did agree: And then they all did say, Hay for Arthur of Bradley, Oh fine Arthur of▪ Bradley, Oh, &c. When all the Swains did see This Mirth and merry Glee, There was never a man did smutch her, But every man kist his Wench. But Giles was greedy of gain, And he would needs kiss twain; Her Lover seeing that Did rap him one the Pate, That he had not a word to say For the Honour of Arthur of Bdley, Oh, fine Arthur of Bradley, Oh, &c. The Piper look'd aside, And there he 'spide the Bride; He thought it was a hard chance That none would lead her a dance: For never a man dirst touch her, But onely Will the Butcher;
e took her by the hand And danc'd whilst he could stand: he Bride was fine and gay, For the honhur of Arthur of bradley, Oh fine Arthur of Bradley, Oh, &c. Then out stept will the VVeaver, And he swore he'd not leave her; He hopt it all of a Leg, For the honour of his Peg; ut Kester in Cambrick Ruffe, He took that in snuffe; For he against that day Had made himself fine and gay, His Ruff was whipt over with blew, He cried a new dance, a new: Then forward Piper and play, For the honour of Arthur of Bradley, Oh fine, &c. Then 'gan the Sun decline, And every one thought it time To go unto his home, And leave the Bridegroom alone: To't to't, quoth lusty Ned, VVee'l see them both in bed; For I will jeopard a joynt But I will get his codpiece point: Then strike up Piper and play, For the honour of Arthur of bradley, Oh fine, &c. And thus the day was spent, And no man homeward went, That there was such crowding and thrusting That some were in danger of bursting, To see them go to bed: For all the Skill they had, He was got to his Bride, And laid him close by her side: They got his Points and Garters, And cut them in pieces like quarters; And then they bid the Piper play For the honour of Arthur of bradley, Oh fine &c.
Then will. and his Sweet-heart Did call for Loth to Depart, And then they did foot it and toss it Till the Cook had brought up the posset, The Bride pye was brought forth, A thing of mickle worth; And so all at the bed side Took leave of Arthur and his Bride, And so they went all away From the wedding of Arthur of Bradley, Oh, &c. A Ballad of the Gelding of the Devil. NOw listen a while and I will you tell Of the Gelding of the Devil of Hell; And Dick the Baker of Mansfield Town, To Manchester market he was bound, And under a Grove of Willows clear, This Baker rid on with a merty chear: Beneath the Willows there was a Hill, And there he met the Devil of Hell. Baker, quoth the Devil, tell me that, How came thy Horse so fair and fat? In troth, quoth the Baker, and by my fay, Because his stones were cut away. For he that will have a Gelding free, Both fair and lusty he must be: Oh! quoth the Devil, and saist thou so, Thou shalt geld me before thou do'st go. Go tie thy Horse unto a tree, And with thy knife come and geld me. The Baker had a knife of Iron and Steel, With which he gelded the Devil of Hell. It was sharp pointed For the nonce Fit for to cut any manner of stons.: The Baker being lighted from his Horse, Cut the Devils stones from his Arse.
h! quoth the Devil beshrow thy heart, Thou dost not feel how I do sinart; r gelding of me thou art not quit, For I mean to geld thee this same day sevennight. he Baker hearing the words he said, Within his heart was sore afraid, e hied him to the next market town To sell his bread both white and brown. nd when the market was done that Day, The Baker went home another way. nto his wife he did tell, How he had gelded the Devil of Hell: ay, a wondrous word I heard him say, He would geld me next market day; herefore wife I stand in doubt, Ide rather, quoth she, thy Knaves Eyes were out. de rather thou should break thy Neck-bone, Then for to Lose any manner of stone, or why 'twill be a Loathsome thing, When every Woman shall call the Gelding. hus they continued both in fear Untill the next market day drew near. ell quoth the good wife, well I wot, Go fetch me thy Doublet and thy Coat. hy Hose thy Shoone and Cap also, And I like a Man to the Market will go: hen up she got her all in hast, With all her bread upon her beast; nd when she came to the Hill side, There she saw two Devils abide, little Devil for and another, Lay playing under the Hill side together. Oh! quoth the Devil, without any fain Yonder comes the Baker again; eest thou well Baker, or beest thou wo, I mean to geld thee before thou dost go. hefe were the words the Woman did say, Good Sir, I was gelded but yesterday;
Oh quoth the Devil that I will see, And he pluckt her cloaths beneath her knee And looking upward from the ground, There he spied a grievous wound: Oh (quoth the Devil) what might he be? For he was not cunning that gelded thee, For when he had cut away the stones clean, He should have sowed up the hole again; He call'd the little Devil to him anon And bid him look to that same man. Whilest he went into some private place To fetch some salve in a little space, The great Devil was gone but a little way, But upon her belly there crept a flea; The little Devil he soon spied that, He up with his paw and gave her a pat: VVith that the woman began to start, And out she thrust a most horrible fart. VVhoop whoop quoth the little Devil, come again I pray, For her's another hole broke, be my fay; The great Devil he came running in hast, VVithin his heart was sore agast. Fogh quoth the Devil thou art not sound, Thou stinkest so sore above the ground; Thy life dayes sure cannot be long, Thy breath it fumes so wond'rous strong. The hole is cut so near the bone, There is no salve can stick thereon. And therefore Baker I stand in doubt That all thy bowels will fall out: Therefore baker hie thee away, And in this place no longer stay.
A Ballad call'd the Green-Gown. An leave, piping, the gods have done feasting, There's never a goddess a hunting to day, rtals marvel at Corridon's Jesting, That gives the assistance to entertain May. e Lads, and the Lasses with scarves on their faces, So lively as passes trip over the downs: ch mirth and sport they make, running at Barly-break; Lord what hast they make for a Green-Gown! hn with Gillian, Harry with Francis, Meg and Mary with Robin and Will, orge and Margery lead all the dances, For they were reported to have the best skill: t Cicily and Nanny the fairest of many That came last of any from out of the towns, ickly got in among the midst of all the throng They so much did long for their Green-Gowns. anton Debora whispered with Dorothy, That she would wink upon Richard and Sym, ncing Maudlin shew'd her authority, And in the quarrel would venture a Limb. t Sibbel was sickly, and could not come quickly, And therefore was likely to fall in a sown, would not tarry for Tom nor for Narry, Lest Christian should carry away the Green-gown anch and bettrice both of a family, Came very lazy lagging behind; nise and Amable noting their policie, Cilpid is cunning although he be blind: t Winny the witty, that came from Citie, VVith Parnel the pretty, and Besse the brown; em, Jone and Isabel, Su, Alice and Bonny Nell, Travell'd excedingly for a Green-Gown.
Now the Youngsters had reach' d the green Medow VVhere they intended to gather their May, Some in the Sun-shine, some in the shadow, Singled in couples, did fall to their play: But constant Penelope, Faith, Hope, and Charity, Lookt very modestly, yet they lay down; And Prudence prevented what Rachel repented, And Kate was contented to take a Green Grown. Then they desired to know of a truth If all their fellows were in the like case, Nem call'd for Eede and Eede for Ruth, Ruth for Marcy and Marcy for Grace; But there was no speaking, they answer'd with squeaking, The pretty Lass breaking the head of the Clown; But some were a wooing while others were doing, Yet all their going was for a Green-Gown. Bright Apollo was all this while peeping To see if his Daphne had been in the throng, But missing her hastily, Downwards was creeping, For Thetis imagin'd he tarried too long. Then all the troop mourned and homeward returned, For Cinthia scorned to smile or to frown: Thus they did gather May all the long Summer day, And at Night went away with a Green-Gown.
A Ballad of Sir Egle More. SIr Egley More that valiant Knight, with his fa, la, lanctre down dille, e fetcht his Sword and he went to fight, with his fa, la, and his lanctre down dille; she went over hill and dale, ll clothed in his Coat of Male, With his fa, la, his fa, la, and his lanctre down dille, huge great Dragon leapt out of his Den, with his fa, la, lanctre down dille, Which had kill'd the Lord knows how many men, with his fa, la, and his lanctre down dille; ut when he saw Sir Egley More, ood lack had you seen how this Dragon did rore! with his fa, la, his fa, la, and his lanctre down dille. his Dragon he had on a Plaguy hide with his fa, la, and his lanctre down dille, hich could both Sword and Spear abide, with his fa, la, &c. e could not enter with hacks and cuts, Which vext the Knight to the very heart blood and guts, with his fa, la, &c. l the trees in the wood did shake, with his fa, la, &c. ars did tremble, and man did quake, with his fa, la, &c. t had you seen how the Birds lay peeping, would have made a mans heart to fall a weeping, with his fa, la, &c. t now is was too late to fear, with his fa, la, &c, r now it was come to fight dog fight bear, with his fa, la, &c. d as a yawning he did fall, thrust his Sword in hilts and all, with his fa, la, &c.
But now as the Knight in choler did burn, with his fa, la, &c. He owed the Dragon a shrewd good turn, with his fa, la, &c. In at his mouth his Sword he bent, The hilt appear'd at his Fundament, with his fa, la, &c. Then the Dragon like a Coward began to fly with his fa, la, &c. Unto his Den that was hard by, with his fa, la, &c. And there he laid him down and ror'd, The Knight was vexed for his Sword, with his fa, la, &c. The Sword it was a right good Blade with his fa, la, &c. As ever Turk or Spaniard made, with his fa, la, &c, I for my part do forsake it, And he that will fetch it, Let him take it, with his fa, la, &c. When all this was done, to the Ale-house he went, with his fa, la, &c. And by and by his two pence he spent, with his fa, la, &c. For he was so hot with tugging with the Dragon, That nothing would quench him but a whole flagon, with his fa, la, &c. Now God preserve our King and Queen, with his fa, la, &c. And eke in London may be seen with his fa, la, &c. As many Knights, and as many more, And all so good as Sir Egle More, with his fa, la, his fa, la, lanctre down dille.
A Ballad call'd Blew-Cap for me. COme hither thou merriest of all the Nine, Come sit you down by me, and let us be jolly; nd with a full Cup of Apollo's VVine, VVee'l dare our Enemy, mad Melancholy; d when we have done, wee'l between us devise pleasant new Dity by Art to compose; And of this new Dity the matter shall be, ever I have a man, blew-cap for me. There dwells a blith Lass in Falkland Town, d she hath Suiters I know not how many, And her resolution she had fet down at she'l have a Blew-cap if ever she have any. Englishman when our geod Knight was there, me often unto her, and loved her dear; Yet still she replied, Geod Sir la be, ever I have a man, blew-cap for me. elshman that had a long Sword by his side, Red Doublet, red Breech, and red Coat, and red Peard, s made a great shew of a great deal of pride, Was tell her strange tales te like never heard; as recon her pedegree long pefore Prute, body was near that could her Confute; ut still she reply'd, Geod Sir la be, ever I have a man, blew-cap for me. Frenchman that largely was booted and spurr'd, g Lock with a ribbon, long Points and long Preeshes, VVas ready to kiss her at every word, for the other exercises his fingers itches; be pretty wench a Metrel par ma Foy, r me do love you, be not so coy; Yet still she reply'd, Geod Sir la be; ver I have a man, blew-cap for me.
An Irishman with a long Skeen in his Hose, Did think to obtain her, it was no great matter, Up stairs to the chamber so lightly he goes, That she never heard him until he came at her. Quoth he, I do love thee, by Fait and by Trot, And if thou wilt know it, experience shall sho't, Yet still she reply'd, Geod Sir, la be, If ever I have a man, Blew-Cap for me. A Netherland Mariner came there by chance, Whose cheeks did resemble two rosting Pome-waters, And to this Blith Lass this sute dit advance, Experience had taught him to cog, lie and flatter: Quoth he, I will make thee sole Lady of the Sea, Both Spanyard and English man shall thee obey: Yet still she reply'd, &c. At last came a Scotchman with a Blew Cap, And that was the man for whom she had tarried, To get this Blyth Lass it was his giud hap, They gan to Kirk and were presently married; She car'd not whether he were Lord or Leard, She call'd him sick a like name as I ne'r heard, To get him from aw she did weell agree, And still she cryed, Blew Cap thou art welcome to me. The Ballad Of the CAPS THe Wit hath long beholding been Unto the Cap to keep it in, But now the wits fly out amain In praise to quit the Cap again; The Cap that keeps the highest part Obtains the place by due desert: For any Cap, what ere it bee, It still the sign of some degree,
he Monmoth Cap, the Saylor thumbe, And that wherein the Tradesman come, he Physick Cap, the Cap Divine, And that which Crowns the Muses nine, he Cap that fools do Countenance, The goodly Cap of Maintenance. For any Cap, &c. he sickly Cap both plain and wrought, The Fudling Cap how ever bought, he Woolsted, Furr'd, the Velvet, Sattin, For which so many pates learn Latin; he Cruel Cap; the Fustian Pate, The Perewig a Cap of Late: For any Cap, &c. he Souldiers that the Monmoth wear, On Castles-tops their Ensigns rear; he Sea-man with his Thrumb doth stand On higher parts then all the land; he Tradesmans Cap aloft is born, By vantage of a stately horn. For any Cap, &c. he Physick Cap to dust can bring Without controul the greatest King, he Lawyers Cap hath Heavenly might To make a crooked action straight; nd if you'l line him in the fist, The Cause he'l warrant as he list. For any Cap, &c. th East and West, and North and South, Where ere the Gospel hath a mouth, he Cap Divine doth thither look; 'Tis Square like Scholars and their Books: he rest are Round, but this is Square, To shew their Wits more stable are: For any Cap, &c. he Jester he a Cap doth wear, Which makes him fellow for a Peer, nd 'tis no slender piece of Wit To act the Fool, where great Men sit;
But O, the Cap of London Town, I wis, 'tis lie a goodly Crown. For any Cap, &c. The Sickly Cap though wrought with silk, Is like repentance, white as milk; VVhen Caps drop off at health apace, The Cap doth then your head uncase. The sick mans Cap (if wrought) can tell Though he be sick, his Cap is well. For any Cap, &c. The Fudling Cap by Bacchus Might, Turn's night to day, and day to night; VVe know it makes proud heads to bend, The Lowly feet for to Ascend; It makes men richer then before, By seeing doubly all their score. For any Cay, &c. The Furr'd and Quilted Cap of age▪ Can mae a mouldy proverb sage, The Satin and the Velvet hive Into a Bishoprick may thrive; The Triple Cap may raise some hope, If fortune serve, to be a Pope, For any Cap, &c. The Periwig, O, this declares The rise of flesh, though fall of hairs, And none but Gransiers can proceed So far in sin, till they this need, Before the King who covered are, And onely to themselves stand bare. For an, Cap, what ere it be, Is still the sign of some degree.
A Ballad Of the NOSE. THree merry Lads met at the Rose To speak in the praises of the Nose: he Nose that stands in the midle place Sets out the beauty of the Face, he Nose with which we have begun VVill serve to make our verses run: Invention often barren grows, Yet still there's matter in the Nose. he Nose his end's so high a prize That men prefer't before their eyes, nd no man counts him for his friend That boldly takes his Nose by the end: he Nose that like Uripus flowes, The Sea that did the wiseman pose, Invention often, &c. he Nose is of as many kinds As Mariners can reckon winds; he long, the short, the Nose displayd, The great Nose, which did fright the Maid; he Nose through which the Brother-hood, Do parly for their Sisters good, Invention of ten, &c. he flat, the sharp, the Roman Snowt, The Hawkes Nose circled round about, he Crooked Nose that stands awry, The Ruby Nose of Scarlet dye, he brazen Nose without a Face That doth the Learned Colledge grace, Invention often, &c.
The long Nose when the teeth appear, Shews what's a Clock if day be clear; The broad Nose stands in Bucklers place, And takes the blows for all the face; The Nose being plain without a Ridge, Will serve sometimes to make a Bridge, Invention often, &c. The short Nose is the Lovers blis, Because it hinders not a kiss; The toteing Nose, O monstrous thing! That's he that did the bottle bring, And he that brought the bottle hither Will drink (O monstrous!) out of measure. Invention often, &c. The Firie Nose in Lanthorn stead May light his Master home to bed, And whosoever this Treasure owes Grows poor in purse though Rich in Nose: The Brazen Nose that's ore the gate Maintains full many a Latin pate. Invention often, &c. If any Nose take this in snuff, And think it more then enough; VVe answer them, we did not fear Nor think such Noses had been here: But if there be, we need not care, A Nose of VVax our Statutes are. Invention now is barren grown, The Matter's out, the Nose is blown.
A Ballad of the Black-Smith. OF all the trades that ever I see, There's none to a Black-smith compared may be, With so many several tools works he, Which no body can deny. The first that ever Thunder-bolt made, Was a Cyclops of the Black-smith trade, As in a Learned Author is said, Which no body can deny. When Thundering-like we strike about, The Fire like lightning flashes out, Which suddenly with water we dout, Which no body can deny. The Fairest Goddess in the Skies, To marry with Vulcan did advise, And he was a Black-smith grave and wise, Which no body can deny. Vulcan He to do her right, Did build her a town by Day and by Night, And gave it a name which was Hamersmiths hight; Which no body can deny. Vulcan further did acquaint her, That a pretty Estate he would appoint her, And leave her Seacole-lane for a Joynter, Which no body can deny. And that no enemy might wrong her, He built her a Fort you'd wish no stronger, Which was in the lane of Ironmonger, Which no body can deny. Smithfield he did Clense from Dirt, And sure there was great Reason for't, For their he meant she should keep her Court, Which no body can deny.
But after in a good time and tide, It was by the Blacksmith rectifi'd, To the honour of Edmond Iron-side; Which no body can deny. Vulcan after made a train VVherein the God of War was tane, VVhich ever since hath been call'd Pauls-Chain; Which no body can deny. The Common Proverb as it is read, That a man must hit the Nale on the head, VVithout the Black-smith cannot be said; Which no body can deny. Another must not be forgot, And fall's unto the Black-smiths lot, That a man strike while the Iron is hot; Which no body can deny, Another comes in most proper and fit, The Black-smiths Justice is seen in it, VVhen you give a man rost and beat him with the spit; Which no body can deny. Another comes in our Black-smiths way, VVhen thing are safe, as old wives say, VVe have them under lock and key; Which no body can deny, Another that's in the Black-smiths books, And onely to him for remedy looks, Is when a man's quite off the hooks; Which no body can deny Another Proverb to him doth belong, And therefore let's do the Black-smith no wrong, VVhen a man's hed hard to it buckle and thong; Which no body can deny. Another Proverb doth make me laugh, VVherein the Black-smith may challenge half, VVhen a Reasons as plain as a Pike-staff; Which no body can deny,
Though your Lawyers travel both near and far, And by long pleading, a good Cause may mar, Yet your Black-smith takes more pains at the Bar; Which no body can deny. Though your Scrivener seek to crush and to kill By his counterfeit deeds and thereby doth ill, Yet your black-smith may Forge what he will; Which no body can deny. Though your bankrupt Citizens lurk in their holes, And laugh at their creditors, and their catch-poles, Yet your black-smith can fetch them over the coals, Which no body can deny. Though Jocky in the stable be never so neat To look to his Nag, and prescribe him his meat, Yet your black-smith knows better how to give him a heat; Which no body can deny. If any Taylor have the itch, The black-smiths water as black as pitch, VVill make his hands go thorough stitch; Which no body can deny. There's never a slut if filth o're smutch her, But owes to the black-smith for her leacher, For without a pair of tongs there's no man would touch her; Which no body can deny. Your Roring boys who ever one Quails, Fights, domineers, swaggers and rails, Could never yet make the Smith eat his Nails; Which no body can deny. If a Scholar be in doubt, And cannot well bring his matter about, The blacksmith he can Hammer it out; Which no bady can deny. Now if to know him you would desire, You must not Scorn but rank him higher, For what he gets, is out of the fire; which no body can deny.
Now here's a good health to Black-smiths all, And let it go round, as round as a ball; Wee'l drink it all off, though it cost us a fall, which no body can deny. The BREWER. A Ballad made in the Year, 1657. To the Tune of the Black-smith. THere's many a Clinching verse is made In honour of the Black-smiths trade, But more of the Brewer may be said; which no body can deny. I need not much of this repeat, The Black-smith cannot be compleat, Unless the Brewer do give him a heat; which no body can deny. When Smoug unto the Forge doth come, Unless the Brewer doth liquor him home, He'l never strike, my pot, and thy pot, Tom; which no bod can deny. Of all professions in the town The Brewers trade hath gain'd renown, His liquor reacheth up to the Crown; which no body can deny. Many new Lord from him there did spring, Of all the trades he still was their King, For the Brewer had the world in a sling; which no body can deny. He scorneth all laws and Marshal stops, But whips an Army as Round as tops; And cuts off his foes as thick as hops;, which no body can deny.
e dives for Riches down to the bottom, And cries, my Masters, when he hat got um, et every tub stand upon his own bottom; which no body can deny. n warlike acts he scorns to stoop, or when his army begins to droop, e draws them up as round as a hoop; which no body can deny. The Jewish Scot that scorns to Eat The flesh of Swine and Brewers beat, Twas the sight of his Hogs-head made um retreat; which no body can deny. Poor Jocky and his basket hilt as beaten, and much blood was spilt, And their bodyes like barrels did run a tilt; which no body can deny. Though Jemy gave the first assault, The Brewer at last made him to halt, And gave them what the Cat left in the Malt; which no body can deny. They cri'd that Antichrist came to settle Religion in a Cooler and Kettle, For his Nose and Copper were both of one mettle; which no body can deny. Some Christian Kings began to quake, And said with the Brewer no quarrel wee'l make, VVee'l let him alone, as he brews let him bake; which no body can deny. He hath a strong and very stout heart, And thought to be made an Emperor for't, But the Devil put a Spoke in his Cart; which no body can deny. If any intended to do him disgrace, His fury would take off his head in the place, He alway did carry his Furnace in his Face; which no body can deny.
But yet by the way you must understand He kept his Foes so under command, That Pride could never get the upper hand; Which no body can deny. He was a stout Brewer of whom we may brag, But now he is hurried away with a hag, He brew's in a bottle and bak'd in a bag; Which no body can deny. And now may all stout Souldiers say, Farewell the glory of the day, For the Brewer himself is turn'd to clay; Which no body can deny. Thus fell the brave Brewer the bold son of slaughter, We need not to fear, what shall follow after, For he dealt all his life time, in fire and water. Which no body can deny. And if his successour had had but his might, Then we had not bin in a pitiful plight, But he was found many grains too light; Which no body can deny. Let's leave off singing, and drink of our bub, Wee'l call up a Reck'ning, and every man club, For I think I have told you a tale of a tub; Which no body can deny.
A Ballad, or Parly, between two West-Countrymen on sight of a WEDDING. I Tell thee Dick where I have been, Where I the rarest things have seen; Oh things beyond compare! Such sights again cannot be found In any place on English ground, Be it at Wake or Fair. At Charing Cross, hard by the way Where we (thou know'st) do sell our Hay, There is a House with stairs; And there did I see coming down, Such Volk as are not in our Town, Vortie at least in pairs. Amongst the rest, one pest'lent fine, (His beard no bigger though then thine) Walkt on before the rest: Our Landlord looks like nothing to him: The King (God bless him) 'twould undo him Should he go still so drest. At Course-a-Park without all doubt, He should have first been taken out By all the maids i'th Town: Though lusty Roger there had been, Or little George upon the green, Or Vincent of the Crown. But wat you what; the youth was going To make an end of all his woing; The Parson for him staid: Yet by his leave (for all his hast) He did not so much wish all past (Perchance) as did the Maid.
The Maid (and thereby hangs a tale) For such a Maid to VVhitson-Ale Could ever vet produce: No grape that's kindly ripe, could be So round, so plump, so soft as she, Nor half so full of juyce. Her finger was so small, the Ring VVould not stay on which he did bring, It was too wide a peck: And to say truth (for out it must) It lookt like the great Collar (Just) About our young Colts neck. Her feet beneath her peticoat, Like little mice stole in and out, As if they fear'd the light: But Dick the dances such a way No Sun upon an Ester day Is half so fine a sight. He would have kist her once or twice, But she would not, she was so nice, She would not do't in sight; And then she lookt as who would say, I will do what I list to day; And you shall do't at night. Her cheeks so rare a white was on, No Dazy makes comparison (VVho sees them is undone:) For streaks of red were mingled there, Such as are on a Katherine Pear, The side that's next the Sun. Her lips were red, and one was thin Compar'd to heat was next her Chin: (Some Bee had stung it newly:) But (Dick) her Eyes so guard her Face, I durst no more upon them gaze, Then on the Sun in July.
er mouth so small when she does speak, hou'dst swear her teeth her words did break, That they might passage get; ut she so handled still the matter, hey came as good as ours, or better, And are not spent a whit. wishing should be any sin he Parson himself had guilty bin, (She lookt that day so purely) nd did the youth so oft the feat t night, as some did in conceit, It would have spoil'd him surely. assion, oh me! how I run on! here's that that would be thought upon (I trow) besides the Bride. he business of the Kitchin's great, r it is fit that men should eat; Nor was it there deny'd. st in the nick the Cook knockt thrice, nd all the VVaiters in a trice His summons did obey, ch Serving man with dish in hand rcht boldly up like our Train-band, Presented and away. hen all the meat was on the Table, hat man of knife or teeth was able To stay to be intreated? d this the very reason was. ore the Parson could say Grace, The company was seated. w hats fly off, and youths carouse; alths first go round, and then the House; The Brides came thick and thick; when 'twas nam'd anothers health, haps he made it hers by stealth; (And who could help it, Dick?)
O'th sudain up they rise and dance; Then sit again, and figh, and glance: Then dance again and kiss: Thus sev'ral wayes the time did pass, VVhil'st every woman wisht her place, And every man wisht his. By this time all were stoln aside, To counsel and undress the Bride; But that he must not know: But 'twas thought he guest her mind, And did not mean to stay behind, Above an hour or so. VVhen in he came (Dick) there she lay Like now-faln snow melting away, ('Twas time I trow to part) Kisses were now the onely stay, VVhich soon she gave, as who would say, God B'w'y'! with all my heart. But just as Heavens would have to cross it, In came the Bride-maids with the Posset: The Bride-groom eat in spight; For had he left the women to't, It would have cost two hours to do't, VVhich were too much that night. At length the Candle's out and now, All that they had not done they do: VVhat that is, you can tell; But I believe it was no more Than thou and I have done before VVith Bridget and with Nell.
The Ballad Of Saint GEORGE for England. WHy should we boast of Arthur and his Knights? Know how many men have perform'd fights; r why should we speak of Sir Lancelot du Lake, r Sir Trestram du Leon that fought for the Ladyes sake? ead old storyes, and there you'l see ow St. George, St. George, did make the Dragon flee: St. George he was for England St. Denis, was for France, Sing Honi soit qui Mal y pense. speak of the Monarchy, it were two long to tell; nd likewise of the Romans, how far they did excel, nuibal and Scipio, they many field did fight, ando Furioso he was a valiant Knight, mulus and Rhemus were those that Rome did build; St. George St. George the Dragon he hath kill'd: St. George he was &c. phtha and Gidion they led their men to fight, e Gibionites and Amoites, they put them all to flight; cules Labour was in the Vale of Brass, d Sampson slew a thousand with the Jaw-bone of an Ass, d when he was blind, pull'd the Temple to the ground: St. Georges, St. George the Dragon did confound: St. George he was, &c. entine and Orson they came of Pipin's blood, bred and Aldrecus they were brave Knights and good; e four sons of Amnon that fought with Charlemaine, Hugh de Burdeaux and Gdfry de Bolaigne, se were all French Knights the Pagans did Convert, St. George, St. George, pull'd forth the Dragons heart: St. George he was, &c.
Henry the fifth he Conquered all France, He quartered their Arms, his Honour to advance, He razed their Walls, and pull'd their Cities down, And garnished his Head with a double treble Crown; He thumbed the French, and after home he came! But St. George, St. George, he inade the Dragon tame: St. George he was, &c. St. David you know, loves Leeks and tosted Cheese, And Jason was the Man brought home the Golden-Fleece; St. Patrick you know he was St. Georges Boy, Seven years he kept his Horse, and then stole him away; For which Knavish act, a slave he doth remain; But St. George St. George, he hath the Dragon slain: St. George he was, &c. Tamerlane the Emperour in Iron Cage did Crown, With his bloody Flags dispay'd before the Town; Scanderbag Magnanimous Mahomets Bashaw did dread, Whose Victorious Bones were worn when he was dead; His Bedlerbegs, his Corn like drags, George Castriot was he call'd, But St. George, St. George, the Dragon he hath mauld: St. George he was for England, St. Denis was for France, Sing Hony soit qui mal y pense. Ottoman the Tartar, Cham of Persia's race, The great Mogul, with his Chests so full of all his Cloves and Mac The Grecian Youth Buchepalus he manly did bestride, But those with all their Worthies Nine, St. George did them deride Gustavus Adolphus was Swedelands VVarlike King, But St. George, St. George, pull'd forth the Dragons sting: St. George he was for England, St. Denis was for France, Sing Hony soit qui mal y pense. Pendragon and Cadwallader of Brittis blood do boast, Though John of Gant his foes did daunt, S. George shall rule the ro Agamemnon and Cleomeon and Macedon did feats, But compared to our Champion, they were but merely cheats; Brave Malta Knights in Turkish fights, their brandisht swords outd But St. George met the Dragon, and ran him through and through St. George, he was, &c.
dea the Amozon, Photius overthrew, s fierce as either Vandal, Goth, Saracen or Jew; he potent Holophernes, as he lay in his bed, came wise Judith and subtly stole his head; ave Cyclops stout, with Jove he fought, Although he showr'd down Thunder; ut St. George kill'd the Dragon, and was not that a wonder! Saint George, He was, &c. ark Anthony, Ile warrant you Plaid feats with Egypts Queen, Egla More that valiant Knight, the like was never seen, rim Gorgons might was known in fight, old Bevis most men frigh∣ted. he Myrmidons and Presbyter John, why were not those men knighted? ave Spinola took-in Breda▪ Nasaw did it recover, ut St. George, St. George, he turn'd the Dragon over and over: St. George he was for England, St. Denis was for France, Sing Hony soil qui mal y pense. The Ballad of The BULLS FEATHER T chanc'd not long ago, as I was walking, An Eccho did bring me where two were a talking, was a man said to his wife, Dye I had rather, Then to be Cornuted and wear the Bulls Feather. en presently she reply'd, Sweet art thou Jealous? Thou can'st not play Vulcan before I play Venus; hy fancyes are Foolish, such follies together: There's many an honest man has worn the Bulls Feather. hough it be invisible, let no man it scorn, Though it be a new Feather made of an old horn; e that disdains it in heart or mind either: May be the more subject to wear the Bulls feather. e that lives in discontent, or dispair, And feareth false measure his wife's fair, is Thoughts are Inconstant, much like to winter weather: Though one or two want it, he shall have a Feather.
Bulls Feathers are Common, as Ergo in Schools, And onely contemned by those that are Fools; Why should a Bulls Feather cause any unrest, Since Neighbours Fare always is counted the best? Those Women wh'are Farest, are likely to give it, And Husbands that have them, are apt to believe it; Some men though their Wives should seem for to Tedder, They would play the Kind Neighbour, and give the Bulls Feath Why should we repine, that our Wives are so Kind, Since we that are Husbands are of the same Mind; Shall we give them Feathers, and think to go free, Believe it, Believe it, that hardly will be. For he that disdains my Bulls Feather to day, May light of a Lass that will play him foul play; There's never a Gallant that treads on Cows Leather, But he may be Cornuted and wear the Bulls Feather. Though Beer of that Brewing I never did drink, Yet be not displeas'd if I speak what I think, Scarce ten in a Hundred, believe it, believe it, But either they'l have it, or else they will give it. The let me advise all those that do Pine, For fear that false Jealousie shorten their Time, This disease will Torment them worse than a Feaver, Then let all be contented to wear the Bulls feather.
A Ballad. Old England turn'd New. YOu talk of New England, I truely believe Old England is grown New, and doth us deceive; 'le ask you a Question or two, by your leave; And is not old England grown new? Where are you old Souldiers with Slashes and Scars, That never us'd Drinking in no time of VVars, Nor Shedding of Blood in Mad drunken Jars: And is not old England, &c. New Captains are made, that never did Fight, But with Pots in the Day, and Punks in the Night, And all their chief Care is to keep their Swords bright; And is not old England, &c. VVhere are your old Swords, your Bills, and your Bowes, Your Bucklers and Targets that never fear'd Blowes? They are turn'd to Stiletto's, with other fair Showes: And is not old England, &c. VVhere are your Old Courtiers, that used to Ride VVith Forty Blew-coats and Foot-men beside? They are turn'd to Six Horses a Coach with a guide: And is not old England, &c. And what is become of our old English Cloathes, Your long sleev'd Doublet and your Trunk Hose? They are turned to French Fashions and other gugaws: And is not old England, &c. Your Gallant and his Taylor some half a year together To fit a new Sute to a new Hat and Feather, Of Gold, or of Silver, Silk, Cloth, Stuff, or Leather: And is not old England, &c.
We have New fashion'd Beards, and new fashion'd Locks, And new fashion'd Hats, for your new pated Blocks, And more New Diseases, besides then the French POX; And is not old England, &c. New Houses are built, and the old ones pulled down, Until the new Houses sell all the old ground, And then the House, stands like a horse in the Pound; And is not old England, &c. New fashions in Houses, new fashions at Table, Old Servants discharg'd and new not so able, And all good old Customes is now but a Fable; And is not old England, &c. New Trickings, new Goings new Measures, new Paces; New Heads for men, for your women new Faces, And twenty new tricks to mend their bad cases; And is not old England, &c. tricks in the Law, new tricks in the Rouls, ew Bodies thy have, they look for new Souls, When the money is paid for building old Pauls, And is not old England, &c. Then talk you no more of New England, New England is where old England did stand, New Furnish'd, new Fashion'd, new Woman'd, new Man'd: And is not old England grown new?
The Ballad On the North-Countrymans Song on his View of London Sights. WHen Ize came first to London-Town, Ize wor a Noviz, as many mo men are; Ize thought the King had live at the Crown, And all the way to Heaven had been through the Star. Ize set up my Horse, and Ize went to Powles, lds nigs, quoth I, what a Kirk bee'th hear, Then Ize did swear by all Kurson souls, t wor a mile long or very near. The top wor as high as any Hill, A Hill quo, I, nay as a Mountain; But Ize went up with very good will, But gladder was I to come down again. For as I went up my Head ga round; Then be it known to all Kurson people, A man is no little way fro the Ground; When he's o'th the top of Pauls Steeple. Ize lay down my Hat and Ize went to pray, But wor not this a pitiful case? A'vor Ize had done it wor stolen away; VVho'd a thought Theeves had been in that place? Now vor my Hot Ize made great moan, A stander by then to me zaid, Thou dost not observe the Scripture aright; For thou mun a watcht, as well as pray'd. From thence to Westminster Ize went, VVhere many a brave Lawyer Ize did zee, ut zome there had a bad intent; 'm zure my Purse was stoln from me.
ow to zee the Tombs was my desire, Ize went with many brave fellows store, gan them a Penny that was their hire, And he's but a Fool that will give any more. hen through the Roomes the Fellow me led, VVhere all the Zights wor to be zeen, nd snuffling told me through the Nose, VVhat formerly the Names of those had been. Iere Lyes, quoth he, Henry the Third, Thou ly'st like a Knave, he zays never a word; nd here lyes Richard the Second Interr'd, And hear stands good King Edward's Sword. nd under this Chair lyes Jacobs Stone, The very same stone is now in the Chair: ery good jest, had Jacob but one? How got he so many Sons without a pair? stai'd not there, but down with the Tide, Iz' made great hast, and Iz' went my way, Iz' was to zee the Lions beside, And the Paris-Garden all in a day. VVhen Ize came there, I was in a Rage, Ize rayl'd on him that kept the Bears, Iustead of a stake, was suffered a stage, And in Hunks his house a Crew of Players. Then through the Bridge to the Tower Iz' went, VVith much ado Ize ent'rd in, And after a Penny that I had spent, One with a loud voyce did thus begin! This Lion's the Kings and that is the Queens, And this is the Princes that stands here by, Vith that I went neer to look in the Den, Cods body I quoth he, why come you so nigh? made great hast unto my Inn, Iz' Zupt, and Iz' went to bed betimes, Zlept, and Iz' Dream'd what I had Zeen, And wak'd again by Cheap-side Chimes.
A Ballad News and no News. WHite Bears are lately come to Town, That's no News, And Cuckolds Dogs shall pull them down, That's no News, Ten Dozen of Capons sold for a Crown, Hey ho, that's News indeed. A Jackanapes at a Merchants dore, That's no News, An Irishman in an Alehouse score, That's no News, And Gravesend Barge without a VVhore, Hey ho, that's News indeed. A Fizling Cur in a Ladyes lap, That's no News, And Feathers wagging in a Fools Cap, That's no News, A Lion caught in a Mouse-trap, Hey ho, that's News indeed. A Roring Gallant not to thrive, That's no News, A Drone to Rob the poor Bees Hive, That's no News, A Parsons VVife not apt to— Hey ho, that's news indeed. A Taylor brisk in gaudy Clothes, That's no News, A Frenchman stradling as he goes, That's no News, A Drunkard without a Copper-Nose, Hey ho, that's News indeed.
A Sattin Suite without a Page, That's no News; A Rayling Poe'e the stage, That's no News: A Rich man honest in this Age, Hey ho, that's News indeed. A Petty-fogger, brib'd with fees, That's no News; A Welshman Cram'd with toasted Cheese, That's no News, A Lad and a Lass in Bed to Freeze: Hey ho, that's News indeed. A Lawyer to turn Hypocrite, That's no News; A Baly to Arrest a Knight, That's no News; A Court without a Parasite: Hey ho, that's News indeed. Before my News be over slipt, That's no News, I wish all Knaves from London shipt, That's no News; And all the VVhores in Bridewel whipt: Hey ho, 'Twere News indeed.
A Ballad: Or the Old Song of an Old Courtier and a New. WIth an Old Song made by an Old Ancient pate, Of an Old worshipful Gentelman who had a great Estate; ho kept an Old house at a bountiful rate, And an Old Porter to relieve the Poor at his Gate, Like an Old Courtier of the Queens. ith an Old Lady whose anger and good words asswages, Who every quarter payes her old Servants their wages, ho never knew what belongs to Coachmen, Footmen and Pages; But kept twenty or thirty old Fellows, with blew-coats and badges; Like an old Courtier, &c. ith an old Study fill'd full of Learned books, With an old Reverend Parson, you may judge him by his looks, ith an old Buttery hatch worn quite off the old hooks, And an old Kitchin, which maintains half a dozen old cooks; Like an old, &c. Vith an old Hall hung round about with Guns, Pikes and Bows, With old swords & bucklers, which hath born many shrew'd blows, nd an old Frysadoe coat to cover his worships trunk hose, And a cup of old Sherry to comfort his [Copper Nose;] Like an old, &c. Vith an old Fashion when Christmas is come To call in his Neighbours with Bag-pipe and Drum, nd good chear enough to furnish every old Room, And old liquor able to make a cat speak, and a wise man dum; Like an old &c.
VVith an old Hunts-man, a Falkoner and a Kennel of Hounds, VVhich never Hunted, nor Hawked, but in his own Grounds; VVho like an old wise man kept himself within his own bounds, And when he died gave every Child a thousand old pounds; Like an old, &c. But to his eldest Son, his house and land he assign'd, Charging him in his VVill to keep the same bountiful mind, To be good to his Servants, and to his Neighbours kind, But in th' ensuing Ditty, you shall hear how he was enclin'd; Like a young Courtier of the Kings. Like a young Gallant newly come to his Land, That keeps a Brace of Creatures at's one command, And takes up a thousand pounds upon's own Band, And lieth drunk in a new Tavern, till he can neither go not stand; Like a young, &c. VVith a neat Lady that is fresh and fair, VVho never knew what belong'd to good house keeping or care, But buyes several Fans to play with the wanton air, And seventeen or eighteen dressings of other womens hair; Like an young &c. VVith a new Hall built where the old one stood, VVherein is burned neither coal nor wood, And a new Shuffle-board-table where never meat stood, Hung Round with Pictures which doth the poor little good. Like a young, &c. VVith a new Study stuff't full of Pamphlets and Plays, VVith a new Chaplin, that swears faster than he prays, VVith a new Buttery Hatch that opens once in four or five days, VVith a new French-Cook to make Kichshawes and Tayes; Like a young, &c. VVith a new Fashion when Christmas is come, VVith a journey up to London we must be gone, And leave no body at home but our new Porter John, VVho relieves the poor with a thump on the back with a stone; Like a young, &c.
ith a Gentleman-Usher whose carriage is compleat, With a Footman, a Coachman, a Page to carry meat, ith a waiting Gentlewoman, whofe dressing is very neat; Who when the Master hath dyn'd gives the servants little meat; Like a young, &c. ith a new honour bought with his Fathers Old Gold, That many of his Fathers Old Manors hath sold, nd this is the occasion that most men do hold, That good House-keeping is now a days grown so cold; Like a young Courtier of the Kings. A Ballad. WIth a New Beard but latley trim'd, VVith a new Love-Lock neatly Kemb'd, VVith a new Favour snatcht or nim'd, VVith a new Doublet French-like limb'd, VVith a new gate as if he swim'd; And a new Souldier of the Kings, Oh the Kings new Souldier. VVith a new Feather in his Cap, VVith new white Boots without a strap, And newly paid for, by great hap, VVith a new Quean upon his lap, VVhich was newly cur'd of a Clap; And a new Souldier, &c. VVith a new Hat without a Band, With a new office without Land, With all his Fingers on his Hand, With a new Face at Plymouth Tan'd, And a new Horse allready Pawn'd; And a new Souldier, &c.
VVith a new Cassock lin'd with Cotten, VVith Cardicues to call his pot in, VVith a new Gun that near was shot in, Under a new Captain very hot in, A new Comand, and hardly gotten; And a new Souldier, &c. With a new Head-peece shot ne're, hit, With a new head of greenish wit, With new shirts without Louse or Nit, With a new band not torn as yet, With a new Spear, and very fit, And a new Souldier, &c. VVith a new Jacket made of buff., VVith new sleeves of Spanish stuff, VVith a new Belt of Leather enuff, VVith new Tobaco-pipes to puff, And a Brasen face that will huff; Like a new courtier, &c. He's newly come to sixteen years, And gon abroad with his Mothers tears, With his Monmoth Cap about his ears, With new Rantadoes void of fears: And with new Oaths by which he swears, To be a new Souldier, &c. VVith a new Nose that ne're met foe, VVith a new Sword that ne're struck blow, VVith a new red Breech to make a show, VVith a new Copper lace or two, And new points on his wings also, To a new Country he will go, To drink old Sack, and do no mo: Like a new Souldier of the Kings, Oh the Kings new Souldier!
The Ballad of the Beard. THe Beard thick or thin on the Lip or Chin, Doth dwell so near the Tongue, That her silence in the Beards defence May do her Neighbour wrong. Now a Beard is a thing that Commands in a King, Be his Scepters ne'r so fair: Where the Beard bears the sway the people obey, And are subject to a hair. Tis a Princely sight, and a grave delight, That adornes both young and old; A well that'cht face is a comely grace, And a shelter from the Cold. When the piercing North comes blustering forth Let a barren face beware; or a trick it will find, with a Razor of wind, To shave the face that's bare. ut there's many a nice and strange device That doth the Beard disgrace, ut he that is in such a foolish sin Is a traitor to his Face. ow of the Beards there be such a company, And fashions such a throng, hat it is very hard to handle a Beard; Though it be ne'r so long. he Roman T, in its bravery, Doth first it self disclose, ut so high it turn's, that oft it burns With the flames of a Torrid Nose! he Stilletto Beard, oh! it makes me afeard, It is so sharp beneath, r he that doth place a Dagger in's Face, What wear's he in his sheath?
But me thinks I do Itch to go through stitch The Needle Beard to amend, Which without any wrong, I may call too long, For a man can see no end. The Souldiers Beard, doth march in shear'd; In figure like a Spade, With which he'l make his enemies quake, And think their graves are made. The grim Stubble eke on the Judges cheek, Shall not my verse despise; It is more fit for a Nutmeg, but yet, It grates poor Prisoners eyes. VVhat doth invest a Bishops breast; But a Milk-white spreading hair? VVhich an Emblem may be of Integritie, Which doth inhabit there. I have also seen on a womans Chin A hair or two to grew, But alass the Face, it is too cold a place! Then look for a Beard below. But oh! let us tarry for the Beard of King Harry, That grows about the Chin, With his bushy pride, and a grove on each side, And a Champion ground between. Last the Clown doth out rush, with his Beard like a bush, VVhich may be well endur'd; For though his face be in such a case, His Land is well manur'd.
A Ballad In Praise of a Red Nose. LEt him that undertook to praise The French POX, and so many wayes Did prove that it is now a dayes Commodious: I say, let him a while give place, For I will prove a fiery Face Is to the owner no disgrace, Nor Odious. Who hath a fiery Face, that man Is said to have a rich Face, and Rubies about his Nose, none can Deny it. And all men know as well as I, That what is rich, most eagerly We covet, and no cost deny To buy it. Some will sell their Clothes from their back, And some their Lands, and some will lack Meat, rather then good Sherry Sack, And Claret: And they swear (and swear truth) that those Which drink small Beer, and wear good clothes, Do offer wrong unto their Nose, And mar it.
If in Romes Senate long-nos'd men Were chose for wisest, tell me then VVhy these should not be praised? when All men know A fiery Face ne'r is without A rich Nose, and how far a snout That's rich exceeds a long to doubt, Or call men to Dispute or to Capitulate, This matter's not so intricate But any may expostulate, And judge it: And if Judge truly, he'l confess Fire-rich, exceeds long wise, I guess No man that hath true worthiness VVill grutch it. Besides, the world knows this, that we Affirm those gracious that we see But Blush, and call it modesty In People: A Rich face alwayes blushes so It doth all faces else out go As far as St. Faiths is below Pauls steeple.
The Ballad called The Parson of Rumford, Or the Merry Maying. I Sing of no Ladyes who Dance in the Court, Nor of the big Lords, so hugeonsly Gay, ut of Lads and of Lasses, who make as good sport; Then away to Rumford, away, away. rom Burnt-wood, and Epping, from Bow, and Mile-end, With Ribbons and Flowers, with Garlands for May, ine Girles and their Lovers did trip it an end; And away to Rumford, away, away. he Streets with green Rushes and Bowers of Boughs, To welcome these guests the Musick did play; he Houses as sweet as the Breaths of our Cows, Come away to Rumford, away, away. hat tricking, what triming, what Puddings what Souse, Nay mustard with Beef prepar'd for the day; nd Pigs that the Parson kept long in his house, For this meting at Rumford, to day to day. ut oh! the brave Gamons with Pepper and Cloves, And stinging good Ale, was there, be my fay, s Sweet and as hot as the Kiss of our Lovers, Come away to Rumford, away away. he Cheese-cakes, with Currans so finely were set, Your Ladyes black patch es not half so gay, tew'd-pruins in syrup as black as the jet; Come away to Rumford, away away. his woundy great Feast the Parson did make In his close-girt Coat, as pert as a Jay, Could no more stand still then a Bear at a stake; In the Town of Rumford, to day, to day.
For joy, he spurr'd us a question to Marry, And told us the season was best in May; Go to it, quoth he, for time will not tarry, And welcome to Rumford I say, I say. We look'd and we look'd on one another, He formerly taught us our flesh was but Clay; VVhy should we not joyn like Sister and Brother, 'Tis time at Rumford, to day, to day. Then Rowland a Keeper in Epping Chase, As bold as a Stag at his Rut, did say, Fair Win now Ile Marry, not bating an Ace, This day at Rumford, to day to day. She blush'd, and she wish'd it were quietly done; But said good Rowland, what hast is I pray? Now you hold me so fast that I cannot run, This Night then in Rumford Ile stay, Ile stay. Now hey for Burnt-Wood, Tom Tanner did cry, His Face shining yellow, his Hands brown bay, He swor't he'd be coupled to Jenny or dye In the Town of Rumford, to day to day. Dick Butcher of Bow came in a great huff, Swore Doll of the Dairy should lead the way, Since both he and she handled much better stuff, In the Town of Rumford then they, then they. Little Robin a Glover of Mile-end Town, With Mawd who dwelt at the Bottle of Hay; Were clapt together with a hey derry down, And all in Rumford to day, to day. A dozen in couples, more the next Morn, Went all to the Church to Marry, and Pray, That every one might have a small pocket horn, When they went from Rumford away a way. Strike up Tom Piper and Kit with thy Fiddle, Play Room for Cuckelds, 'tis almost day; Go home with your Wives and play at down-diddle, And a way from Rumford, away away.
A Ballad called, The Man in the Moon. BRight Cynthia scorns alone to wear Horns, To her Sexes grief and shame; But swears in despight of the Worlds great light, That men shall wear the same: The man in the Moon to hear this in a swoun, Quite out of his wits he fell, And with this affront (quoth he) a pox on't, My Forehead begins to swell. A way straight he wood, in his Lunatick mood, And from his Mistress would run; And swore in his heart, though stew'd in his sweat, He had rather go dwell in the Sun. But he was appeas'd to see other men pleas'd, And none that did murmur or mourn; For without an affright, each man with delight Did take to himself the Horn. The Lord he will go, in his Park too and fro, Persuing the Dear that is barren; But whilst he's in's Park, his Steward or Clerk May boldly go hunt in his Warren. The Cittizen clown, in his foxfurr'd gown, And his doublet fac'd with Ale, Talks slow, and drinks quicker, till his wife like his liquor, Leaves working, and rellisheth stale. Lo! thus she behorn's him, and afterwards scorn's him, Though he come to be chief of the Rout: And thinks it no sin to be occupied within, VVhile her Husband is busi'd without.
The Puritan will go ten Miles to and fro To hear a Sanctifi'd brother; But while his Zeal burns, his wife she up turns The egs of her Eyes to another. The Lawyer to succour u'm, with Parchment and Buckr'um, To London the next way will strike; But whil'st he opens his case to his Adversaries face His wife to a friend may do the like. The Physcian will ride to his Patient that dy'd Of no disease, but that he did come; But whilst abroad he doth Kill with Portion and Pill, His Wife takes a Glister at home. The Merchant o're run's the Sea with his Gun's, His Marriners and their Mates; But whilest he doth please himself on the Broad Seas, Another may ride on his Streights: The Souldier will go, like a man to his foe, With brave resolution to fight; Whilst his Wife with her friends, in her wanton armes spends Time, And makes him a Beast by night. And though that he be well Arm'd Cap a pe, He must yield to a naked boys scorn, And instead of bright Steel, and hard Iron, he'l Be content with a hard piece of Horn. Thus all men will love their Wives though they prove Them false even in their own sight; But yet they do well, for a Horn (you can tell) Was alwayes a friend to the Night.
A Ballad Or Colins Adventure. AS Colin went forth his sheep to unfold In a Morning of April, as gray as 'twas cold, In a Thicket he heard a Voyce itself spread; Which was O, O, I am almost dead, He peep't in the Bushes and spide where there lay His Mistress, whose countenance made April May; But yet in her looks some sadness was read, Crying O, O, I am almost dead. He rush't in to her, and cryed, what's the matter? Ah! Colin, quoth she, why will you come at her? Who by the false Swain hath often been mislead, For which O, O, I am almost dead. He turn'd her Milk-payl, and there he down sat, His Hands strok't his Beard, on his Knee lay his Coat, But, O, still Mopsa cry'd before ought was said, Colin O, O, I am almost dead. No more, quoth stought Colin! I ever was true, Thou gav'st me a Handkercher all hem'd with Blew A Pin-box I gave thee, and a Girdle so Red; Yet still she Cry'd O, O, I am almost dead. Delaying, quoth she, hath made me thus Ill, For I never fear'd Sarah that dwelt at the Mill, Since in the Evening late her Hogs thou hast fed; For which O, O, I am almost dead. Colin then Chuckt her under the Chin, Cheer up, for to Love thee I never will lin, Says, she I'le believe it when the I'arson has read, Till then O, O, I am almost dead.
Ud's boars, quoth Colin, I'le new my Shoo'n, And ere the week pass, by the Mass it shall be don: You might have done this before, then she sed, But now O, O, I am almost dead. He gave her a twitch that quite turn'd her round, And said I'm the truest that ere trod on ground; Come settle thy Milk-pail fast on thy head, No more O, O, I am almost dead. VVhy then I percieve thou'lt not leave me in the lurch, I'le don my best Clothes and straight to the Church: Jog on, merry Colin, jog on before, For Ifaith Ifaith, I'le die no more. A Ballad. Of A Good Wife and a Bad. To the Tune of When Fortune was so Kind. SOme VVives are Good and some are Bad, (Reply) Me thinks you touch them now, And some will make their Husbands mad, (Cho.) And so will my Wife too: And my Wife and thy Wife, And my Wife so will do. Some VVomen love to breed discord, Me thinks, &c. And some will have the latter word, (Cho.) And so will my Wife too: And my Wife, &c. Some VVomen will Spin, and some will Sow, Me thinks &c. And some will to the Tavern go, (Cho.) And so will my Wife too: And my Wife, &c.
Some women will say thei'r sick at Heart, Me thinks, &c. And some will let a rousing Fart, (Cho.) And so will my Wife too: And my, &c. Some women will ban, and some will curse, Me thinks, &c. And some will pick their Husbands Purse, (Cho.) And so will my Wife too: And my, &c. Some women will Brawle, and some will Scold, Me thinks, &c. And some will make their Husbands Cuckold, (Cho.) And so will my wife too: And my, &c. Some women will drink, and some will not, Me thinks, &c. And some will take the to'ther Pot, (Cho.) And so will my Wife too: And my, &c. Some women are sick, and some are sound, Me thinks, &c. And some will take it on the Ground, (Cho.) And so will my wife too: And my, &c. Thus of my song Ile make an end, Me thinks, &c. Hoping all women will amend, (Cho.) And so will my Wife too: And my Wife, &c.
A Ballad Intituled the Faries Farewel. FArewel Rewards and Faries, Good Housewifes may say, For now foul sluts in Daries, Do fare as well as they: And though they sweep their Hearths no less Then Mayds were wont to do, Yet who of late for Cleanliness Finds Six-pence in her shooe? Lament, Lament old Abbies, The Faries lost Command; They did but change Priests Babies, But some have chang'd your Land: And all your Children sprung from thence Are now grown Puritans, Who live as Changlings ever since, For love of your Demeans. At Morning and at Evening both You Merry were and Glad; So little care of Sleep or Sloth These prettie Ladies had: VVhen Tom came home from labour, Or Ciss to Milking rose, Then merryly, merryly went their Taber, And Nimbly went their Toes. VVitness those Rings and Round delayes Of theirs which yet remain, VVere footed in Queen Maries dayes On many a Grassy Plain:
But since of late Elizabeth, And later James came in, They never danc'd on any Heath; As when the time hath been. By which we note the Faries Were of the old Profession, Their Songs were Ave Maryes Their Dances were Procession: But now alass they all are dead, Or gone beyond the Seas, Or farther for Religion fled: Or else they take their ease. A Tell-tale in their Company They never could endure, And who so kept not secretly Their Mirth was punish't sure: It was a just and Christian deed To Pinch such black and blew, But oh! the Common Wealth do want Such Justices as you. Now they have left our Quarters, A Register they have, VVho looketh to their Charters; A man both wise and grave: A Hundred of their merry Pranks By one that I can name Are kept in store, Con twenty thanks To William for the same. I marvel who his cloke would turn VVhen Puck had led him round, Or where those walking Fires would burn, VVhere Cureton would be found? How Broker would appear to be For whom this Age doth Mourn? But that their Spirits live in thee, In thee, old William Chourne.
To William Chourne of Stafford-shire, Give Laud and Praises due, VVho every meal can mend your chear, VVith talks both old and true. To William all give audience, And pray ye for his Noddle: For all the Faries evidence VVere lost, If that were Addle. A Ballad of THE PIGG. (1) I Sing not Reader of the fight 'Twixt Bailiffs and that doughty Knight Sir Ambrose, sung before: Nor of that dismal Counter scuffle, Nor vet of that Pantofle They say the Virgin wore. (2) No Turkey-cock with Pigmyes fray, Or whether then did get the day, Nor yet Tom Coriots shooes; Nor yet the swine-fac'd Maidens-head, I'th' Netherlands they say was bred, Is subject of my Muse. (3) But in Rhime Doggril I shall tell, What danger to a Pig befell, As I can well rehearse; As true as if the Pig could speak On Spit, in Prose would either squeak, Or grunt it out in Verse.
(4) A boysterous rout of armed Host, Just as the Pig was ready rost, Rusht in at doors, (God bless us!) The Leader of this Warlike rout, Strong men at armes, and stomach stout, I ween, was Captain Bessus. (5) They lately had in Scotland been, VVhere they such store of Sows had seen, That garr'd them hate their Babbies: And Bessus men neer Norton lay, VVhere Pigs you know on Orgins play, That once belong'd to Abbies. (6) It was a Tithe Pig, I confess, And so the crime might be no less, Then if't a Cassock wore; But yet in Orders it was ne're, Nor ever preacht, unless it were Ith' tub the night before. (7) Nor was it Popishly inclin'd, Although by Forrest law their kind Are taught to use the Ring: VVhat though it wore a Scarlet-Coat? It ne're appear'd ith' Kirk to vote For her Fine Baby King. (8) But right or wrong, such dainty Cates VVere nere ordain'd for Reprobates, The fat o'th earth is theirs; The Saints by Faith and Plunder have An heritage, and must inslave Malignants, and the Heirs.
(9) Fall on, fall on, they cry aloud, This Pig's of Antichristian brood, You'l find we are no dastards, Their Teeth so sharp, their Stomachs keen That Marriots you would them ween, Or Wood of Kents own Bastards. (10) But now to tell how from the paws Of th' unlickt VVhelps with greedy jawes This Pig escap'd, hereafter; s then our bellyes gan to prank it, (Thanks to Besse for that good banquet) VVill fill your mouth with Laughter. (11) A sturdy Lass with courage bold, On Pig, and Spit, and all, laid hold, And swore she would it rescue; For whether they their Teeth did set, For anger, or for hunger whet, She way'd not that a fescue. (12) This brave incounter had you seen, You would have sworn she should be Queen Of th' Amazons, or Fayries; And if she make good the retreat, Her sole protectress wee'l create Of Milk-maids and their Daries. (13) Up stairs she marcheth in a trice, And safely convey'd is the Greice Into my Ladies chamber; Such holy grounds not trod by those VVhose arm-pits, and whose sockless toes Are not so sweet as amber.
(14) The Jewes ne're eat their Pascal Lamb In half such hast, as we did cram This Pig unto our dinners: Like Presbyterians we did feed, No grace that day our meat did need, For that belongs to sinners. (15) And when the story of the Pig VVas done; the Pettitoes a Jig Came tripping in at Supper; 'Twas meat and drink to us to see The souldiers by the Jade to be Thus thrust besides the Crupper. A new Ballad: Call'd the Tunbridge Doctors. YOu Maydens and Wives, And young Widowes rejoyce, Declare your thanksgiving, With Heart and with Voice; Since Waters were Waters I dare boldly say There ne'r was such cause Of a Thanksgiving day. or from London-Town There's lately come down, our Able Physicians That never wore Gown▪
Their Physick is Pleasant, Their Dose is large, And you may be Cur'd Without Danger or Charge. No Bolus nor Vomit, No Poison nor Pill, Which sometimes do Cure, But ofner do Kill, Your Tast nor your Stomach Need ever displease, If you'l be advised By one of these. For they've a new Drug Which is call'd The close Hug, Which will mend your Complexion, And make you look smug; A Soveraign Balsam Which once well apply'd, Though griev'd at the Heart The Patient ne'r Dy'd. In the Morning you need not Be robb'd of your rest, For in your warm Beds Your physick works best; And though in the taking Some stirring's requir'd, The motion's so pleasant You cannot be tyr'd. For on your Backs you must lye, With your Body rais'd hie, And one of these Doctors Must alwayes be by, Who still will be ready To cover you warm, For if you take cold All Physick doth harm.
Before they do venture To give their direction, They alwayes consider Their Patients complection, If she have a moist Palm Or a Red Head of Hair, She requires more Physick Than one man can spare. If she have a long Nose, The Doctors scarce knows How many good handfuls Must got to her Dose; You Ladyes that have Such ill symptomes as these, Inreason of conscience Should pay double fees. But that we may give To these Dostors due praise, Who all sorts of people Their favour conveys; n the ugly for pity sake Skill shall be shown, nd as for the handsom, They're Cur'd for their own. n the Silver or Gold They never lay hold, or what comes so freely They scorn should be sold: hen joyn with the Doctors, And heartily pray, heir power of Healing May never decay.
A Ballad Called the German Doctor, As it was Sung by his man Merry Andrew. To the Tune of (Why should I pine away.) IS any Deaf, is any Blind, Is any bound or loose behind? Is any Foul that would be Fair, Would any Lady change her Hair; Doe's any Dream, do's any Walk, Or in their Sleep affrighted talk? I come to Cure what ere you feel, Within, without, from head to heel. Be Drums or Rattles in thy head, Are not thy Brains well tempered; Doe's Eolus thy Stomach gnaw, Or breed there Vermin in thy Maw; Dost thou desire and cannot please, Lo! here's the best Cantharides; I came to Cure what, &c. Even all Diseases that arise From ill disposed Crudities, From too much Study, too much Pain, From Laziness, and from a strain; From any humour doing harm, Be it dry, or moyst, or cold or warm▪ I come to Cure what, &c.
Of Lazy Gout I Cure the Rich, I rid the Begger of the Itch, I Fleam do void, both thick and thin, I dislocated jovnts put in, I can old Age to Youth restore, And do a thousand wonders more. I come to Cure what ere you feel, Within, without, from head to heel. Second Part. Mayds of the Chamber or of the Kitching, If you be troubled with the Itching, Come, give me but a Kiss or two, And here is that shall cure you. Nor Gallen nor Hipocrates, Did ever do such Cures as these. rackt Maydens that cannot hold their Water, Or use to break wind in your Laughter, r be you vext with Kybes, with Corns, Ile cure, or Cuckolds of their Horns; Nor Gallen nor, &c. lusty Sis, Mayd of the Dairy, Chance to be Blew Nipt by the Farie, or making butter with her Tail, Ile give her that shall never fail. Nor Gallen nor, &c. r if some mischance betide her Or that the Night-Mare over ride her, r if she tell all in a Dream, I'le help her for a mess of Cream. Nor Gallen nor Hipocrates Did ever do such Cures as these.
Third Part. Here's Water to quench Mayden fires, Here's Spirits for old Occupiers, Here's Powders to preserve youth long, Here's Oyl to make weak Sinnews strong; What is't you lack, what would you buy, What is't that you do need? Come to me Galants, Tast and try Here's that will do the deed. This Powder doth preserve from fate, This cures the Meleficiate, Lost Mayden-heads this doth restore, And makes them Virgins as before; What is't you lack, &c. Here's Cure for Bone-ach, Feavers Lurdens, Unlawful or untimely burthens, Diseases of all Sex, all Ages, This Medicine Cureth or asswages: What is't you lack, &c. I have Receipts to cure the Gout, To keep Pox in, or put them out, To cool hot Bloods, cool Bloods to warm, Shall do you (if no good) no harm. What is't you lack, what would you buy, What is't that you do need? Come Gallants, tast and try, Here's that will do the deed.
A Ballad Called the Angler. OF all the Recreations which Attend to humane Nature, There's nothing soars so high a pitch Or is of such a stature, As is the subtil Anglers life In all mens approbation, For Anglers tricks do daily mix With every Corporation. When Eve and Adam liv'd in Love And had no cause of Jangling, The Devil did the Waters move, The Serpent went to Angling: He baits his hook with god-like look, Thought he this will intangle her, The woman chops, and down she drops; The Divel was first and Angler. Physicians, Lawyers, and Divines Are most Ingenions Janglers, And he that tries shall find in fine That all of them are Anglers; Whilst grave Divines do fish for Souls, Physicians (like Cormugeons) Do bait with health, to fish for wealth, And Lawyers fish for Gudgeons. A Polititian too is one Concern'd in Piscatory, He writes, he fights, unites and slights To purchase wealth and glory;
His Plummet sounds the Kingdoms bounds To make the Fishes nibble, His Ground-bait is a past of lies, And he blinds them with th' Bible. Upon the Exchange 'twixt twelve and one Meets many a neat Intangler, 'Mongst Merchant-men not one in ten But is a cunning Angler: For like the Fishes in the Brook Brother doth swallow Brother, A Golden-bait hangs at the Hook, And they fish for one another. A Shop-keeper I next prefer A formall man in black Sir, He throws his Angle every where, And cryes, what is't you lack Sir, Fine Silks or Stuffs, or Hoods or Muffs? But if a Courtier prove the Intangler, My Cit i en must look to't then, Or the Fish will catch the Angler. A Lover is an Angler too, And baits his Hooks with kisses, He playes, he toyes, he fain would do, But often times he misses; He gives her Rings and such fine things A Fan and Muff and Night-hood, But if you cheat a City pate You must bait your Hook with Knight-hood. There is no Angler like a Wench Stark-naked in the water, She'l make you leave both Trout and Tench And throw your self in after; Your Hook and Line she will confine, Then tangled is th' Intagler, And this I fear hath spoyl'd the ware Of many a Jov'al Angler.
But if you'l Trowl for a Scriv'ners soul Cast in a Rich young Gallant, To take a courtier by the pole, Though in a Golden Tallent: But yet I fear the draught will ne're Compound for half the charge an't, But if you'l catch the Divel at a snatch You must bait him with a Sergeant. Thus have I made my Anglers Trade To stand above defiance, For like the Mathematick Art, It runs through every Science: If with my Angling Song I can To Mirth and pleasure seise you, I'le bait my hook with Wit again, And Angle still to please you. The Ballad of the two Amorous Swains. TOM and Will were Shepherds Swains Who lov'd and lived together, Till fair Pastoa. grac'd the Plains, A lass! why came she thither Yet felt both one desire; Pastoras Eyes and comely Locks Set both their hearts on fire.
Tom came of a gentle race By Father and by Mother, Will was noble, but alass He was a younger Brother! Tom was toy-some, Will was sad, No Hunts-man nor no Fowler, Tom was held the properer Lad, But Will the better Bowler. Tom would drink her health and swear The Nation could not want her, Will would take her by the Eare And with his Voyce Inchant her: Tom kept always in her sight And ne'r forgot his duty, Will was witty and would write Sweet Sonnets on her Beauty. Yet which of them she loved best, Or whether she lov'd either; 'Twas thought they found it to their cost That she indeed lov'd neither: Yet she was so sweet a she So pleasing in behaviour, That Tom thought he, and Will thought he Was chiefest in her favour. Pastora was a lovely Lass And of a comely feature, Divinely good and fair she was, And kind to every Creature: Of favour she was provident, And yet not over-sparing, She gave no loose encouragement, Yet kept men from dispairing. Whe Tatling fame had made report Of fair Pastora's beauty, Pastora's sent for to the Court For to perform her duty;
And to the Court Pastora's gone, It were no Court without her, The Queen of all her Train had none Was half so fair about her. Tom hung his Dog, and flung away His Ship-hook, and his Wallet; Will broke his Pipes, and Curst the day That ere he made a Ballet: Their Nine-pins and their bowls they brake, Their Tunes were turn'd to Tears; 'Tis time for me an end to make, Let them go shake their Ears. A Ballad called The Jovial Bear-ward. THough it may seem rude For me to intrude With these my Bears by chance-a, 'Twere sport for a King If they could sing As well as they can dance-a. Then to put you out Of ear or doubt, I came from St Katharine-a These Dancing Three, By the help of me, Who am Keeper of the signe-a.
We sell good ware And we need not care Though Court and Country knew it, Our Ale's o'th best, And each good Quest Prayes for their souls that Brew it. For any Ale-house We care not a Louse, Nor Tavern in all the Town-a; Nor the Vintry Cranes Nor St. Clement Danes, Nor the Divel can put us down-a Who has once there been Comes hither again, The Liquor is so might; Beer strong and stale, And so is our Ale, And it Burns like Aquavitae. The Wives of Wapping They trudge to our Tapping, And still our Ale desire, And there fit and drink Till they spue and stink And often piss out the fire. From morning to night, And about to day-light, They sit and never grudge it; Till the Fish-wives joyn, Their single coyn, And the Tinker pawns his budget. If their brains be not well, Or bladders do swell, To ease them of their burden; My Lady will come VVith a Bowl and a Broom, And her hand-maid with a Jourdan.
From Court we invite Lord, Lady and Knight, 'Squire, Gentlemen, Yeomen and Groom; And all our stiff Drinkers Smiths, Porters and Tinkers, And the Beggers shall give you room. A Ballad Ʋpon the New Inn, with the Famous Signe-Post called the White-Heart at Skoal in Norfolk. 1. DId none of you hear Of a wonder last year, Of an Inn and an Host, With a Signe and a Post, That might hold (Godbless us) the King. 2. The building is great, And very compleat, But cannot be compar'd to the Signe; But within dores I think 'S scarce a drop of good drink, For Bacchus drinks all the best Wine. 3. But here's the design, VVhat's amiss in the Wine, By Wenches shall be supply'd; There's three on a row Stands out for a show, To draw in the Gallants that ride.
4. The first of the three Diana should be, But she cuckolded poor Actaeon, And his Head she adorns With such visible horns, That he's fir for his hounds for to prey on. 5. 'Tis unsafe we do find To trust VVomen kind, Since horning's a part of their trade; Diana is patch't As a Goddess that's chast, Yet Actaeon a Monster she made. 6. The next wench doth stand VVith the Scales in her hand, And is ready to come at your beck; A new trick they've found, To sell Sack by the pound, But 'twere better they'd sell't by the peck. 7. The last of the three They say Prudence must be, VVith the Serpent and Horn of plenty; But Plenty and Wit So seldom doth hit, That they fall not to one in twenty. 8. But above these things all Stands a Fellow that's small, VVith a Quadrant discerning the Wind, And says he's a fool That travels from Skoal, And leaves his good liquor behind.
9. Neer the top of the figne Stands three on a line, One is Temperance, still pouring out; And Fortitude will Drink what Temperance fill, And fears not the stone or the gout. 10. The next to these three, You'l an Usurer see, VVith a Prodigal child in his mouth; 'Tis Time (as some say) And well so it may, For they be devourers both. 11. The last that you stare on, Is old Father Charon, VVho's wafting a wench o'r the ferry; VVhere Cerberus do's stand, To watch where they land, And together they go to be merry. 12. Now to see such a change Is a thing that is strange, That one, who as stories do tell us, His money has lent At fifty per cent A Colledge should build for good fellows. 13. But under this work Does a mystery lurk, That shews us a founders designe; He has chalk'd out the way For Gallants to stray, That their lands may be his in fine.
14. That's first an Ale-bench, Next hounds, then a wench, VVith these three to roar and to revel; Brings the prodigals lands To the Vsurers hands, And his body and soul to the Devil. 15. Now if you would know, After all this adoe, By what name this Sign should be known; Some call't this, and some that, And some I know not what; But 'tis many signs in one. 16. 'Tis a sign that who built it, Had more money then wit, And more wealth then he got or can use; 'Tis a sign that all we Have less wit then he, That come thither to drink, and may chuse.
The Ballad Of Old Simon the King. IN a humour I was late As many good fellows be, To think of no matters of State, But to seek for good companie That best contented me, I travell'd up and down, No company I could find Till I came to the signe of the Crown; My hostess was sick of the Mumps, The Maid was ill at ease The Tapster was drunk in his Dumps They were all of one disease Says Old Simon the King. Considering in my mind, And thus I began to think, If a man be full to the Throat And cannot take off his drink; And if his drink will not down He may hang himself for shame, So may the Tapster at the Crown, Where upon this reason I frame; Drink will make a man Drunk, And Drunk will make a man Dry; Dry will make a man Sick, And Sick will mak a man Dye Says Old Simon the King. f a man should be drunk to night, And laid in his Grave to morrow, Will you or any man say That he dyed of Care or Sorrow?
Then hang up sorrow and care, 'Tis able to Kill a Cat, And he that will drink all night Is never afraid of that! For Drinking will make a man Quaff, Quaffing will make a man Sing; Singing will make a man Laugh, And Laughing long life doth bring, Says Old Simon the King. If a Puritan Skinker cry Dear brother, It is a Sin To drink unless you be dry, Then strait this tale I begin, A Puritan left his Can And took him to his Jug, And there he play'd the man As long as he could tug: But when that he was spide, What did he swear or rail? No truly, Dear brother, he cry'd Indeed all flesh is frail, Says Old Simon the King. So Fellows if you'l be Drunk, Of frailtie it is a sin, Or for to keep a Punk Or play at In and In; For Drink and Dice and Drabs Are all of one condition, And will breed want and Scabs In spite of the Physician: Who so fears every grass Must never piss in a Meddow, And he that loves a Pot and a Lass Must never cry Oh my head, oh! Says Old Simon the King.
The Ballad Of the Fryer and the Maid. AS I lay musing all alone A merry Tale I thought upon; Now listen a while and I will you tell Of a Fryer that lov'd a Bonny Lass well. He came to her when she was going to bed Desiring to have her Maiden-head; But she denyed his desire, And said that she did fear Hell-fire. Tush, tush, quoth the Fryer, thou need'st not doubt, If though wer't in Hell, I could sing the out: Why then, quoth the Maid, thou shalt have thy request; The Fryer was as glad as a Fox in his nest. But one thing more I must request More than to sing me out of Hell-fire, That is for doing of the thing An Angel of Mony you must me bring. Tush, tush, quoth the Fryer, we two shall agree, No Mony shall part thee and me; Before thy company I will lack Ile pawn the Gray-gown off my back. This Maid bethought her on a Wile How she might this Fryer beguile; When he was gone, the truth to tell, She hung a Cloth before a Well:
The Fryer came, as his bargin was, VVith Mony unto his Bonny Lass; Good morrow, Fair Maid, good morrow, quoth she; Here is the Mony I promis'd thee. She thank'd him, and she took the Mony; Now let's go to't, my own sweet-Honey: Nay, stay a while, some respite make, If my Master should come, he would us take. Alass! quoth the Maide, my Master doth come; Alass! quoth the Frier, where shall I run? Behind yon Cloth run thou, quoth she, For there my Master cannot see. Behind the Cloth the Fryer went, And was in the Well incontinent: Alass! quoth he, I'm in the Well; No matter, quoth she, if thou wer't in Hell. Thou said'st thou couldst sing me out of Hell, I prethee sing thy self out of the Well; Sing out, quoth she, with all thy might, Or else thou'rt like to sing there all night. The Fryar Sang out with a pittyful sound Oh! help me out or I shall be Drownd: She heard him make such pitiful moan, She hope him out, and bid him go home. Quoth the Fryer I never was serv'd so before; Away, quoth the Wench, come here no more: The Fryer he walked a long the street As if it had been a new washed Sheep, Sing hey down a derry; and let's be merry, And from such sin ever to keep.
A Ballad Called the Politick Drinker. MY Masters and Friends, whosoever intends To trouble this Room with discourse; You that do sit by, are as guilty as I, Be your talk better or worse. Now lest you should prate of Matters of State, Or any thing else that might hurt us; Rather let us drink off our Cups to the brink, And then we shall speak to the purpose. Suppose you speak clean, from the matter you mean, That's not a pin here nor there; Yet take this advice, Be merry and wise, You know not what creatures be near: Or suppose that some Sot should lurk in this Pot, To scatter our words that might hurt us To free that same doubt, we'l see the Pot out, And then we shall speak to the purpose. If any man here be in bodily fear Of a Woolf, a wife, or a Tweak, Here's Armour of proof shall keep her a loof, This liquor will make a man speak: Or if any enter to Chalenge his friend, Or rail at a Lord that might hurt us, Let him drink once or twice of this Helicon Juice, And then he shall speak to the purpose. He that rails at the Times in Prose or in Rhimes, Doth bark like a Dog at the Moon, ing prophecies strange, and theatens some change, And hang them upon the Queens Tomb:
He is but a Raylor, or a prophis'ing Taylor, To scatter out words that might hurt us; Let's talk of no matches, but drink and sing Catches, And then we shall speak to the purpose It is a mad zeal for a man to Reveal His secret thoughts when he Bouzes, And he's but a wigion that talks of Religion In Taverns or Tipling houses. It is not for us such things to discover, Let's talk of nothing that might hurt us, But let us begin a Health to our King, And then we shall speak to the purpose. A midst of our bliss it is not amiss To talk of our going home late; If a Constable Kite, or a Pispot at night Should chance to douse on our pate, It were all in vain to rage or complain, Or scatter out words that might hurt us, T'were better trudge home to honest kind Joan, And then we shall speak to the purpose.
A Ballad. Or the Reformed Drinker. COme, my Hearts of Gold, Let us be merry and wise; It is a proverb of old Suspition hath double Eyes: Whatsoever we say or do Let's not Drink to disturb the brain, Let's laugh for an hour or two And ne're be drunk again. A cup of old Sack is good To drive the cold Winter away, 'Twill cherish and comfort the blood Most when a man's Spirits decay; But he that doth drink too much Of his head he will complain; Then let's have a gentle touch, And ne're be drunk again. Good Claret was made for man, But man was not made for it; Let's be merry as we can, So we drink not away our wit: Good Fellowship is a bus'd, And Wine will infect the brain; But we'l have't better us'd, And ne're will be drunk again. When with good fellows we meet, A Quart among three or four 'Twill make us stand on our feet While others lie Drunk on the Floore:
Then Drawer go fill a quart, And let it be Claret in grain. 'Twill cherish and comfort the Heart, But we'l ne'r be de drunk again. Here's a Health to our Noble King, And to the Queen of his Heart; Lets laugh and merrily sing And he's a Coward that will start. Here's a Health to our General, And to those that were in Spain, And to our Colonel, And we'l ne're be drunk again Enough's as good as a Feast, If a man did but measure know; A Drunkard's worse thaa a Beast, For he'l drink till he cannot go. If a man could time recall In a Tavern that's spent in vain, We'd learn to be sober all, And ne're be Drunk again.
A Ballad Of the Courtier, and the Country Clown. YOu Courtiers scorn we Country Clowns, We Country Clowns care not for Court; But we'l be as merry upon the Downs As you are at midnight with all your sport; With a Fadding, &c. You Hawk, you Hunt, you ly upon Pallets, You Eat you drink the Lord knows how; We sit upon Hillocks and pick up our Salets, And drink up a Syllabub under a Cow; With a Fadding, &c. Your Masks are made for Knights, and Lords And Ladyes that go fine and gay; VVe dance to such Musick the Backpipe affords, And trick up your Lasses as well as we may: With a Fadding, &c. Your Cloths are made of Silk and Satin, And ours are made of good Sheeps gray; You mix your discourses with peeces of Latin, VVe speak our own English as well as we may: With a Fadding, &c. Your Chambers are hung with Cloth of Arras, Our Meddows be deckt as fine as may be; And from our sport you never shall bar us, Since Joan in the Dark is as good as my Lady: With a Fadding, &c.
You Courtiers clip and cull upon beds, We Jumble our Lasses upon the Grass; And when we have gotten their Mayden-heads They serve to make a Courtiers Lass: With a Fadding, &c. You dance Corants and the French Braull, We Jig the Morrice upon the Green; And we make good sport in a Country Hall, As you do before the King and the Queen: With a Fadding, &c. Then Ladyes do not us disdain Although we wear no gaudie Cloaths, You'l find as much pith in a Country Swain When he plucks up your gay imbroydred Cloaths: With a Fadding Fadding. A Ballad Called, Cresadays Lamentation. IN a green Meddow, a River running by, I heard a prety Mayden Lament, Weep, Sigh and Cry; The Tears fell from her Eyes as clear as any pearl, And I much Lamented the mourning of this Girl: She sighed and sobbed, and to her self she said, A lass! what hap had I to live so long and die a Maid. Now in this World no Charity is known, And young men are hard-hearted, which makes me lie alone; The day and time hath been, had I not been so nice, I might enjoy'd my True-Love if I had been so wife: But Sullenness, Coyness and Pevishness such store Hath brought me to this pensiveness, and many Maidens more.
Some Dames that are so nice, that hear me thus complain, Will think me fond and idle, and much my credit stain; But let me answer them, the Case may be their own, The wisest on the Earth may by love be overthrown: For Cupid he is blind, and cometh in a Globe, He aymeth at a Rag as well as at a Robe. Venus she was Beautiful, and eke a godess born, And yet to love poor Vulcan she took it not in scorn; His Hammer hit so round, and had so sweet a touch, She liked well the sound, oh it pleased her too much! Her raging love rayned within her loving breast, Till Mars came down in Armour to give Vulcan a Crest. Since godesses come down to play with such a Boy, Why may not pretty Maidens commit an idle toy? For Hellen of Greece for Beauty was the rarest, She was the wonder of the World and certainly the fairest; Yet could she nor would she remain a Maiden still The Town of Troy can witness, the breeder of their ill. Virginity's a burden which few or none can carry, And that is sure the reason why our Mothers all did Marry; Then sith it is a pastime that hath been us'd before, If bashfulness do wrong me, I'le deny no more: Be it light, or be it dark, do ye look or wink, You cannot miss the mark, if you have the wit to think. Although some Maidens lightly deny it when it's offer'd, Yet I'de wish you wisely to take it when 'tis profer'd, And be not like to Cresady, that scorns so true a friend, Lest you be glad to take poor Charity in the end. For time lost, and time past cannot be call'd again, Therefore all Maidens make hast, lest with me you complain.
A Ballad Called a medly of Wooers. I am a young Lass, my time it doth pass, Of late I do long for to marry, I have for my Dear five thousad a year, And yet I love good Sir Harry. I have with a Scot mickel matter I wot, He struts with his Rapier and poinyard; He hath an ill face, but he's lay'd on with lace, I fear me he hath marri'd his whinyard. There came a Frenchman that finely could Dance, He's proper in every Joynt, It seems once he had scaped the P: So well he can cut the cross-point. I lov'd the proud Scot, his Sute was too hot, I took him to be but a bragger; VVith that the Frenchman he missed his wench, And Toby had lost his Dagger. A Sennora-Spaniora is newly come over And thinks that there's no man his fellow, He hath gotten a strain is hot in the vain, VVith danceing in a Bardella. A Dutchman there came, that tossed the Can Till his head was as light as a feather; The Spaniard his Punck, and the Dutchman was Drunk, And so they were both together. An Italian came post, that finely could bost Amongst the rest of his fellows; If I were his VVife, I should have an ill life The Fool he is so Jelous.
There came one from Rome, would needs be my groom, He fasted three days in week; If he chanced to come where he saw a fair Nun Oh! his stomach was wonderous quick. A Galant brave Dane came marching again As proud as any of the rest; He could not prevail, but he hoy'st up his sail; His Nose could abide no jest's. From Ireland we had a lively young Lad Of Bony and Birth most mighty; I am not sure, but I think he was poor, He smelt so of Aquavitae. A Shentle-man of Wales, was tell her fine tales Her house was brave on a Hill; Had Pig, and had Goat, Green-leek in her pot Wase eat Cause-bubby her fill. If her will have, her will keep her full brave, Her will py her a Band and a Hat, Fine Garters, Silk Hose fine Sharf and brave close; Sweet-heart, how like her tat? An Englishman came, but I know not his name, That finely could quaff and could quarrel He'l drink till he dye some say, but not I, And sell all his land for apparel. He swears by his life, if i'le be his wife Er'e long he will make me a Lady; He'l sell his old Mannors to buy him new Honors, And that's but the trick of a Babey. Your counsel I crave which of these I should have, If there be any one here for to fit me; The best I do take, the rest I forsake If Cupid do chance for to hit me.
A Ballad Or The Welfhmans Praise of Wales. I's not come here to tauke of Prut, From whence the Welse dos take hur root; Nor tell long Pedegree of Prince Camber, Whose linage would fill full a Chamber; Nor sing the deeds of our Saint Davie, The Ursip of which would fill a Navie: But hark you me now for a liddel tales Shall make a great deal to the creddit of Wales, For still he will twitch your ears, With the praise of hur thirteen Seers; And make hur as clad and merry As fourteen pot of Perry, 'Tis true, was wear him Sherkin freize, But what is that? we have store of seize, And Got is plenty of Goats milk That sell him well will boy him silk Inough, to make him find to quarrel At Herford Sizes in new apparel; And get him as much green Melmet perhap, Shall give it a face to his Monmouth Cap. But then the ore of Lemster; Py Cot is uver a Sempster; That when he is spun, or did Yet match him with hir thrid. For still he will twitch, &c. Aull this the backs, now let us tell ye Of some provision for the belly: As Kid and Goat, and greats Goats Mothor, And Runt, and Cow, and good Cows uther, And once but tast on the Welse Mutton; Your Englis Seeps not worth a button.
And then for your Fisse, shall shoose it your disse, Look but about, and there is a Trout, A Salmon, Cot, or Chevin, Will feed you six ot seven, As taul man as ever swagger With Welse Club, and long dagger. For still hur will twitch, &c. But aull this while, was never think A word in praise of her Welse drink: Yet for aull that, is a Cup of Braggat, Aull England Seer may cast his Cap at. And what her say to Ale of Webley, Toudge him as well, you'll praise him trebly, As well as Metheglin, or Sider, or Meath, S'all sake her dagger quite out o'the seath. And Oat-Cake of Guarthenion, With a goodly Leek or Onion, To give as sweet a rellis As e're did Harper Ellis. For still her will twitch, &c. And yet is nothing now all this, If of our Musicks we do miss; Both Harps, and Pipes too, and the Crowd, Must aull come in, and tauk aloud, As lowd as Bangu, Davies Bell, Of which is no doubt you have hear tell: As well as our lowder Wrexam Organ, And rumbling Rock in the Seer of Glamorgan, VVhere look but in the ground there, And you sall see a sound there; That put her all to gedder, Is sweet as measure pedder. For still her will twitch your ear With the praise of her thirteen Shire, And make her so glad and merry, As fourteen pot of Perry.
A Ballad Called Cooklorrel. By Mr. Ben. Johnson. COOK-Lorrel, would needs have the Devil his Guest, And bad him once into the Peake to dinner; VVhere never the Feind had such a Feast Provided him yet at the charge of a sinner His stomach was queasie (for coming there Coacht) The jogging had caused some Crudities rise, To help it he call'd for a Puritan poacht That used to turn up the Eggs of his Eyes. And so recovered unto his Wish, He sat him down, and he fell to eat; Promooter in plum-broath was the first dish; His own privy Kitching had no such meat. Yet though with this he much were taken, Upon a sudden he shifted his trencher; As soon as he spide the bawd, and bacon, By this you may note the Devil's a wencher. Six pickled Taylors sliced and cut, Sempsters, Tire-women, fit for his pallet, With fether-men, and perfumers put, Some twelve in a Charger to make a grand sallet. A rich fat Usurer stew'd in his Marrow, And by him a Lawyers head and Green-sawce; Both which his belly took in like a barrow, As if till then had never seen sawce.
Then carbonado'd, and cookt with pains, Was brought up a cloven Srjeants Face; The sawce was made of the Yeomans brains, That had been beaten out wth his owne Mace. Two rosted Sheriffes came whole to the board, (The Feast had nothing been without um, Both living and dead they were Fox't and Fur'd; Their chains like Sawsages hung about um. The very next dish was the Major of a Town, With a pudding of maintenance thru in his belly Like a Goose in the Feathers drest in his Gown, And his couple of Hinch-boyes boyld to a jelly. A London Cuckold hot from the spit, And when the carver up had broke him; The Devil chopt up his head at a bit, But the horns were very near like to have choakt him. The chine of a Lecher too there was rosted, With a plump Harlots haunch and Garlike; A pandors pettitoes that had boasted Himself for a Captain, yet never was warlike. A large fat Pasty of a Mid-wife hot, And for cold bak'd meat into the story, A reverend painted Lady was brought, And coffin'd in crust, till now she was hoary. To these, an over grown-Justice of the Peace With a Clerk like a gizard thrust under each arm, And warrants for sippets, laid in his own grease, Set over a chafing-dish to be kept warm. The Jowl of a Jaylor, served for Fish, A Constable sous'd with Vinegar by, Two Aldermen-Lobsters asleep in a dish, A Deputy tart, a Church-warden pye. All which devoured, he then for a close, Did for a full draught of Darby call, e heav'd the huge Vessel up to his Nose, And left not till he had drunk up all.
Then from the Table he gave a start, Where banquet and wine were nothing scarce; All which he started away with a Fart, From whence it was called the Devils Arse. And there he made such a breath with the wind, The hole too standing open the while, That the sent of the Vapour before and behind Hath foully perfumed most part of the Isle. And this was Tobacco the Learned suppose, Which since in Country, Court and Town, In the Devils Glister-pipe smoaks at the Nose Of Polcat and Madam, of Galant and Clown. From which wicked weed, with Swines flesh and Ling, Or any thing else that's feast for the Feind; Our Captain and we cry God save the King, And send him good Meat, and Mirth without end.
The Song, of Tom a Bedlam. To the Tune of Grays-Inn Mask. FOrth from my sad and darksome Cell, From the deep abiss of Hell, Mad-Tom is come to view the world again, To see if he can ease his distemper'd brain: Fear and Dispair possess my Soul; Hark how the angry Furies howl! Pluto laughs, and Proserpine is glad To see poor naked Tom of Bedlam mad. Through the World I wander Night and Day To find my troubled Senses; At last Time I found Time With his Pentatuch of Tenses. When he me spies, away he flyes, For Time will stay for no man; vain with cryes I rend the Skies, For pity is not common. old and comfortless I lye, Oh help, oh help or else I dye! ark I heat Apollo's Team, The Carman 'gins to whistle; hast Diana bends her bow, And the Bore begins to bristle. ome Vulcan with tools and with tackles. And knock off my troublesome Shackles; d Charles make ready his Wain To fetch my five Seuses again.
Last night I heard the Dog-Star bark Mars met Venus in the dark; Lymping Vulcan heat an Iron bar, And furiously run at the god of War. Mars with his weapon layd about, Lvmping Vulcan had the gout, For his broad Horns that hung so in his light That he could not see to aym aright. Mercury the nimble post Post of heaven Stay'd to see the Quarrel, Gorrel belly Bacchus giantly bestrid A Strong-beer barrel: To me he drunk, I did him thank, But I could drink no Sider; He drank whole Buts till he burst his guts, But mine was ne're the wider. Poor Tom is very dry, A little drink for Charitie: Hark! I hear Acteon's hounds, The Hunts-man hoops and Hallows; Ringwood, Rockwood, Jowler, Bowman, All the Chace doth follow. The man in the Moon drinks Clarret, Eats powder'd Beef, Turnep and Carret: But a Cup old Malligo Sack Will fire the Bush at his back.
A LETANY. 1. FRom going to Bath with little money in my purse; From staying there after all's spent, which is worse, And from a drawers visit when I am ready to horse. Good Mercury defend me. 2. From an old German Quack yelipp'd Doctor Bavie, Whose skill is not half so much as his knavery, And ten to one will rather kill'ee then save'ee, Good Mercury, &c. 3. From his Purges and Vomits, his Powders and Jellie, Which more for's own good then yours he does sell'ee, And from medling with the Tapsters wife with a great belly. Good Mercury, &c. 4. From Ladies that take Physick before they be fick; That they may with better mettal answer the (.) Who copulates thrice a night, yet call't a lewd trick, Good Mercury, &c. 5. From such as in Bath use to sing a Hymn, From a Barber that on Sunday mornings refuses to trim, From living a Traitor, and dying like Pym, Good Mercury, &c. 6. From a Preacher that's as fat as the Bull Basan, And bellowes out such Doctrines as would amaze one, From his Font of Pewter, and his face that's brazen, Good Mercury, &c. 7. From his thanks to God for saving in Child-bed pain A woman that's from a Church a mile off or twain, And perhaps preparing for the same Bysiness again, Good Mercury, &c.
8. From a Colonel that vapours as if he were Mars, Yet will take a blow on the face and a kick on the arse, And so suffers more in Peace then he did in the Wars, Good Mercury, &c. 9. From a Captain that keeps a horrible stir, And when he's call'd Rascal, cries, Your servant Sir, That will challenge a Mastiff, and not fight with a Cur, Good Mercury, &c. 10. From an Hostess that reckons the same thing again, And brings in the same Items to several men; And from such that call to pay before it be ten, Good Mercury, &c. 11. From a rainy day when I have never a Cloak, From foul wayes when I ride in boots that do soak, And from a Town without drink when I am ready to choak, Good Mercury, &c. 12. From a Stone-horse that's right and sound limb and wind, Yet tires and leaves a fair Lady behind; And from an Inn where I'm forc't to take such as I find, Good Mercury, &c. 13. From uncivil Creditors that threaten to sue me; Fram gaping after Wealth which will never come to me; And from being a Poet, for that will undo me, Good Mercuy defend me.
A Ballad Ʋpon the downfal of one part of the Mitre-Tavern in Cambridge, or the finking thereof into the Cellar. By Mr. Tho. Randolph. LAment, Lament, you Scholars all, Each wear his blackest gown; The Mitre that held up your wits Is now it self faln down: The dismal Fire on London-Bridge Could move no heart of mine, For that but o're the water stood, But this stood o're the Wine. It needs must melt each Christian heart That this sad news but hears, To see how the poor Hogsheads wept Good Sack and Claret Tears. The Zealous students of that place Change of Religion fear, Lest this mischance may chance bring in The herresie of Beer. Unhappy Mitre I would know The cause of thy sad hap; Came it by making Legs to low To Pembrook's Cardinal's Cap?
Hence  now thy self and cringe no more, Since Popery went down, That Cap should vail to thee, for now The Mitre's next the Crown. Or was't because our company Did not frequent thy Cell, As we were wont to drown those cares, Thou fox'd thy self, and fell? No sure the Devil was adry And caus'd that fatal blow, 'Twas he that made the Cellar sink, That he might drink below. And some do say the Devil did it, 'Cause he would drink up all; But I rather think the Pope was drunk And let the Mitre fall. But Rose now wither, Faulcon mew, Whilst Sam enjoyes his wishes; The Dolphin too must cast her Crown, VVine was not made for Fishes. That signe a Tavern best becomes, That shews who loves wine best; The Mitre's then the onely signe, For 'tis the Scholars crest. Then drink Sack Sam and cheer thy Heart, Be not dismay'd at all; For we will drink it up again, Though our selves do catch a fall. VVe'l be thy workmen day and night In spite of Bugbear Proctors, We drank like Freshmen all before, But now we'l drink like Doctors.
Ʋpon the Virtue of SACK. By Dr. Hen. Edwards. FEtch me Ben. Johnsons scull, and fill't with Sack Rich as the same he drank▪ when the whole pack Of jolly sisters pledg'd, and did agree It was no sin to be as drunk as he: If there be any weakness in the wine, There's virtue in a Cup to mak't divine; This muddy drench of Ale does tast too much Of earth, the Mault retains a scurvy touch Of the dull hand that sows it; and I fear There's heresie in Hops; give Calvin Beer, And his precise Disciples, such as think There's Powder treason in all Spanish drink; Call Sack an Idoll, nor will kiss the Cup, For fear their Conventickle be blown up VVith superstition: give to these Brew-house alms, VVhose best mirth is Six shillings Beer, and Psalms: Let me rejoyce in sprightly Sack, that can Create a brain even in an empty pan. Canary! it's thou that dost inspire And actuate the soul with heavenly fire; That thou sublim'st the Genius making wit, Scorn earth, and such as love, or live by it; Thou mak'st us Lords of Regions large and fair, VVhil'st our conceits build Castles in the air: Since fire, earth, air, thus thy infriours be, Henceforth I'll know no Element but thee: Thou precious Elixi of all Grapes! VVelcome by thee our Muse begins her scapes, Such is the worth of Sack; I am (me thinks) In the Exchequer now, hark now it chinks:
And do esteem my venerable self As brave a fellow, as if all the pelf Where sure mine own; and I have thought a way Already how to spend it; I would pay No debts, but fairly empty every trunk, And charge the Gold for Sack to keep me drunk; And so by consequence till rich Spains Wine Being in my crown, the Indies too were mine: And when my brains are once afoot (heaven bless us!) I think my self a better man then Craesus. And now I do conceit my self a Judge, And coughing laugh to see my Clients trudge After my Lordships Coach unto the Hall For Justice, and am full of Law withal, And do become the Bench as well as he That fled long since for want of honestie: But I'll be Judge no longer though in jest, For fear I should be talk'd with like the rest When I am sober; who can chuse but think Me wise, that am so wary in my drink! Oh admirable Sack! here's dainty sport, I am come back from Westminster to Court; And am grown young again; my Ptifick now Hath left me, and my Judges graver brow Is smooth'd, and I turn'd amorous as May, When she invites young lovers forth to play Upon her flowry bosome: I could win A Vestal now, or tempt a Queen to sin. Oh for a score of Queens! you'd laugh to see How they would strive which first should ravish me, Three Goddesses where nothing: Sack has tipt My tongue with charms like those which Paris sipt From Venus, when she taught him how to kiss Fair Helen, and invite a fairer bliss: Mine is Canary-Rhetorick, that alone Would turn Diana to a burning stone: Stone with amazement, burning with loves fire, Hard, to the touch, but short in her desire.
Inestimable Sack! thou mak'st us rich, Wise, amorous, any thing; I have an itch To 'other cup, and that perchance will make Me valiant too, and quarrel for thy sake If I be once inflam'd against thy Nose That could preach down thy worth in small-beer Prose, I should do miracles as bad, or worse, As he that gave the King an hundred Horse: T'other odd Cup, and I shall be prepar'd To snatch at Stars, and pluck down a reward With mine one hands from Jove upon their backs That are, or Charls his enemies, or Sacks: Let it be full, if I do chance to spill Ov'r my Standish by the way I will Dipping in this diviner Ink, my pen, Write my self sober, and fall to tagen.
ON A Combat of Cocks, the Norfolk, and the Wisbish. By Mr. Tho. Randolph. Go you tame Gallants, you that have the name, And would accounted be Cocks of the Game, That have brave spurs to shew for't and can crow, And count all dung-hill breed that cannot shew Such painted Plumes as yours; that think't no vice, With Cock-like lust to tread your Cockatrice: Though Peacocks, Wood-cocks, Weather-cocks you be, If y' are no fighting-cocks, y' are not for me: I of two feather'd Combatants will write; He that to th' lise means to express the fight, Must make his ink o'th' blood which they did spill, And from their dying wings borrow his quill. NO sooner were the doubtful people set, The matches made, and all that would had bet, But straight the skilful Judges of the Play, Bring forth their sharp hee'ld VVarriours, and they VVere both in linnen bags, as if 'twere meet, Before they dy'd to have their winding-sheet. VVith that in th' pit they are put, and when they were Both on their feet, the Norfolk Chanticleere Looks stoutly at his ne're-before seen foe, And like a chalenger begins to crow, And shakes his wings, as if he would display His Warlike colours, which were black and gray: Mean time the wary Wisbish walks and breaths His active body, and in sury wreaths
His comely crest, and often looking down, He whets his angry beak upon the ground: With that they meet, not like that coward breed Of Aesop, that can better fight than feed: They scorn the dung-hill, 'tis their only prize, To dig for Pearl within each others eyes: They fight so long, that it was hard to know To th' skilful, whether they did fight or no, Had not the bloud which died the fatal floore Born witness of it; yet they fight the more, As if each wound were but a spur to prick Their fury forward; lightuing's not more quick Nor red then were their eyes: 'twas hard to know Whether it was blood or anger made them so: And sure they had been out, had they not stood More safe by being fenced in by blood. Yet still they fight, but now (alas!) at length, Although their courage be full tryed, their strength And blood began to ebbe; you that have seen A water-combate on the Sea, between Two roaring angry boyling billows, how They march, and meet, and dash their curled browes, Swelling like graves, as if they did intend To intomb each other, ere the quarrel end: But when the wind is down, and blustring weather, They are made friends, and sweetly run together, May think these Champions such; their combs grow low, And they that leapt even now, now scarce can go: Their wings which lately at each blow they clapt (As if they did applaud themselves) now slapt; And having lost the advantage of the heel; Drunk with each others blood they only reel. From either eyes such drops of blood did fall, As if they wept them for their Funeral. And yet they would fain fight, they came so near, As if they meant into each others ear To whisper death; and when they cannot rise, They lie and look blowes in each others eyes.
But now the Tragick part after the fight, When Norfolk Cock had got the best of it, And Wisbich lay a dying, so that none, Though sober, but might venture seven to one, Contracting (like a dying Taper) all His force, as meaning with that blow to fall; He struggles up, and having taken wind, Ventures a blow, and strikes the other blind. And now poor Norfolk having lost his eyes, Fights onely guided by the Antipathies: With him (alas!) the Proverb holds not true, The blows his eyes ne're see, his heart most rue. At length by chance, he stumbling on his foe, Not having any power to strike a blow, He falls upon him with a wounded head, And makes his conquered wings his Feather bed: Where lying sick, his friends were very charie Of him, and fetcht in hast an Apothecary; But all in vain, his body did so blister, That't was uncapable of any glister; Wherefore at length, opening his fainting bill, He call'd a Scrivener, and thus made his VVill. INprimis, Let it never be forget, My body freely I bequeath to th' pt, Decently to be bol'd, and for its tomb Let it be buried in some bungry womb. Item, Executors I will have none, But he that on my side laid sever to one: And like a Gentleman that he may live, To him and to his heirs my comb I give Together with my brains, that all may know, That oftentimes his brains did use to crow. Item, It is my will to the weaker ones, Whose Wives complain of them I give my stones; To him that's dull, I do my spur impart; And to the Coward, I bequeath my heart: To Ladies that are light, it is my will, My feathers should be given; and for my bill, I'de give't a Taylor, but it is so short, That I'm afraid hee'l rather curse me for':
d sr the Apothecaries fee, who meant give me a Glister, let my Rump be sent. Lastly, because I feel my life decay, I yield, and give to VVisbich Cock the day. On a Fart in the Parliament-House. By Sir John Sucklin. DOwn came Grave Antient Sir John Crooke And read his message in a book, ery well quoth Will. Norris, it is so, ut Mr. Pym's Tayl cry'd no. ye, quoth Alderman Atkins, I like not this passage o have a Fart intervoluntary in the midst of a message; Then up starts one fuller of Devotion Then Eloquence, and said, a very ill Motion: ot so neither quoth Sir Henry Jenking, The motion was good but for the Stinking; Quoth Sir Henry Poole 'twas an audacious trick o Fart in the Face of the Body Politick; ir Jerome in Folio swore by the Mass This Fart was enough to have blown a Glass: Quoth then Sir Jerome the lesser, such an abuse VVas never offer'd in Poland nor Pruce. Quoth Sir Richard Houghton, a Justice i'th Quorum, VVould tak't in snuff to have a Fart let before him: f it would bear an Action quoth Sir Thomas Holcraft, would make of this Fart a Bolt or a Shaft; Then quoth Sir John Moor to his great commendation will speak to this House in my wonted Fashion, ow surely sayes he, For as much as how be it This Fart to the Serjeant we must commit.
No quoth the Serjeant, low bending his knees Farts oft will break Prisons but never pay Fees; Besides this motion with small reason stands To charge me with that I can't keep in my hands: Quoth Sir Walter Cope, 'twas so readily let, I would it were sweet enough for my Cabinet. Why then Sir Walter (quoth Sir William Fleetwood) Speak no more of it but bury it with sweetwood. Grave Senate, quoth Duncombe, upon my salvation This Fart stands in need of some great Reformation. Quoth Mr. Cartwright, upon my conscience, It would be reformed with a little Frankensence. Quoth Sir Roger Ason It would much mend the matter If this Fart were shaven, and washt with Rose-water. Per verbum Pincipis, how dare I tell it, A Fart by here-say, and not see it nor smell it. I am glad quoth Sam. Lewknor we have found a thing, That no tale-bearer can carry it the King. Such a Fart as this was never seen Quoth the learned Councel of the Queen. Yet quoth Sir Hugh Beston the like hath been Let in a Dance before the Queen. Then said Mr. Peake I have a president in store, His Father Farted last Sessions before. A Bill must be drawn then quoth Sir John Bennet, Or a selected committee quickly to pen it. Why, quoth Dr. Crompton no man can draw This Fart within the compass of the Civil Law. Quoth Mr. Jones by the Law 't may be done, Being a Fart Intay'ld from Father to Son; In truth, quoth Mr. Brooke, this speech was no lye, This Fart was one of your Post Nati: Quoth Sir William Padd he dare assure 'am Though 'twere Contra modestum, 'tis not prater naturam. Besides by the Aphorismes of my art Had he not been deliver'd had been sick of a Fart. Then quoth the Recorder, the mouth of the City, To have smother'd that Fart had been great pity. It is much certain, quoth Sir Humphry Bentwizle, That a round Fart is better then a stinking Fiezle.
Have patience, Gentlemen, quoth Sir Francis Bacon, There's none of us all but may be mistaken: Why right, quoth the great Attorney, I confess The Eccho of ones A— is remediless. The Amorous Welshman to his Mistress. A Modest Shentle when hir see The creat laugh her make on me, And fine wink that her send To hir, to come see hir frend; Hir could not chuse pi got aprove, Put 'twas entangle in her Love. A Hundred tymes hir was a pout To speak to her to panish dout, Put hir being a Welshman porn, Was fer her think her wod hir scorn; And therefore was think nothing petter Then put her love into a letter. Hoping her will no ceptions take Unto hir love for Country sake; For say hr be Welshman, what tan; Pi got they be all Shentlemen: Was desended from Shoves nown lyne, Part Humain, and part Divine. And from far Fenu that far gottess, And twenty other shentle poddies: ector stout, and comely Paris, Arthur Plutus King of Faries Was hir own Cosen aull a Kin, Au'l of the Powel's issue spring.
Was love compel hir write this Ryme That never was wrytt before this time, And if her will not pitty hir pain Got sudge hir soul was never write again; Put if her vouchsafe to pleasure me, And for to come into her company To drink a quart, or too of wine, Pi got hir will say her fortunes fine; And tell her something in her eare Which her would not have aul to hear: And pi the Saul of sweet St. Taffie Or in kindness her would crave ye For to wryte too word or three VVhen and where our meet shall be, For love is like an Acue fit, VVas trive poor Welshman out of hir wit; Till py her answer her do know VVhether her do love her yea or noe. Hir have not pin in England long And hir cannot speak the English Tongue, Put hir is her friend, and so hir will prove, I pray send hir word if her can love. Theise Verses I send Peing rudly pend. By Griffin ap Shones ap Morgan ap Owen ap Ryce ap Powell.
On the Choice of a WIFE. Have past my maddest Age Free from Cupid's foolish Rage, ree from sighings, free from tears; ree from hopes, and free from fears: And yet I'le wed, if I can see A Mistress that is meet for me. rst, I wo'd have her person such s deformity cannot touch; e she black, or brown, or fair f complexion, hue, or hair,; If my Mistress comely be, She'l prove fair enough for me. urtly carriage in these dayes but a suspicious praise; r my part I care not for't, ture is not made at Court: Let a grave and vertuous Mother Be my Wifes Court, and no other. ealth I wish she may have more en to keep her from being poor, at she need not love for need, r I wealth her love to feed: If in mind or means she be Rich, she's rich enough for me. be born of noble blood, o her that's good a good: to me it is no more an time past, or untry'd Ore: Be she good, how ere she be Born, she's nobly born to me.
True Religion will make Any good for her own sake; But, let vertue be the Teacher Of my Wife, before the Preacher; She's good that wo'd use me well, Were there neither Heaven or Hell. Who for beauty takes a VVife, Chooseth by the sheath the Knife; And, who takes her for Estate, Or for person, hath ill fate: These may perish, or decay On, or ere her VVedding day. VVealth is Fortunes and not mine, Person owes decay to time: Learning, Wit, and such like parts Ravish mens, not womens hearts; But a love, by true love bred, Gives each night a maiden-head. Wit and Eloquence of tongue, Sho'd to me, not her, belong: Sober silence in a maid Sayes enough when nothing's said; And a wife when she speaks least, And that little well, speaks best. VVhen I court her first she shall Neither credit nought nor all, But, when time my truth has prov'd, Ad the finds she is belov'd Let her then believe, and then First begin to love agen. Let her next be wise, and know Love shall reap as Love shall sow. Trying masteries in a wife, Is the scab or bane of life: And hath too oft had the fate, To destroy a good Estate.
Children sho'd not be loves end, But loves mend: if God them send, She sho'd love them for no other Cause, but for my VVife's their Mother: If God send none I should be Child to her, and she to me. For man is the ball of fate, ost about from state to state; Therefore God for one chief part Give mine Fortitude of heart, That so she may valiant prove, And bear any loss but love. Next I wish that my heart may ind her's made of VVax, not Clay: hat my love may make her's be ore saft, not more hard to me; She's loves hangman, and his hell In whom a proud heart does dwell. VVhen the Priest has made us one, lesh of flesh and bone of bone; VVe must wed our wills together, nd will one in both or neither: By her tongue my heart must speak, Hers by mine must silence break. VVhere two hearts be thus indented hey live, for they live contented; VVhere they differ, there they die, nd their Marriage-knot untie: They and none but they are wed, Whose hearts lodge both in one Bed. e that knows to spend or spare, s times and occasions are, ings a portion, bringing none, , much better bringing one; One may well call such a wife, The life of her husbands life.
She her Husbands state and kie Shakes her glass to dress her by: She a neat and wholesom Diet Makes the utmost of her Riot; She, like a good snail, doth dwell Most at home in her own shell. Such a Wife as this would make Monks their Cloysters to forsake, Such a Wife would almost vex Angels, that they want a sex; Such a Wife I wish to nurse Both my hody and my purse. Thus i'th' Mine I'de choose my Gold, And my Wife cast in a Mould; Yet a Wonans son may vary, But I mean, if e're I marry, Either to have such an one, Or a better, which is none.
A Ballad On the Decay of good HOSPITALITY. GAllants, wil't please you to hear a plain Ditty, That's non-sense, and yet sense; not foolish nor witty? I tax no Commanders nor Magistrates Life, Nor speak of the Marriage of Maid, Widow or Wife; But I'le sing you a plain quoined song, a plain quoined song. Good Hospitality now are thee well, For, where go thy Founders to Heaven or Hell? A Question unanswered: The Papists approve it, The Puritan hates it; there's few that love it: The reason it was the old Fashion, the old Fashion. The Divine is incensed, and straight he will tell ye, The Scripture forbids him to make a god of his belly; And yet to speak truly they are tall men at Trenchers, carse a fine bit can scape them, some say they are Wenchers: It strengthens them in their Devotion, in their Devotion. The Country Justice hath the Law on his For to cite Statutes, therewith to provide That Beggars be punisht; and that's his protection, They dare not come near him for fear of correction: So he saves his Bread and his Beer, and his Beer. The Clerk of the Kitchin is grown out of season, And indeed for that Office I know not the reason, For three Cooks are busied about one dish of Meat, Whilst twenty stands gaping the same for to eat. Oh this is a hungry Age! a hungry Age!
The Porter indeed is in best estimation, To keep the Gates fast is a Noble-mans Fashion; A man may as soon enter into Lustra Ferarum, Especially if the master be Emptor terrarum: Oh this is a fearful time, a fearful time. Now where are those feastings and good Christmas keeping, Alass! they that us'd it are in their Graves sleeping; Your Baskets with New-year-gifts make you good chear, But all the year after you shall not drink there: 'Tis a Fashion they learnt in the City, learnt in the City. Now Noble-mens houses are nests for Jack-Daws, And Gentle-mens houses, are guarded by Laws; And Tennants are Rack't by there Land-lords so hie, That the poor, some Hang, some Starve and some dye: And all for want of good House-keeping, House-keeping. Captain Squiers Lettany, FRom Mahomet and Paganisme, From Heriticks, from Sects and Schisme; From Highway Raschals and Cut-purses, From Carted Bawds and old dry Nurses, From Glister-pipes and Doctors whistles, From begging Scholars stale Epistles, From Turn-stile boots and Long-lae Beavers, From Agues and from drunken Feavers, Libera nos, &c. From all several kinds of Itches, From Pick-locks and Cloak-bag Breeches, From Carbonado Sutes of Serges, From a Barstard that's the Clerges, From thread points and Caps of Cruel, And from the danger of a Duel, From a Tally full of Notches, And two privey Seals of botches, Libera nos, &c.
From a Whore that's never pleasant But in lusty Wine and Pheasant, From the watch at twelve a Clock, And from Bess Broughtons button'd Smock, From Hackney-Coaches, and from Panders That do boast themselves Commanders, From a tedious Taylors bill And a Pilgrimage up Helbourn Hill, Libera nos, &c. From Damages and Restitutions, From accursed Executions, From all new found wayes of Sinning, From the Scurf and Sable linnin, From the Pox and the Physician From the Spanish Inquisition, From a wife that's wan and meager, And from Lice and winter Leager, Libera nos, &c. From a gryping slavish Cullion, From the Gout and the Strangullion, From a Mount'bank with's Potions, Fron his Serrenges and Lotions, From the Buttock of Priscilla, That diets with Sarsaparilla, From a Pastor too too Zealous, And from the Tub of old Cornelius. Libera nos, &c. From Bawdy Courts and Civil Doctors, From Drunken Som'ners and their Proctors, From occasion to Revel VVith a Lawyer at the Divel, From Serjeants, Yeomen, and their Maces, From false Friends with double faces, From an Enemy more Mightie Than Usquebah or Aquavitae. Libera nos, &c.
A York-shire TRIALOGUE IN York-shire Dialect, Between an Awde Wife, a Lasse, and a Butcher. Awd Wife. PRetha now Lass, gang into th'hurn An fetch ma heame a Skeel o burn; Na, pretha Barne mack heast and gang, Ise marr me deaugh thou stayes sa lang. Lass. VVyah gom Ise gea, bad for me paines Yeu's ge m' a frundell o yar graines. Awd W. My grains me Barne, marry not I, Me draugh's for th' Gilts and Gauts ith' Sty: Than preetha Luke ith' Garth an see VVhat Owsen at the Stand-hecks be. Lass. Blukrins, the'l put, I dare not gang Outcep y' al len ma th' great Lap-stang. Awd. Take th' Fruggan, or th' awde Maelyn shaft, Cum tyte agaen and be nat daft. Lass. Gom th' great Bull segg he's brocken lowse, And he he's hypt your brade-horn'd Owse: And th' Owse is faln into the Swine trough, I thinke hee's brocken his Camerill-hough.
Awd. VVhaw whaw mi Lass, mack haest to th' Smedy, Hee's nuded, for he rowts already; Hee's bownd; O, how it boakes an stangs! His Lisk e'en bumps and bobbs wi' pangs; His VVeazen-pipe's as dry as dust, His Dew-lapp's sweild, he cannot host; He beales, tack th' Barwhams of oth' heames An fetch sum Breckons fra the dames, Fre th' bawkes, ga fetch ma a wayem-tow, My Nowts een wreckend, hee'l not dow. Een wellanerin for my Nowte, For syke a Musan neer was wrought; Put th' VVhyes a mel yon stirks an steers Ith' Oumar, an Sneck the Lear deers; See if Goff Hyldreth be gaen hand, Thou Heltarfull, how dares ta sland? Lass. Hee'l come belive or eables tittar, For wheyn a hard in what a twittar Yar poor Owse lay, he tooke his Flayle An hang't by th' Swypple on a Nayle, Anteuke a Mell fra th' topp oth' VVharmes, Answayr hee'd ding yar Owse ith' Harnes; He stack his Shackfork up ith' Esins, An tuke his Jerkin of oth' Gresins; Than tuke his Mittans, reacht his Bill, An of oth' Yune head tuke a Swill Ta kepp th' Owse blude in; Luke his cum. Awd. Than reach a Thivel or a Strum Ta stur his Blude; stand nat te tawke, Hing th' Recans up oth' Rannel-bawke, God ya god moare Goff. Is' een faine, You▪l put me Owse out o' his pain. Butch. Hough band him; tack thur VVeevills hyne Fra th' Reaps-end; this is not a Swyne VVe kill; where ilk yean hauds a fuat? Ise ready now, yelk ane luke tuit.
Than Beef a Gods nam, I now Cry, Streach out his Legs, and let him lye Till I cum stick 'im; whore's me swill? Cum hither Lass; hawd, hawd, hawd-still. L. What mun I dua with' Blude? B. Thou Fule Team't downe ith' gath, ith' Middin-pule. Good Beef by th' Messe, and when 'tis hunge Ise rowe it downe, with Teuth an Tongue, And gobbl't down een till I wurrye, And whan nest Mell wee mack a Lurrye; A peece o' this fre th' Kymlyn brought By th' Rude, 'twill be as good as ought. A. Mawte-hearted Fule, I een cud greet Ta see me Owse dead at me Feet; I thank ya Goff; Ise wype me Eene And pleas ya tue. B. Wyah Gom Green.
The SECOND PART. Here followeth Merry SONGS and CATCHES. The Tobacco-Takers Song. TObacco is my Musick, From idlers I absent me, For I have a Case that yields a brace Of Pipes that do content me. Still do I cry, Fill a Pipe, Fill a Pipe of the best Boy, Fill Boy never fail me; With Fire and Smoak, Still do I choak The Man that sits near me. If any bids me leave it, Or wish me to forsake it, Tell him from me, what e're he be, That in snuff I do take it. Still do I cry, Fill, &c. We need not the Physician, We scorn your Medicine-Makers, We hate your Pills for no poyson kills The true Tobacco-Takers. Still do I cry, Fill, &c.
My wife I fear is angry, I shall be shent if Nell come; Boy what's to pay? for I must away. Ten Pipes Sir, and you'r welcome. Still da I cry, Fill, &c. Tobacco makes me Valiant, From this our wives would wean us, But 'tis not she shall conquer me, For Mars did conquer Venus. Still do I cry, Fill a Pipe, Fill a Pipe of the best Boy, Fill Boy, never fail me; With Fire and Smoak Still do I Choak The Man that sits near me.
The Coblers Song. OH the Jovial Coblers! who lives merry lives, They have all things at command except it be our wives; How so ere we use the Body, Yet still we mend the Soul, And sing and drink and merrily trowl the Bowl. There's nere a Trade in Europe that can without us stand, For we repair and set upright all things we take in hand; We help all womens tripping, And such as tread awry, And sing and drink, and still we are a dry. We brissel with the proudest, be all in all with friends; No Lawyer in this Kingdome brings things to shorter ends: Although we are all in Pitch, At night we make all well, And sing and drink and merry Tales we tell. There was many Lords and Princes, the Gentle-craft did use, Who with content there time they spent in making Ladys shoos; Yet they themselves translated were, When to that Trade they fell, To sing and drink and trowl the Pitcher well. There's not a better Crafts-man in all the Common wealth, For though our Fingers be all Pitch we never live by stealth; But what we get all day, boys, At night we freely-spend, And sing and drink, and make a Jovial end.
The Needy-man's Song. A Way with this Cash, 'twill make us all mad, The happiest are they that ne're mony had; The Pocket that's full proves the owner a Gull, No Niggard so great, or apter to cheat, A Fob that is lank makes the owner Frank, I tell thee, my Friend, his loves without end. (Cho.) Oh he never can be Too Frolick and Free, No sweeter Estate Then the Needy mans fate. When mony's a stranger, the man's cut of danger, From whores and from wine he's kept within line, Hee smells to no Barrels, nor broaches no Quarrels, From Millions of Mocks and as many knocks, He saveth him self, by scorning of pelf; He wears out no shooes in hunting for News. (Cho) Oh he never can be Too Frolick, &c. He cheateth no Heires, nor Shoulder-men fears, Takes care for no Rent, forgets what was lent, Remembers not what this toy cost or that, He Signeth no Bill nor maketh no will; Away all is hurl'd, he treads down the World, And all that has sums, he counts them bt scums. (Cho.) Oh he never can be Too Frolick and Free, No sweeter Estate Then the Needy mans fate.
The Pedlers Song. FRom the fair Lavinion Shore I your Markets come to store, Muse not though so far I dwell And my wares come here to sell: Such is the secret hunger of Gold, Then come to my Pack, While I cry, What d'ye lack, What d,ye buy? for here it is to be sold. I have Beauty, Honour, Grace, Fortune Favour, Time and Place; And what else thou would'st request, Even the thing thou likest best: First let me have but a touch of thy Gold, Then come to me Lad Thou shal't have what thy Dad Never gave; for here it is to be sold. Madam, come see what you lack, Here's Complexion in my pack; White and Red you may have in this place To hide your old ill wrinkled face. First let me have but a touch of thy Gold, Then thou shal't seem Like a Wench of fifteen, Although you be Threescore year old.
The Cut-Purse Song. I Keep my Horse, I keep my Whore, I take no Rent, yet am not poor; I travel all the Land about, And yet was born to ne're a foot. With Partridge plump and Wodcock fine I often do at midnight Dine; And if my Whore be not in case, My Hostess Daughter takes her place. The Maids sit up and take their turns, If I stay long the Tapster mourns; The Cook maid has no mind to sin, Though tempted by the Chamberlin. But if I knock, O how they brussel! The Ostler yauns, the Gueldings gusses; If the Maid but sleep, O how they Curse her! And all this comes, of Deliver your Purse; Sir.
The Hay-makers Song. THe Morning doth wast, To the Medows let's hast, For the Sun doth with Glory shine on them; The Maidens must Rake Whilst the Hay-cocks we make, Then merrily Tumble upon them. The envy of Court Ne're aimes at our sport, For we live both honestly and meanly; Their Ladies are Fine But to Venus encline, And our Lasses are harmless and cleanly, Then let us advance Our selves in a Dance, And afterwards fall to our labour; No Measure so meet, Nor Musick so Sweet To us, as a Pipe and a Tabor.
The Scholar's Song, WHat Creatures on Earth Can boast freer Mirth, Less envy'd and loved than we; Though Learning grow poor, We scorn to implore A Gift but what's noble and free. Our freedom of mind Cannot be confin'd, VVith Riches we're inwardly blest; Nor Death, nor the Grave Our worths can deprave, Nor malice our Ashes molest. VVhen such Moles as you Your own Earth shall mue, And VVorms shall your memory eat; Our names being read Shall strike envy dead, And Ages our VVorths shall repeat.
The Beggers Song. CAst your Caps and cares away This is the Beggers Holy day; At the Crowning of our King Thus we ever Dance and Sing. In the world look out and see VVhere is so happy a King as he; VVhere's those people live so free, And so merry as do we? Be it peace or be it war, Here at Liberty we are, And enjoy our ease and rest, To the Field we are not prest. Nor are call'd into the Town To be troubled with a Gown, Hang all Offices we cry And your Magistrate defie. VVhen the Subsides are increast VVe are not a Penny ceast, Nor will any go to Law VVith a Begger for a straw. All which happiness be brags He doth owe unto his Rags. Second Part. From hunger and cold who liveth more free, And who so richly clothed as we; Our Bellies are full and our flesh it is warm, And against Pride our Rags is a charm. Enough is a Feast and for to Morrow, et Rich-men take Care, we feel no Sorrow,
The Tavern Song THe Gentry to the Kings-head, The Nobles to the Crown, The Knight unto the Golden-Fleece, And at the Plow the Clown. The Churchman to the Miter, The Shepherd to the Star, The subtle Gardner to the Rose, And at th' Drum the man of War. To the Feathers Ladies go, the Globe The Seaman do not scorn, The Usurer to the Devil, And the Citizen to the Horn. The Huntsman to the White-hart, To the Ship the Merchants go; But those that do the Muses love, To the Swan call'd River Poe. The Banquerout to the Worlds end, The Fool to the Fortune hie, Unto the Mouth the Oyster wife, The Fidler to the Pye. The Punck unto the Cockatrice, The Drunkard to the Vine, The Begger to the Bush, And with Duke Humphry to Dine.
The Healths. HEre's a Health to the merry old Sinner In a glass of strong Aquavitae, That for a Crown and a Dinner Will get you a wench will delight you. Because that you are not for Ale, Here's a Health to a Girle in strong Beer, Although she (like it) be stale, She may happen to cost you dear. Here's a Health in Ale to our Dear That latley hath serv'd in the Kitchin, A bouncing Wastcoateer, A remedy for the Itching. Here's a Health to the Earls fine Daughter In Renish with Lemon and Sugar Who (with this well ballanc'd) will after Give liberty to you for to hug her. Uno the Green sickness Maid Here's a Health in sparkling white, Though yet she be never staid, She may alter her mind e're night. Unto the new married wife Here's a Health in neat Clarret, Though her Spouse lead a jealous life, And her tongue out prattles a Parrot. To the Jovial Widdow at last A Health wee'l drink in Sack, Her constitutions in hast, You may quickly guess what she does lack. Now you have so freely drank Their Healths and merrily round, Each of you may go to his Punck, They are yours a Mite to a pound. But now I've thought better on't, Y'ad best to leave Drinking and Whoring, For virtue hereafter will vaunt, When vice shall receive a great scoring.
A Glee to Bacchus. BAcchus I, acchus fill our brains As well as Bowles with sprightly strains. Let Souldiers fight for pay and praise, And money be the Misers wish, Poor Scholars study all their daves, And Gluttons glory in their dish. 'Tis Wine, pure Wine, revives sad souls, Therefore give me the chearing bowles. Let Minions marshal in their hair, And in a Lovers Lock delight, And artificial Colours were, We have the Native red and white. 'Tis Wine, pure Wine, &c. Your Pheasant pout, and culver Salmon, And how to please your pallets think, Give us a salt West Phala-Gamon, Not meat to eat, but meat to drink. 'Tis Wine, pure Wine, &c. It makes the backward spirits brave, That Lively, that before was dull; Those grow good Fellows that are grave, And kindness flows from cups brim full. 'Tis Wine, pure Wine, &c. Some have the Tissick, some have Rheume, Some have the Palsey, some the Gout; Some swell with fat, and some consume, But they are found that drink all out. 'Tis Wine, pure Wine, &c. Some men want Youth, and some want health, Some want a Wife, and some a Punck; Some men want wit, and some want wealth, But he wants nothing that is drunk. 'Tis Wine, pure Wine, &c. Bacchus I, acchus fill our Brains As well as Bowles with sprightly strains.
A Glee to Bacchus. TO Bacchus we to Bacchus sing, VVith VVine and Mirth wee'l conjure him. By his Mothers Eye, And her Fathers Thigh, By his God brought to Light, And his too glorious Sight, By Juno's deceit, And by thy sad retreat, Appear appear appear in Bottles here. By Ariadnes wrongs, And the false youngs harms, By the Rock in his breast, And her tears sore opprest, By the Beauty she fled, And the pleasures of a bed, Appear appear appear in Bottles here. By this purple wine Thus pour'd on thy shrine, And by this Beer Glass, To the next kind Lass, By a Girle twice nine That will clasp like a Vine. Appear appear appear in Bottles here. By the men thou hast won, And the women undone, By the Friend-ship thou hast made, And the Secrets betraid, By the power over sorrow, Thus charm'd till to morrow, Appear appear appear in Bottles here.
ON A Pint of SACK. OLd Poets H'pocrin admire, And pray to water to inspire Their wit and Muse with heavenly fire; Had they this Heav'nly Fountain seen, Sack both their Well and Muse had been, And this Pint-Pot their Hipocrin. Had they truly discovered it They had (like me) thought it unfit To pray to water for their wit; And had ador'd Sack as divine, And made a Poet God of Wine, And this Pint-pot had been a shrine. Sack unto them had been in stead Of Nectar, and their heav'nly bread, And ev'ry Boy a Ganimed; Or had they made a God of it, Or stil'd it patron of their wit, The Pot had been a Temple fit. Well then Companions is't not fit Since to this Jemme we owe our wit, That we should praise the Cabinet, And drink a health to this divine, And bounteous pallace of our VVine: Die he with thirst that doth repine.
In the Praise of WINE. TIs VVine that inspires, And quencheth Loves fires, Teaches fools how to rule a State; Maids ne're did approve it, Because those that do love it, Despise and laugh at their hate. The drinkers of beer Did ne're yet appear In matters of any weight; 'Tis he whose designe Is quickn'd by wine That raises things to their height. VVe then should it prize For never black eyes Made wounds which this could not heal; VVho then doth refuse To drink of this Juice, Is a foe to the Common-weal.
A Glee in praise of Sack. Verse. SAck is the Prince of Wines, The Quintessence of Liquor, The Brain it Purges and Refines, And makes the Wit the quicker. Chorus. Then let us laugh, let us sing and quaff, Let us toss the Pot and be merry; Let us all bear a part, to drink quart after quart Of this same delicate Sherry. Verse. Should Jove come down to men And tast this Sack, he'd think, Nay swear by Styx 'twere better than The Wine the Gods do drink. Chorus. Then let us laugh, let us sing and quaff, Let us toss the Pot and be merry; Let us all bare a part, to drink quart after quart Of this same delicate Sherry. Verse. If a man have but this, He shall no Musick lack; No Musick to a Sack But is, Or to a But of Sack. Chorus. Then let us laugh, let us sing and quaff, Let us toss the Pot and be merry; Let us all bear a part, to drink quart after quart Of this same delicate Sherry.
A Song, Forsaken Phillis, her Lamentation. To a choice New Tune. MY Lodging is on the cold Ground, And very hard is my Fare; But that which troubles me most is The unkindness of my Dear: Yet still I cry O turn Love, And I prethee Love turn to me; For thou art the man that I long for, And alack what remedie! I'le Crown thee with Garlands of Straw then, And I'le Marry thee with a Rush Ring; My frozen hopes shall thaw then, And merrily we will sing, O turn to me my dear Love, And I prethee Love turn to me; For thou art the man that alone can'st Procure my libertie. But if thou wilt harden thy Heart still, And be deaf to my pitiful moan, Then I must endure the smart still, And tumble in straw alone: Yet still I cry O turn Love, And I prethee Love turn to me; For thou art the man that alone art The cause of my miserie.
On a Cold Chyne of BEEF. BRing out the Old Chyne, the Cold Chyne to me And how Ile charge him come and see: Brawn tusked, Brawn well sowst and fine VVith a precious cup of Muscadine: Chorus How shall I sing, how shall I look, Chorus In honour of the Master-Cook. The Pig shall turn round and answer me, Canst thou spare me a shoulder, a wy, a wy; The Duck, Goose and Capon, good fellows all three Shall dance thee an antick so shall the Turkey: But O! the cold Chyne, the cold Chyne for me▪ Chorus How shall I sing, how shall I look, Chorus In honour of the Master-Cook. VVith brewis Ile noynt thee from head toth heel Shall make thee run nimble then the new oyl'd wheel, With Pye-crust wee'l make thee The eighth wise man to be; But O! the cold Chyne, the cold Chyne for me: Chorus How shall I sing, how shall I look, Chorus In honour of the Master-Cook.
On a Chine of BEEF. A Chine of Beef, God save us all! Far longer than the Butchers Stall, And sturdier than the City wall; For this held out untill the foe By dint of Blade, and potent blow Fell in Pell-mell, that did not so. VVith Somachs sharper than their Knives They lay'd about them for their lives; VVell East-Cheape men beware your VVives: Inraged weapons storm'd it round Each wreaking from an open wound, That in its own Gravy it seem'd drown'd. Magnanimous Flesh! that did not fall At first assault or second mall, But a third time defaist them all; VVhat strength may fates decrees revoke? It was ordain'd this should be broke, Alass! in time the sturdy Oake. VVhat goodly Ruines did appear, VVhat Bulwarks, Spondals are there here, VVhat Palizado Ribs are there; The bold monument stearn Death defies, Inscribed thus to mirth, here lies A Trophey, and a Sacrifice.
Councel to a Batchellor. HE that Marries a merry Lass He has most cause to be sad, For let her go free in her merry tricks, She'l work his patience mad. But he that Marries a Scold a Scold He has most cause to be merry, For when she is in her fits, he may cherrish his wits With Singing hey down a derry. He that Weds a Roring Girle That will both scratch and fight, Though he study all day to make her away, Will be glad to please her at night. But he that Marries a sullen wench, Which scarce will speak at all, Her doggedness more than a Scold or a Whore Will penetrate his Gall. He that Marries with a Turtle-Dove That has no spleen about her, Shall wast so much life in love of his wife, He had better be without her.
Advice to a Friend upon his Marriage. TO Friend and to Foe, to all that I know That to Marriage Estate do prepare, Remember your dayes in several wayes Are troubled with sorrow and care: For he that doth look in the Married mans book And read but his Items all over, Shall find them to come, at length to a sum Which shall empty Purse, Pocket and Coffer. In the pastimes of love, when their labours do prove, And the fruit beginneth to kick, For this and for that, and I know not for what, The woman must have, or be sick: There's Item set down for a loos-bodyed Gown, In her longings you must not deceive her; For a Bodkin a Ring, or the other fine thing, For a Whisk, a Scarf or a Beaver. Deliver'd and well, who is't cannot tell Thus while the Child lyes at Nipple, There's Item for Wine, and Gossips so fine, And Sugar to sweeten their Tipple: There's Item I hope for Water and Sope, There's Item for Fire and Candle, For better for worse, There's Item for Nurse The Baby to dress and to dandle. When swadled in lap, There's Item for Pap, And Item for Pot, Pan and Ladle; A Courel with Bells, which custom compels, And Item ten Groats for a Cradle: With twenty odd knacks which the little one lacks, And thus doth thy pleasure bewray thee: But this is the sport in Country and Court, Then let not these pastimes betray thee.
The Married mans Diet. Twelve sorts of Meats my Wife provides, And bates me not a Dish; Of which Four Flesh, Four Fruit there are, The other Four of Fish. For the first Course she serves me in Four Birds that dainties are, The First a Quaile, the next a Raile, A Bittern, and a Jar. My Appetite being cloy'd with these, With Fish she makes it sharp, And brings me next a Lump, 2 Pout, A Gudgeon 2nd a Carp. The Second Course is of Fruit well serv'd, Fitting well the Season, A Medler, and a Hartichoak, A Crab, and a small Reison. What's he that having such a Wife That on her would not doat, Who daily does provide such Fare VVhich costs him ne're a Groat?
A Song, Caelia's Complaint. POor Caelia once was very fair, A quick bewitching eye she had; Most neatly look'd her brayded Hair, Her dainty Cheeks would make you mad: Upon her Lips did all the Graces play, And on her Breast ten thousand Cupids lay. Then many a doting Lover came From Seventeen till Twenty one, Each told her of his mighty flame, But she, Forsooth, affected none: One was not Handsome, th'other was not Fine, This of Tobacco smelt and that of wine. But t'ther day it was my fate To walk along that way alone, I saw no Coaob before her Gate, But at her Dore I heard her Moan; She dropt a Tear, and Sighing seem'd to say, Young Ladies, Marry, Marry while you may.
A Song, The Mad Lover. HE that will court a wench that is Coy, That is Proud, that is Peevish and Antick; Let him be as careless to sport and to toy, And as wilde as she can be frantick: Flatter her and slight her, Laugh at her and spight her, Rayl and commend her again; 'Tis the way to woe her, If you mean to do her; Such Girles love such men. He that will court a wench that is milde, And that is sweet of behaviour, Lt him gently woe her, And not roughly come to her, 'Tis the way to win her Favour: Give her Kisses plenty, She'l take them were they twenty, Stroak her and Kiss her again; 'Tis the way to woe her, If you mean to do her, Soft Girles love milde men. He that will court a wench that is mad, That will squeak and cry out if you hand her, Let him frisk and fling, and make the house to ring, 'Tis the only way to command her: Take her up and towze her, Give her Kisses and rouse her, Rayl and commend her again, 'Tis the way to woe her, If you mean to do her, Such Girles love wilde men.
A Song, An Old Knight to a Young Lad MAdam, your Beauty (I confess) May our young Gallants wound or bless, But cannot warm my frozen Heart, Not capable of Joy or smart: Cause neither Wit, nor Looks, nor Kindness can Make young a Super-annu-ated man. Those sparks that every Minute fly From your bright Eyes, do falling dye; Not kindle flames as heretofore, Because old I can Love no more: Beauty on wither'd hearts no Trophy gains, For Tynder over-us'd, no fire retains. If you'l indure to be admir'd By an Old Dotard new Inspir'd, You may enjoy the Quinteslence Of my past loves without Expence: For I can wait, and prate, I thank my Fate I can do all, but no new Fire Create.
A Song, Colin and his Love. MOst early in a Morning fair A Shepherd Sang this Solemn Ayr, VVhere his Dear Love did use to lye, And thus Lamenting he did Cry! VVas ever one in love as I, That am so Sick yet cannot dye? My Heart is broak, my delight is gone, Yet I'le have my Love, or I'le have none. My Father hath done me much wrong To keep me from my Love so long, But unto him I'le have it known That I'le hav my Love, or I'le have none. To some far Country I will goe, Confine my self to care and woe; And there I'le sit and make my moan, For I'le have my Love, or I'le have none, Set Forty Thousand on a row My love will make the fairest show; And though from me she's fled and gone, Yet I'le have my Love, or I'le have none. I gave my Love a pair of Shoon As black as Jet, her shoo-strings blew; She put um on and away she's Flown, Yet I'le have my Love, or I'le have none.
A Song, A Lady to a young Courtier. LOve thee, Good sooth, not I; I've some what else to do: Alas! you must go learn to talk, Before you learn to VVoe; Nay fie, stand off, go to go too. Before you'r in the Fashion, And newly come to Court, D'ye think your Cloths are Orators T' invite us to the sport, Ha ha! who will not jeer you for't? Ne're look so sweetly, Youth, Nor Fiddle with your Band, VVe know you trim your borrow'd Curls To shew your pretty Hand, But 'tis too young for to command. Go practice how to Jeer, And think each word a Jest; That's the Courts wit, Alas! you are out To think when finely drest You please me, or the Ladies best. And why so confident, Because that lately we Have brought another lofty word Unto our Pedegree; Your inside seems the worse to me. Mark how Sir Whacham Fools, I marry there's a wit? Who cares not what he sayes or swears, So Ladies laugh at it: Who can deny such Blades a bit.
The Bashful Lover. A Song in the Play of the Mock Astrologer. CAlm was the Evening and clear was the skie, And the sweet budding flowers did spring, When all alone went Amintor and I To hear the sweet Nightingale sing: I sate and he lay'd him down by me, And scarely his breath he could draw, But when with a fear he began to come near, He was dasht with a ha ha ha ba ha ha, &c. He blusht to himself, and laid still a while, 'Twas his modesty curb'd his desire; But strait I convinc'd all his fears with a smile, And added new flames to his fire: Ah! Silvia, said, he your are cruel To keep your poor lover in awe, Then once more he prest with his hand to my brest, But wast dasht with a ha ha ha ha ha ha, &c. I knew 'twas his passion that caused his fear, And therefore I pittied his case; I whisper'd him softly, there's no body near, And lay'd my Cheek close to his Face: But as he grew bolder and bolder A Shepherd came by us and saw, And strait as our bliss, we began with a Kiss, He laughs out with a ha ha ha ha ha ha, &c.
A Song, Fredome in Love. PLeasure, Beauty, Youth attend ve, Love and melting thoughts befriend ye; While the spring of Nature lasteth Use your time e're Winter hasteth. Active blood and free delight Place and privacy invite, Oh be kind as you are fair! Lose no advantage got for Air. She is cruel that denies it, Stealth of sport in love supplies it; Bounty best appears in granting, Else the eares of love are wanting. There's the sweet exchange of bliss, Where ach whisper proves a Kiss; In the gains are felt no pains, For still in all the loser gains.
A Song, Advice to Cloris. CLoris forbear a while, do not o're Joy me, Urge not another Smile, lest you destroy me; That Beauty pleaseth most, and is best taken, Which soon is won, soon lost, Kind, yet forsaken: I love a coming Lady, 'tis true I doe, But now and then I'de have her scornful too. O'recloud those eyes of thine, bo-peep thy Features, Warm with an April shine, scorch not thy Creatures; Still to display thy ware, still to be fooling, Argues how rude you are in Cupid's schooling: Disdain begets a smile, scorn draws us nigh, 'Tis cause I would and cannot, makes me try. Cloris I'de have thee wise, when Gallants view thee, And Court, do thou despise, fly those persue thee; Fasts move an Appetite, makes hunger greater, Whose stinted of delight falls to't the better: Be coy and kind by turns, be smoth and rough, And buckle now and then, and that's enough.
A Song, Counsel to a Maid. CLoris when e're you do intend To venture on a bosom Friend, Be sure you know your servant well, Before your libertie you sell. For Loves a Feaver in young and old, That's sometimes hot and sometimes cold; And men you know when e're they please Can soon be sick of this disease. Then wisely chuse a freind that may Last for an Age, not for a day; Who loves thee not for Lip or Eye, But from a Mutual Sympathie. To such a friend thy Heart engage, For he will court thee in old Age; And kiss thy shallow wrinkled brow With as much joy as he doth now.
A Song, The doubtful lover Resolv'd. FAin would I love but that I fear, I quickly should the willow wear; Fain would I marry, but men say When love is try'd he will away: Then tell me Love what I shall do To cure these fears when e're I woe. The fair one she's a mark to all, The Brown one each doth lovely call, The Black a Pearl in fair-mens eyes, The rest will stoop to any prize: Then tell me Love what I shall do To cure these fears when e're I woe. Reply. Go Lover, know it is not I That wound with fear or jealousie; Nor do men feel those smarts Until they have confin'd their hearts: Then if you'l cure your fears, you shall Love neither Fair, Black, Brown, but All.
A Song, The Merry Lover. I Love thee for thy Fickleness And great inconstancie; For had'st thou been a constant Lass, Then thon had'st ne're lov'd me. I love thee for thy Wantonness And for thy drollerie; For if thou had'st not lov'd to sport, Then thou had'st ne're lov'd me. I Love thee for thy Poverty And for thy want of Coin; For if thou had'st been worth a groat Then thou had'st ne're been mine. I Love thee for thy Uglyness And for thy Foolerie, For if thou hadst been fair or wise Then thou had'st ne're lov'd me. Then let me have thy Heart a while, And thou shalt have my Money, I'le part with all the wealth I have T' enjoy a lass so Bonny.
A Song, Liberty in Love. HOw happy art thou and I That never knew how to love, There's no such blessings here beneath, What e're there is above: 'Tis libertie, 'tis libertie That every wiseman loves. Out out upon those Eyes That think to Murder me, And he's an asse believes her fair That is not kind and free: There's nothing sweet, there's nothing sweet To man but Libertie. I'e tye my Heart to none, Nor yet confine mine eyes, But I will play my game so well I'le never want a prize: 'Tis libertie, 'tis libertie Has made me now thus wise.
A Song, A Clown to his Mistress. EXcellent Mistress! fairer then the Moon, Then scowred Peter or the silver Spoon; Brighter then Venus, or the Morning Star, Dainty fine Mistress by my troth you are. Far excelling all other Nimphs, As Lobsters, Crawfish or Crawfish Shrimps. The Glow-worm is most bright, Your Eyes do shine more clearly, As I hope to be Knighted I love thee most dearly. On a Wife. HEr for a Mistress fain would I enjoy Who hangs the Lip, and pouts at every toy; Speaks like a wag, is bold, dare boldly stand, And bare Loves Scepter in a constant hand; Laughs loud, and for one blow will give me three, And when she's stabb'd will fall a kissing me: If she be Modest Wise, and chast of Life, Hang her, she's good for nought but for a Wife.
On Tobacco. MUch Meat do serve the Glutton To feed upon like Swine, But he's a happy man indeed That on an Hearb can Dine: His Trencher needs no Napkin His Fingers for to wipe; He keeps a Kitchin in his box, His roast-meat in a Pipe. Upon a Welshman. A Man of Wales a little before aster Ran on his Hostess score for Cheese a Teaster. His Hostess chalkt it up behind the dore, And said, for Cheese (good Sir) Come pay the score: Cod's Pluternails (quoth he) what meaneth these? What dost thou think her knows not Chalk from Cheese?
A Song, The Jovial Tinker. HE that a Tinker, a Tinker will be, Let him leave other Loves and come listen to me, Though he Travels all the Day Yet he comes home still at Night, And dallies with his Doxie, And dreams of Delight. His Pot and his Tost in the morning he takes, And all the day long good musick he makes; He wanders up and down to Wakes and to Faires, And casts his Cap at the Court, and its cares: When to the Town the Tinker doth come, Oh how the wanton wenches run! Some bring him Basons, some bring him Bowles, All wenches pray him to stop up their holes; Tink goes the Hammar, the Skellet and the Skummer: Come bring me the Copper Kettle For the Tinker the Tinker, the merry merry Tinker, Oh he is the man of mettle! Ho Maids, Fair maids, sweet wenches come away, Let me here no longer stay, But bring me the Kettle, the Trug and the Tray, For here comes the Tinker with his Tools: This Trade was never taught in Schools, No nor his Art, as you may see, The Cobler mends not more then he.
CATCHES. NOw that the Spring hath fill'd our Veins With kind and active fire, And made green Liveries for the Plaines, And every Grove a Quire. Sing we this Song with mirth and merry glee, And Bacchus crown the Bowl, And here's to thee, and thou to me, And every thirsty soul. Shear sheep that have them, cry we still But see that none escape To take of his Sherry, that makes us so merry And plump as the lusty Grape. 2 Catch. Your merry Peets old Boys Of Aganippes Well, Full many tales have told Boys, Whose liquor doth excel, And how that place was haunted By those that love good VVine; VVho tippled there and chaunted Among the Muses Nine. VVhere still they cry'd Drink clear Boys, And you shall quickly know it, That 'tis not lowzy Beer Boys But Wine that makes a Poet. 3 Catch. Call George again boy, call George again, And for the love of Bacchus call George again. George is a good boy, and draws us good wine, Or fill us more Clarret our wit to refine; George is a brave Lad, and an honest man, If you will him know, he dwells at the Swan,
4 Catch. 'Mongst all the precious Juices Afforded for our uses, There's none to be compar'd with Sack; For the body or the mind No such Physick you shall find, Therefore boy see we do not lack. VVould'st thou hit a lofty strain, VVith this Liquor warm thy brain, And thou Swain shalt sing as sweet as Sidney; Or would'st thou laugh and be fat, There's not any like to that To make Jack Sprat a man of Kidney. It is the Soul of mirth To poor Mortals upon Earth, It would make a coward bold as Hector, Nay I wager durst a Peece, That those merry Gods of Greece Drank old Sack and Nectar. 5 Catch. Come come away to the Tavern I say, For now at home 'tis washing day; Leave your prittle prattle, and fill us a pottle, You are not so wise as Aristotle: Drawer come away, let's make it Holy-day, Anon, Anon, Anon Sir, what is't you say.
6 Catch. There was an old man at Waltham cross, Who merrily sung when he liv'd by the loss; Hey tro-ly loly loly lo. He never was heard to sigh a hey ho, But he sent it out with a Hey troly loly lo. He chear'd up his heart When his goods went to wrack With a hem, boy, Hem! And a cup of old Sack; Sing hey troly loly lo. 7 Catch. Come let us cast Dice who shall drink, Mine is twelve and his fice sink, Six and Four is thine, and he threw Nine, Come away Sink tray, Size ace fair play; Quator duce is your throw Sir, Quator ace, they run low Sir; Two Duces I see, Duce ace is but three: Oh were is the wine, come fill up his glass, For here is the man has thrown Ams ace. 8 Catch. She that will eat her breakfast in her bed, And spend the morn in dressing of her head, And sit at dinner like a Maiden-Bride, And nothing do all day, but talk of pride; Jove of his mercy may do much to save her, But what a case is he in that shall have her!
9 Catch. Never let a man take heavily the clamor of his wife, But be rul'd by me, and lead a merry life; But let her have her will in every thing, If she scolds then laugh and sing, Hey derry derry ding. 10 Catch. Let's cast away care and merrily sing, There is a time for every thing; He that plays at work, and works at his play, Neither keeps VVorking, nor yet Holi-day: Set business aside, and let us be merry, And drown our dull thoughts in Canary and Sherry. 11 Catch. Hang sorrow and cast away care, And let us drink up our Sack; They say 'tis good to cherish the blood, And for to strengthen the back: 'Tis Wine that makes the thoughts aspire, And fills the body with heat; Besides 'tis good, if well understood To sit a man for the feat: Then call, and drink up all, The drawer is ready to fill; Pox take care, what need we to spare, My Father has made his Will.
12 Catch. The Wisemen were but seven, ne're more shall be for me; The Muses were but nine, The worthies three times three; And three merry Boyes, and three merry Boyes are we. The Vertues were but seven, and three the greater be; The Caesars they were twelve, and the fatal Sisters three; And three merry Girles, and three merry Girles are we. 13 Catch. Shew a Room, shew a Room, shew a Room, Here's a knot of Good Fellows are come That mean for to be merry With Clarret and with Sherry; Each man to mirth himself disposes, And for the reckoning tell Noses: Give the Red-Nose some White, And the Pale-Nose some Clarret, But the Nose that looks Blew, Give him a Cup of Sack 'twill mend his hew. 14 Catch. O the wily wily Fox, with his many wily mocks! We'le Earth him, if you'l but follow, And now that we have don't, to conclude this merry hunt, Let us roundly whoop and hollow: Prethee drink, prethee drink, prethee-prethee drink, That the hunters may follow.
15 Cath. My Lady and her Maid upon a merry pin, They made a match at Farting, who should the Wager win, Jone lights three Candles then, and sets them bolt upright, With the first fart she blew them out, With the next she gave them light: In comes my Lady then, with all her might and main, And blew them out, and in and out, and out and in again. 16 Catch. Now I am married, Sir John I'le not curse, He joyns us together for better, for worse; But if I were single I tell you plain, I would be advised e're I marri'd again. 17 Catch. An old house end, an old house end, And many a good fellow wants mony to spend, If thou wilt borrow Come hither to morrow, I dare not part so soon with my friend, But let us be merry, and drink off our Sherry, But to part with my mony I do not Intend; Then a turd in thy Teeth, and an old house end.
18 Catch. Thou sit'st too long at the Pot Tom Thou sit'st too long at the Pot Tom, Here's thy Pot and my Pot, And my Pot and thy Pot, Then hold thy Nose to the Pot Tom. Thou studiest Phylosophy Tom, And some time Astrologey Tom; Let's have our Liquor about us Both within and without us; Then hold thy Nose to the Pot Tom. What humour hath cross'd the now Tom, VVhat humour hath cros'd the now Tom? VVhat Bug-bear doth fright thee From that that delights thee? Then hold thy Nose to the Pot Tom. VVhat Lawyer is like to thee Tom, Or for to plead against the Pot Tom? A fig for his reading, Except that his pleading Is for to maintain the Pot Tom. The Pot is the Peace-maker Tom, And the righter of every mans wrong Tom; For when the Law cannot mend it, The Pot it will end it, Then hold thy Nose to the Pot Tom. Then hold thy Nose to the Pot Tom, And do thy self not so much wrong Tom, Ct not that behind thee, VVhich Bacchus design'd thee; Then hold thy Nose to the Pot Tom,
For Malt that's good for the Maw Tom, It will cure the body in Autumn; The felix quem faciunt I pray thee be patient, Aliena pericula Cautum. Then hold thy Nose to the Pot Tom, And do thy self not so much wrong Tom; Neither Parson nor Vicar But will take off his Liquor, Then hold thy Nose to the Pot Tom. 19 Catch. Drink, drink, all you that think To cure your souls of sadness; Take up your Sack, 'tis all you lack, All worldly care is madness. Let Lawyers plead, and and Scholars read, And Sectaries still conjecture, Yet we can be as merry as they With a Cup of Apolle's Nectar. Let Gluttons feed and Souldiers bleed, And fight for reputation; Physicians are fools, to fill up close stools, And cure men by purgation. Yet we have a way far better then they, VVhich Galen could never conjecture, To cure the head, nay quicken the dead, VVith a cup of Apolle's Nectar. VVe do forget we are in debt VVhen we with liquor are warmed; VVe dare out-face the Sergeant's Mace And Martial Troops through armed. The Swedish King much Honur did win, And valiant was as Hector; Yet we can be as valiant as he, VVith a cup of Apollo's Nectar.
Let the worlds slave his comfort have And hug his hoards of treasure, Till he and his wish meet both in a dish; So dies a Miser in pleasure. 'Tis not a fat farm our wishes can charm, We scorn this greedy conjecture; 'Tis a health to our friend, to whom we commend This cup of Apollo's Nectar. The Pipe and the Pot, are our common shot, Wherewith we keep a quarter; Enough for to choak with fire and smoak The great Turk and the Tartar. Our faces red, our Ensignes spread, Apollo is our Protector; To rear up the Scout, to run in and out, And drink up this cup of Nectar. 20 Catch. There was three Cooks in Colebrook And they fell out with our Cook, And all was for a pudding he took, And from the Cook of Colebrook. There was swash cook, and slash cook, And thy Nose in my Narse Cook, And all was for a pudding he took, And from the cook of Colebrook. Then they fell all upon our Cook, And mumbled him so, that he did look As black as the pudding which that he took, And from the Cook of Colebrook. 21 Catch. Wilt thou lend my thy Mare to ride a mile? No, she's lame going over a stile: But if thou wilt her to me spare Thou shalt have mony for thy Mare: Oh! say you so, say you so, Mony will make my Mare to go.
22 The Answer. Your Mare is lame she halts down right, Then shall we not get to London to night: You cry'd ho, ho, mony made her go, But now I well perceive it is not so; You must spur her up and put her to't Though mony will not make her go, your spurs will do't. 23 Catch. If any so wise is, that Sack he despises, Let him drink his small beer and be sober, VVhilest we drink Sack and sing, as if it were spring, He shall droop like the Trees in October. But be sure over night, if this dog do you bite, You take it henceforth for a warning, Soon as out of your bed, to settle your head Take a hair of his tayle in the Morning: And be not so silly, to follow old Lilly, For there's nothing but Sack that can tune us, Le his Ne-assuescas be put in his cap-case And sing bi-bi-to vinum Jejunus. 24 Catch. Good Symon how comes it your Nose looks so red, And your Cheeks and lips look so pale, Sure the heat of the Tost, your Nose did so rost, VVhen they were both souc'd in Ale. It showes like the Spire of Pauls steeple on fire, Each Ruby darts forth (such lightning) Flashes VVhile your face looks as dead, as if it were Lead, And covered all over with ashes.
Now to heighten his colour, yet sill his pot fuller And nick it not so with froth, Gra-mercy mine Host, it shall save thee a Toast, Sup Simon, for here is good broth. 25 Catch. Wilt thou be Fat? I'le tell thee how Thou shalt quickly do the Feat; And that so plump a thing as thou Was never yet made up of meat: Drink off thy Sack, 'twas onely that Made Bacchus and Jack Falstafe, Fat, Fat. Now every Fat man I advise That scarce can peep out of his eyes, Which being set can hardly rise; Drink of his Sack and freely quaff, 'Twill make him lean, but me to laugh To tell him how — 'tis on a staff. 26 Catch. Of all the brave Birds that ever I see The Owle is the fairest in her degree, For all the day long she sits in a tree, And when the night comes away flies she; To whit, to whow, to whom drinkst thou? Sir Knave to thou; This song is well sung, I make you a vow, And he is a knave that drinketh now. Nose, Nose, Nose, and who gave thee that jolly red Nose? Nutmegs and Cloves, and that gave thee thy jolly red Nose.
27 Catch. This Ale, my bonny Lads, is as brown as a berry, Then let us be merry here an hour; And drink it e're it's sowre: Here's to thee lad, Come to me lad; Let it come Boy, to my Thumb Boy. Drink it off Sir, 'Tis enough Sir; Fill mine Host Toms Pot and Toast. 28 Catch. What are we met? come let's see If here's enough to sing this Glee; Look about, count your number, Singing will keep us from crazy slumber; 1, 2, and 3, so many there be that can sing, The rest for wine may ring: Here is Tom, Jack and Harry, Sing away and do not tarry, Merrily now let's sing, carouse and tipple, Here's Bristow Milk, come suck this nipple, There's a fault Sir, never halt Sir, before a cripple. 29 Catch. Jog on, jog on, the Foot path-way, And merrily hent the stile-a; Your merry heart goes all the day, Your sad tires in a mile-a. Your paltry mony bags of Gold, What need have we to stare for, VVhen little or nothing soon is told, And we have the less to care-for:
Cast care away, let sorrow cease, A Fig for Melancholy; Let's laugh and sing, or if you please VVe'l frolick with sweet Dolly. 30 Catch. VVhat fortune had I poor Maid as I am To be bound in eternal vow, For ever to lye by the side of a Man That would, but know's not how: Oh can there no pity Be in such a City, VVhere Lads anough are to be had! Unfortunate Girle, that art wed to such woe, Go seek thee a lively Lad, And let the poor that hath nothing to shew Go seek for another as bad: Then call for no pity Thou dwelt in a City, VVhere Lads enough were to be had. 31 Catch. Fly Boy, Fly Boy, to the Cellars bottom, View well you Quills and bung Sir, Draw wine to preserve the Lungs Sir, Not rascally wine to Rot u'm: If the Quill runs foul, Be a trusty soul, and cane it; For the Health is such An ill drop will much profane it.
32 Catch. Diogenes was merry in his Tub. And so let us be at our Club; 'Tis mirth that fills the veins with blood, More then either wine, sleep, or Food. Let each man keep his Heart at ease, No man e're dy'd of that disease; 'Twill alwayes keep thy body in health, Then value it above thy wealth. 'Tis sadness and grief that doth bring Diseases in Autumn and Spring; Then welcome harmless mirth I say, The more we laugh the more we may. 33 Catch. What if we drink, let no man think There's Treason in the Cup, 'Gainst the King it is not any thing, 'tis a plot To blow our sorrow up. Ne're charge pure wine with such design, 'Tis too noble, fill the Glass, Let's be free without fear, Loyaltie liveth hear. In vino verita. 34 Catch. A Fig for care, why should we spare The Parish is bound to find us, For thou and I and all must dye, And leave the world behind us. The Clerk shall Sing, the Bells shall Ring And the Old Wives wind us; Sir John shall lay our Boues in Clay, VVhere no body means to find us.
35 Catch. Had the not care enough, care enough, Care enough of the old man? She wed him, she fed him, And to the bed she led him; For seven long winters she lifted him on: But oh how she negl'd him, negl'd him, Oh how she negl'd him all the night long! 36 Catch. Here's Health unto his Majesty with 2 Fa la la, &c. Conversion to his Enemies with a Fa la la, &c. And he that will not pledge this Health, I wish him neither wit nor wealth, Nor yet a Rope to hang himself with a Fa la la, &c. 37. Catch. Tom Sanders is he that draws us good Wine, At Edmunton Town there hangs out his Signe; He carries the Bell for Sack and Terse Clarret, Jack knowes it well and Paul will aver it: For Mathew and will with the rest of the Voken, There's much might be said, But then more must be spoken. 38 Catch. Ne're trouble thy self at the times nor their turnings, Afflictions run circular and wheel about; Away with thy murmuring and thy heart burnings, VVith the Juyce of the Grape we'l quench the fire out. Ne're chain nor imprison thy soul up in sorrow, What fails us to day, may be friend us to morrow; Let us scorn our content from others to borrow.
The thirsty Earth Drinks up the Rain, And Drinks and gapes for Drink again; The Plants suck in the Earth, and are With constant drinking fresh and fair; The Sea it self, which one would think Should have but little need of drink, Drinks ten Thousand Rivers up, So fill'd that they o'reflow the Cup. The busie Sun, and one would guess, By's Drunken fiery Face no less, Drinks up the Sea, and when that's done, The Moon and Stars Drink up the Sun; They Drink and Dance by their one light, They Drink and Revel all the night; Nothing in Nature's sober found, But an eternal health goes round. (Cho.) Fill up the Bowl and fill it high, Fill all the Glasses here, for why Should every Creature Drink but I? Why man of Morrals, tell me why! Mr. A. Cowley. 40 Catch. Good Susan be as secret as you can, You know your Master is a jealous man; Though thou and I do mean no hurt or Ill, Yet Men take Women in the worse sens still; And fear of Horns more grief in hearts hath bred, Then wearing Horns doth hurt a Cuckolds head.
41 Catch. Sweet Jane, sweet Jane, I love thee wondrous well; But I'm afraid, thoul't dye a Maid, And so lead Apes in Hell. For why my Dear, 'Tis pitty it should be so, Thou'dst better then to take a man And keep thee from the foe. Thou art so pretty and fine, And wondrous handsome too; Then be not coy, let's get a boy, Alass! what should we do. I see thy Brow, and I know What colour it is below; Then do not Jest, but smile the rest, I fay I know, what I know. 42 Catch. If wealth could keep a man alive, I'de only study how to thrive; That having got a mighty Mass 'Might bribe the fates to let me pass. But since we can't prolong our years, Why spend we time in needless grief and fears; For since Dest'nie has decreed us to dye, And all must pass over the Ferry: Hang Riches and Cares, Since we han't many Years, Let's have a short life and a merry.
43 Catch. Times are changed from bad to worse, Knavery thrives and sills a pace the Purse It was a goodly Golden Age of Old, But now the Age is mad for Gold; Youth and Beauty play at wasters, Is not this a mad world, my Masters? Couzenage is the praise of wit, Letchery but a merry merry fit, Pride a complement and grace, Beauty an Adul'trate Face; Drunkards now are call'd Boon Wasters, Is not this a mad world, my Masters? 44 Catch. Bess black as a Charcole, Was found in a dark hole, With Kit, at the Cat and the Fiddle; But what they did there, None safely can swear, Yet Gentlemen Riddle my Riddle. 'Troth I would be loth, Were I put to my oath, To swear Kit with Bess did ingender; Yet it would tempt a man, Bridle all he can, His present wishes to tender. But it was found at last, E're twelve-months was past, That Cristopher Bess had o're master'd, For betwixt either Thigh He quartered so nigh, She brought him a Jolly brown Bastard.
45 Catch. A Womans rule should be in such a fashion, Only to guide her houshold, and her passion; And her obedience never out of season, So long as either Husbands lasts or Reason. Ill fares that hapless Family that showes, A Cock that's silent and a Hen that Crowes; I know not which live most unnatural lives, Obedient Husbands, or Commanding Wives. 46 Catch. When Wives do hate their Husbands friends, As jealous of some fearless ends, And still and angry look she settles, As if of late she'ad piss'd on Nettles. Ware ho, ware ho, for then of force The Mare will prove the better Horse. When Women will ever be nice, Foolish, Proud and manly wise; And their wanton humour Itches, To were their Husbands widest Breeches. Ware ho, ware ho, for then of force The Mare will prove the better Horse. 47 Catch. Then let us be friends, and most friendly agree, The Pimp, the Punck and the Doctor are three; That cannot but thrive when united they be. The Pimp brings in custom, the Punck she gets treasure, Of which the Physician is sure of his measure, For work that she makes him in sale of her pleasure. r which when she wears by Diseases or Pain, e Doctor new Vamps, or Upsets her again; e Doctor new Vamps or upsets her again.
48 Catch. A Pox on the Jaylor and on his fat Jole, There's liberty lies in the bottom of th' Bole, A fig for what ever the Rascal can do, Our Dungeon is deep, but out Cups are so too; Then Drink we round in despite of our foes, And make our hard Irons cry clink in the close: Now laugh we and quaff we, untill our rich Noses Grow red, and contest with our chapplets of Roses. 49 Out of Anacreon. When I tast my Goblet deep, All my cares are rock'd asleep; Then I am Croesus Lord of th' Earth, Singing Odes of Wit and Mirth: And with Ivy Garlands Crown'd, I can kick the Globe round, round. Others Fight, but let me Drink, Boy, my Goblet fill to th' Brink; For when I lay down my Head, Better be Drunk, Dead-drunk, then dead. FINIS.
Although some of these merry Poems Do seem to Halt on Crutches, Yet I doubt not, but they'l please you, For your charge, which not much is. Advertisement. Those who for their Curiosity, and the more complete∣ment of these Ballads, Songs, or Catches, do desire the Tune to any of them, if they please to call at John Playford's shop in the Temple; he will accommodate them with the most of the said Tunes.
Books newly printed for John Playford at his Shop in the Temple. 1. Three Books of Ayres and Dialogues to sing to the Theorbo Lute or Viol, Composed by Mr. Henry Lawes and others, all bound in one Volum in Folio, the price 10 s. 2. The Musical Companion containing Catches, Ayres and Songs of 2, 3 and 4 Voyces, bound in one Volum in 4o the price 3 s. 6 d. 3. A new Collection of Lessons for the Lyra Viol in 4o Intituled Musicks Recreation on the Lyra Viol, fitted for young beginners, the price 2 s. 4. the Introduction to the skill of Musick both Vocal and Instrumental by John Playford in 8o the price bound up 2 s. 5. Musicks Handmaid, a Book engraven on Copper Plates in 4o Containing 40 easie and pleasant Lessons for the Virginals the price 2 s. 6. Musicks Delight, containing new and pleasant Lessons on the Cithren, with Instructions for beginners, bound in 8o the price 18 d.
