E2094 E397_22 R201678 99862178 114329
AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT. To inable the Committee of the MI∣LITIA of LONDON to make Searches for Popish Recusants, and other ill-affected Persons. And to raise, maintaine, and continue 600. Horse, for the defence and safety of the Parlia∣ment, City, and parts adjacent. Die Sabbathi 10. Julii, 1647. ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith printed and published. Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. London Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1647.
Die Sabbathi 10. Julii. 1647. An Ordinance to enable the Com∣mittee of the Militia of London to make Searches, and to raise six hundred Horse. THe Lords and Commons in Parlia∣ment assembled doe Declare and Ordaine, That the Committee of the Militia of London shall have power, and are hereby authorized and required by themselves, or such as they, or any nine or more of them shall appoint, to search all houses and places within the Lines of Communication, and Parishes men∣tioned in the weekly Bills of Mortality, and Hamblets of the Tower, where the said Committee, or any nine or more of them shall have cause to suspect; for all Popish Recusants, or other persons, who have or shall discover their ill affection to the Parlia∣ment, by any act or offence for which they ought to be sequestred by any Ordinance of Parliament; and for such person or persons
as by any Act or Ordinance of Parliament be Declared, Ordained, or Commanded to de∣part, or not come into, or be removed out of the City of London and Liberties thereof, or out of the Line of Communication, or Pa∣rishes within the weekly Bills of Mortality, and Hamblets of the Tower; and likewise to search for Armes, Ammunition, and ma∣terialls for Warre in the custody of, or be∣longing to such persons; and to seize and take away the same, and also to commit to safe custody all such persons as abovesaid (o∣ther then such as by both Houses of Parlia∣ment, or by Authority from the said Houses are enabled, declared, or have license to a∣bide, or come into the said City and places) or to expell all and every such persons (o∣ther then as abovesaid) out of the Line of Communication, and limits aforesaid as they shall see cause; and in case of resistance to command any Constable, or Constables, or others in their aid, to breake open any house or place within the said limits where any re∣sistance shall be made. And it is hereby fur∣ther Declared and Ordained, and the said
Lords and Commons in Parliament assemb∣led doe Declare, and Ordaine for the better suppression of all tumults, and unlawfull assemblies within the Cities of London and Westminster, and parts adjacent, and for the defence and safety of the Parliament and Ci∣ty, and parts adjacent, That the Militia of the City of London, or any nine or more of them shall, and may, and are hereby enabled, authorized, and required to continue, raise, or leavie, or cause to be continued, raised, or leavied from time to time one Regiment of Horse, with Riders and furniture fitting, not exceeding six hundred Horse with Officers. And for the better continuing, raising, and leavying the said six hundred Horse, it is fur∣ther Ordained, and be it by authority of Parliament Ordained, That the said Com∣mittee of the Militia of London, or any nine, or more of them, shall hereby have full Power and Authority from time to time to charge such Inhabitants who are constantly dwelling within the Lines of Communication, and Parishes mentioned in the weekely Bills of Mortality, and
Hamblets of the Tower, or such persons who have any stocks going in Trade within the Limits aforesaid, and absent themselves (as shall appeare to them to be most able) to finde and maintaine Horses with Riders and Furniture, at their proper charge, for the de∣fence of the City, and parts adjacent, (so as no person shall be charged for the raising and maintaining of more then two Horses) to be put under such Commanders and Offi∣cers as the said Committee shall thinke sit: And if any person or persons who shall be charged to finde Horses, Riders, and Furni∣ture, as is aforesaid, and shall refuse or neg∣lect to provide the same, within three daies after notice thereof given to them, or left in writing at their dwellings, shall forfeit and pay twenty pounds; And if they shall neg∣lect or refuse to send forth their Horse or Horses, with Riders provided and furnished, as is aforesaid, when, and as often as he or they shall be summoned thereunto by the said Committee, or such Commanders or Officers as they shall appoint; in default thereof, that then they shall forfeit and pay
ten shillings upon every such failing, or suf∣fer foure daies imprisonment without Bayle or Mainprize, to be inflicted upon every such Offendor, in such manner and forme, and by such Officers and Persons as are appointed for the inflicting of penalties upon the fail∣ing of the Foot Souldiers of the Trayned Bands, expressed in an Ordinance of Parlia∣ment, dated the second day of May, Anno Dom. 1643. And the said Fines to be im∣ployed by the said Committee toward the payment of the Commanders and Officers of the said Horse; and for such other uses as the said Committee shall finde necessary for the better carrying on the said Service. And be it hereby further Declared and Or∣dained, That for the better executing of this present Ordinance, and such former Ordi∣nances which are now in force concerning the Militia of the City of London, and the places aforesaid, Power and Authority be hereby given to the said Committee, to make one or more Sub-Committee or Sub-Com∣mittees within the said Limits, as they shall thinke fit, for the executing of this and the
said former Ordinances concerning the Mili∣tia: And all Constables, Headboroughs, and other inferiour Officers within the said Li∣mits, and all Commanders and Souldiers of the said Militia, are hereby required to obey and execute such Warrants and Orders as they from time to time shall receive from the said Committee, or Sub-Committee, or Sub-Committees, for, and concerning the execu∣tion of the same accordingly. And lastly, That no priviledged place, or person, within the Limits aforesaid, shall be exempted from the Power of this Ordinance, except the Peers of this Realme, and Members of the House of Commons, and Assistants of the House of Peeres, and Officers and Attendants of both Houses of Parliament respectively, who shall be exempted from this Ordinance, and all things therein contained. Provided that this Ordinance shall continue for two months and no longer. FINIS.
