G1595 E55_10 99871378 155256
A TRVE REFORMATION, AND PERFECT RESTITVTION, Argued by Silvanus and Hymeneus; Where in the true Church of Christ is briefly discovered here in this life in her estate of regeneration, as also her perfection in the life to come, As it hath been foretold by all the holy Prophets and Apostles, which have been since the world began. By J. G. a Friend to the truth and Church of God. Feare not little Flock, it is your Fathers pleasure to give you the Kingdom, For now is our Salvation neerer than when we believed. LONDON, Printed by T. B. and are to be sold by S. B. in Corn-hill, 1643.
TO THE CHVRCH OF CHRIST IN ENGLAND. Faithfull and beloved, I The unworthyest of ten thousand of you have presumed to speak while you all were silent of this Subject, and have made bold with your honourable and spirituall conditions to make a brief description of you, the Lords people, who are all of you the Chil∣dren of wisdom, and so taught of God, that your own God termes you the wise that shall understand, the keepers of his truth, his remembrancers, the people in whose heart is his Law, to whom it is given to know the mysteryes of the Kingdom of God. I intreate you all fellow sufferers, truly noble and honourable Christians, that how much the
neerer our salvation approacheth, so much the more let our joynt prayers and praises be to our God, the lambe that sitteth upon the Throne, let us not cease, nor give him no rest till he establish, and till he make Ierusalem a praise in the earth; and if I have failed in negotiating your great af∣faires, let our garment of love cover it: and your wise and grave reproof, or admonitions shall be as balme to cure my weaknesse; so the God of truth, multiply the comforts of it in us all, in the clear de∣monstration of the spirit with power, that as we are the Children of Abraham by Faith, so we may do the works of our Father Abraham, for which your Brother J. G. shall ever pray with you, and for you to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen.
A True Reformation, and perfect Restitu∣tion argued by Silvanus and Hymeneus. Silvanus. OLD Friend Hymeneus, how hath it been with you a long time, I heare seven years a go you were in new England? Hymeneus: I thank you Sir, that you would acknowledge your long unseen, although longer known Friend, for I think it is neere twice seven years since I last spake with you. Silv. What news in new England? I heare you are there at a hard-ship, both for soul and body, provision for back and belly, foode and clothes very scarce, and Religion which should be as both to the soul, is so lost, that, that which seemed unitie in the truth, is turned to dissen∣tion, the ground of error and falshood, which custome the Church of Christ hath not, which is the Church of God. Hym. Friend, you may heare more than is true, yet I say, the superfluitie of this world is not alwayes expedient, and for Religion it is requisite that there should be difference amongst us that the approved may be manifest. Silv. I see you have not forgotten your former Custome frequently to alleadge Scripture-phrase, but I perceive also you have not learned the A∣postles rule perfectly, which saith, if any man speak, let him speak as the O∣racles of God, that is, the true meaning of it, for all that were in the Church of Corinth, were not of the Church. Hym. I hope I have done the same in what I have said. Silv. I spake before of the truth and of the children thereof, which ad∣mit of no dissention, and you speak of the Church of Corinth, in which were some, which were Sectaries, and not the children of the truth, and though they were amongst them, yet they were not of them, but were false Apostles and wicked inordinate persons.
Hym. I pray, expresse your meaning to me more fully. Silv. My meaning is that Christians should still intend by their speak∣ing the same meaning which the holy Ghost doth, in the termes he useth, for one and the same terme, sometimes is to be understood in a speciall sence, sometimes in a generall, as by Iew, sometimes the same word in∣tends the inward Iew, sometimes the outward, so of Religion and of the Church, vaine Religion aswell as pure Religion, the Synagogue of Sathan aswell as the true Church of God. Hym. These distinctions under one, and the same name are very profitable without doubt in the reading the Scriptures. Silv. I pray you Friend, tell me what matter, and what manner you have for the constitution of your Churches in new England. Hym. The matter are a company of believers; the manner or forme is this, we from amongst our selves choose a pastor; the pastor and we being entred into a mutuall Covenant, the one to be faithfull in teaching and feeding, the other in hearing and obeying according to Christs ordinance; by this reciprocall bond, we become one Congregation or body, as the head and members are one, and so the pastor and people together choose other Church Officers, as Elders and Deacons. Silv. I understand you thus, that this is your first way you take to give your Church the being or name of a Church, but what way do you take to encrease this Church, or ad unto it, for the Scripture saith, there were day∣ly added to the Church such as should be saved. Hym. Our custome is that we admit none to be Members of our Church, but such as cannot give an Accompt of their conversion, and that they do re∣nounce all other congregations as Members to them; and doth make themselves by covenant that is by a solemne vow, calling God to witnesse that they joyne themselves to us to be our Members only, and so to no other Church but to walk with us according to Christs Ordinance; and though some of other congregations may come in Communion in the Ordinance of the word yet we account them no Members. Silv. And this is all you believe that the Scripture expresses, tending to the making and being of a true Church. Hym. I professe unto you, I know no other. Silv. You now grow old, and therefore it should not be with you as it is with such as are Novicees in Religion, wherefore take heed of faire speeches and holy pretences, for there is nothing so common in the world as that which is like the truth, & yet not the truth the name of the Church and pure spouse, and yet upon examination doth prove Strumpets and har∣lots; for Christs Church his Sanctuarie, his true Tabernacle, is that, which he her Lord pitcheth or buildeth & not man: & therfore that we may trie the truth of your Church, pray shew me how you prove it by Scripture;
and first where it is proved, that the people of every particular Church are to call and choose their Pastor. Hym. In the sixth chapter of the Acts; it is thus written, wherefore Brethren look ye out from among your selves, seven men of honest report, full of the holy Ghost and wisdom, whom we may appoint over this businesse; where it appeares to us, the Apostles gave the believers for ever power to choose their own Mi∣nisters. Silv. There is not one word in the Text that proves your conclusion; that the people of every particular Church are to call their Pastor, but this it proves, that the Apostles times were wholly taken up in prayer and preaching, in regard the Disciples were so exceedingly multiplied, that they could not have time touching the matter of receiving and distribu∣tion towards the necessity of the Saints, by reason of which there arose murmurings of the Graecians against the Hebrews, because their widows were neglected in the dayly Administration. So that there was a necessity that Deacons should be appointed for that businesse, who were comended by the people and confirmed by the Apostles; and this is the whole scope of that Scripture. Hym. But what say you to that, Act. 1. 23. they appointed two, that is, the people presented them to the Apostles. Silv. This place shews that the Apostles and Disciples being together in one place to the number of 120 persons; Saint Peter took occasion to speak to the Congregation of the prophecys of Judas treason, and of the Iudgment that did befall him, and also how the Prophet foretold that an∣other should be chosen in his place to his office of an Apostle; wherefore saith he, of these men that have accompanied with us all the time that the Lord Iesus went in and out amongst us, must one be ordained to be wit∣nesse with us of his Resurrection; and they appointed two, that is the A∣postles with the rest thought none so fit as Barsabas and Matthias, but which of these two they could not determine of, so they cast lots and it fell on Matthias, and he, by the whole Church, was reckoned amongst the twelve, this is all that place intends, and not the least part of your inten∣tion proved by it. Hym. Now I will set you a place of Scripture that shall not only prove the custome and manner of our Church, but the matter also as before I have related to you, and that is the description of the Church of Antioch, which will prove all that I have said to you. Act. 14. 22. 23. Silv. Wheresoever Paul and Barnabas came they confirmed the souls of the Disciples, and exhorting them to continue in the Faith, and that we must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God, he doth not here by this confirmation and exhortation enter into a reciprocall co∣venant
with the believers as you spake of to stand in a pastorall covenant with them as the head and Members, for what one Apostle did, they did both, and the words are in the plurall number, they, and indeed they taught them so effectually that they strengthned them and built them up to a further increase and degree in the truth. And as it follows they ordained them Elders in every Church, that is, these Apostles did ordaine, not the Disciples, so that this Text is cleare a∣gainst your distinction both for the matter and forme you spake of, for as these Christians had received the truth before Barnabas came to them at the first, so they did abide in the comfortable profession of it till Barnabas brought Paul with him, and then they two ordained them Elders in e∣very Church, that is preachers, and not the people as you affirme. Hym. Good Friend Silvanus I have another Scripture which I pray consider you of, and then I hope you will be of my mind, that is Act. 11. 19 20. 21. 22. 23. you shall see there that in the 19. 20. and 21. verses, there is mention made of be∣lievers and that the Gentiles had received the Faith: then in the 22. and 23. vers. Barnabas from amongst these believers gathers a Church after he had descen∣ded from Hierusalem to Antioch by the Apostles Commission, and to me the words prove both the matter and forme of our Church who when he came & had seen the grace of God was glad and exhorted them all that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord; to me it is plaine that with purpose of heart to cleave unto the Lord, is the covenant the people enter into with their Pastor, and Barnabas his rejoycing to see their grace from God and his rejoycing in it, his continuing to exhort them, and to this Church much people was added as in the 24. verse. Silv. I have often observed old friend, that there is none so easily deceived as those that would willingly be deceived, for if you would not willingly be ignorant the reading of the text would better informe you, for there is not one word in all those verses you have read, proves what you say, the truth is this that the persecution that arose about Stephen was the occasion that many disciples were scattered and disperst amongst the Gentiles, and by the witnesse they bare to Christ, many believed, as many Greeks at An∣tioch; tydings whereof came to the Church at Hierusalem, who sent Bar∣nabas thither, and when he came to them found the report so true that it rejoyced his heart, and his doctrine was of that power and authoritie that he furthered the grace begun, and begun it where it it was not, for he was a good man and full of the holy Ghost and of Faith, that his exhortations wrought so through their hearts that it prevailed with the thought and purposes thereof to cleave to the Lord so full is the phrase, as if he had gained the whole heart to the Lord, and besides he added much people un∣to the Lord saith the text, and then departed to Tarsus to seek Saul, so there
is not the least shew for your opinion, for when he had found him he brought him to Antioch, and doubtlesse for the love of them that walked in the truth, it came to passe that a whole yeare they assembled themselves with the Church and taught much people, but not all this while made any such covenant nor membership as you suppose, (that is to say) to become Members to that Church only, and no other. Therefore now Hymeneus, I must tell you plaine, by that you as yet know not the true Church, and be∣ing ignorant of that, I feare you know not what belongs to a true Chri∣stian. And for that which you fancy to be the Church upon Scripture ground, there is not one Scripture rightly understood by you. And if your foundation faile you, your whole building cannot stand. Hym. My good friend Silvanus, I pray let me heare your description of the true Church. Silv. By the name of the Church of Christ in Scripture we are to under∣stand, Gods faithfull peculiar, chosen and regenerate people, such and such only as are born of the holy Ghost; and that I may the better describe and manifest the true Church, the whole body, building or house, I will first declare the making parts and true nature of every particular living stone and member, of which, and which only the whole frame or fabrick consi∣steth. Now to the making of any part thereof and so of every part, 3 things are considerable and required; that is to say, the spirit, water and bloud, whereof the first is the worker, the two last the work, or matter or make∣ing parts of every living stone of the Church it self. Of these three termes the first is literall, by which we are to understand the finger of God, the spirit which proceeds from the Father and the Sonne: the other two are Metaphoricall, by which other things are meant, namely repentance and remission of sins, as it is written, Except a man be borne againe from above of water and the holy Ghost he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Hym. I pray Sir expresse your self unto me concerning the two Metaphori∣call termes. Silv. That I shall willingly do, and give you their definition in their due place. For the first, which is repentance, the Lord in the working thereof, unhardens the heart that naturally by sin is obdurate, hard, flat and quite contrary and disobedient to God and his will, which graciously God of his meete and alone goodnesse by a kind of heavenly power, sof∣tens and makes it plyable and inclinable to God and his will. And the word of God compares this humble broken bruised contrite heart to plowed ground, to soft and tender flesh, and to water, and such like, setting forth by all these comparisons the true nature and condition thereof. That as flesh differs from a stone; barren, fallow, weedy ground from
that which is broken up and plough'd; and as the plyablenesse and softnesse of water differs from the hardnesse of a Dyamond, so a broader and greater difference is there between this penitent heart and that it was before, for that which was pleasant & delightfull is now become nothing but grief & sorrow of heart, that which before was chiefly fought after is now most ab∣horred. As formerly its joy and gladnesse was in such sinfull ways as car∣ried him from God, now he uncessantly seeketh, prayeth, desireth and longeth after every way and meanes whereby he may be brought to God, to be refreshed with his favour, which by his sins and transgressions he hath lost; and never did any hunted and chased hat pant more after the water brooks, than this soul doth thirst and desire the favour and grace of God in Christ. No undone man, no wounded man, no diseased man, no deadly sick man, no man in bondage and thraldome so miserable and wretched in a naturall sence as this penitent man in his own apprehension in a spirituall and godly sence. Therefore it is said of Iohn the Baptist the great and powerfull preacher and worker of repentance, that he should prepare the way of the Lord, that is, make a people ready for the Lord to heale and cure, and in working the preparation, he bruised the reed, he caused the flax to smoak, he turned the hearts of the Fathers to the children, the disobedient to the wisdom of the just, he humbled and brought low the high and lofty, the rough, ridged, and untoward he made gentle and smooth, the crooked and perverse hearted, he bent, bow'd, and made straight, he made the rich poor, the well sick, the whole broken, in a word, all these terms do but set out and declare his great and heavenly work of repentance which he wrought in the hearts of men. According as it was prophecyed of him, that he should go in the power and spirit of Elias and as the Angell said to Zacharias his Father, And ma∣ny of the children of Israel shall he turne to the Lord his God. Yea, the whole life of this holy Prophet and every houre therof prea∣ched repentance, for he chose the desart place in the wildernesse to dwell in before the stately City Ierusalem: And hunger and thirst before dainty fare, wine or strong drink, and sack-cloth rather then soft rayment, his Garment was hair-cloth and his Girdle a leather skin. Neither boyld nor rost was his food but what he found unbought or uncared for; his meate was locust and wild hony. His life and Doctrine being thus one and the same, and both so wonderfully powerfull and effectuall, that all Ierusalem, Iudea, and the Region about Iordan went out to see and heare him, the like Prophet being never heard nor seen before. And he preached unto them repentance for the remission of sins, for so
powerfull was his ministery in working repentance in their hearts, that the holy Ghost saith of them, they were baptised of him in Iordan confes∣sing their sins. An apt and plaine figure or resemblance is the baptisme of water, of that of repentance, for repentance it is the preparation of the way of the Lord, the signe or badge of it is the baptisme with water, and so Saint Marke doth plainly preach, Iohn did baptize in the wildernesse, there's the signification; and preached the baptisme of repentance for the remission of sins, there's the substance, which heavenly gift repentance he calls the beginning of the Gospell of Iesus Christ, by which he proves cleerly, that the beginning of our new birth or regeneration, is the begin∣ning of the new covenant of life and salvation; herein agreeing with all the Prophets, who speaking of the new covenant, still begin with the unhard∣ning the heart, taking away the stony heart and giving an heart of flesh. Hym. You have been large in the description of repentance, and I desire to heare your definition of it, as you promised. Silv. The supernaturall grace and first part of unregeneration may be thus defined, that it is the work & gift of God by which the heart is turned from all the pleasures and delights in sin, into great grief and unspeakeable sorrow for them, with humble confession and acknowledgment of all its sins, expressive an unsatisfied desire of pardon and forgivenesse, and to be received into the love and favour of God through Iesus Christ. Hym. You cald to me to prove the description I made of the Church, I pray therefore proove this to me. Silv. It is well desired, this definition of repentance and every part of it is fully set forth in the prodigall Sonne, who once was so full of affe∣ction to sinfull pleasures that he rejoyced in it, but God working repen∣tance in him now is become forlorne and miserable in his own apprehen∣sion, and seeing his rash rebellion and unadvised sinfulnesse against God his most bountifull and loving Father, Creator, and preserver, in utter dis∣like of himself and all his doings sorrowfully resolves; And in the second place returnes to his Father, by which is set forth the displeasure and dis∣like he now takes against all his sins which have been the cause of all his misery and Gods dishonour, being conscious thereof dislikes, forsakes, leaves them and goes from them, plainly and clearly declaring his return∣ing unto God in his heart, Manifested in the third place by his penitent confession with ardency of affection in these words, I will say unto my Fa∣ther. I have sinned against heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Sonne, Every word declaring the true and reall sensiblenesse of his own guiltynesse, confessing with detestation in the strength of his re∣quest, like the penitent Publicain smiting his wofull breast with his guilty hand in a ruefull manner, as a man lost and undone; in the fourth and last
place, see his unsatisfied desire of pardon and forgivenesse, of mercy, peace and reconciliation, Make me as one of thy hired servants, which words for the matter and manner found of nothing but violence, and admit of no answer, no satisfaction in the world but of grace and favour, to be admit∣ted and received, though into the least, the lowest office of all, even into the office of a servant. Thus all the Prophets and Apostles, as doth their Lord also, describe re∣pentance, and the penitent, by the poor, the broken hearted, the lost, the sinners, the unrighteous, because these only are so truly in their own eyes and in the gift or work of God called repentance, or the preparation of God, happy man is he that heareth and obeyeth, for God hath sworn he shall not perish. Hym I must now confesse you have both described and defined repentance; but yet me thinks you ascribe too much to it, to say whosoever repents shall not perish. Silv. I tell you the truth as it is written, Ezechiel 18. 28. because he that considereth and returneth away from all his transgressions he shall surely live, he shall not dye: And so saith our Lord, Except you repent you shall all likewise perish. Hym. I pray let me heare you declare the other Metaphoricall terme which setteth forth the second part of regeneration as you said. Silv. The second part of our new birth before called remission of sins hath divers termes and expressions in Scripture; sometimes it is said to be the Baptisme of fire, the Baptisme of the holy Ghost, the blood of Christ shed abroad in our hearts, sometimes called the blessing, the life, the voice or promise of God, the ministery of the Lord, of Iohn the Baptist whose shooe latchet the servant said, he was not worthy to untie; this Lord of the prepared way in working this econd and more speciall work of the holy Ghost preached; that is, giveth remission of sins to the penitent, sanctifieth those which John had prepared, bound up that which he had broken, healed that which he had bruised, perfecting the smoak into a light flame, fulfilling what was written of him, being anointed for that purpose, name∣ly to preach glad tydings unto the poor, to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaime liberty to the Captives and to inlarge such as were bounden, to proclaime the acceptable yeare of the Lord, and to comfort all that mourne, to appoint unto them that mourne in Syon, to give unto them beauty for ashes, oyle of joy for sorrowing, the garment of praise for the spirit of heavynesse, that they may be called Trees of righteousnesse, the planting of the Lord that he might be glorified; and this was the work of the Lord of the whole world, who as he was greater than this servant his foregoer, so his ministration exceeded, and good reason, for it was of a
more higher and more excellent nature, Even as healing exceeds break∣ing, liberty, captivity, the spirit of Gladnesse that of heavinesse, a rich and plenteous estate, that which is low and miserable, in the working and ef∣fecting hereof the holy Ghost applies the blood of Christ, to that fore broken and bruised spirit, which is the only healing plaister unto salvation and blessed life; for this is the word so much spoken of in the Scripture which cures and heales the wounded spirit, that neither herb nor plaister can possibly do, the word speaking peace by Iesus Christ, which began after the baptisme which Iohn preached; thereby ingraving or writing in that Table of flesh the everlasting love and favour of God, never againe to be razed or blotted out, so purging, purifying and sanctifying the prepa∣red heart by the sprinckling of the bloud of Christ the heavenly fire of lve, so refining it, that it exceeds the purest triedst gold beyond all com∣parison. And this effect of the holy Ghost, the Scripture also calleth the spirit of his Sonne, the spirit of adoption by which we call Abba Father. And this is that new covenant which God made with Adam and Abra∣ham and all his spirituall seed: that life that Moses had and taught to others, that everlasting Law and statute of grace and favor for ever, as it is written, whom he loveth once he loveth to the end, that is everlastingly; for his sure mercies and love are written, even written in the prepared heart, that God will be their God and they his people, for ever more still testify∣ing that this was he that was once dead but now liveth, was lost but now is found, from which work and testimony of the holy Ghost in the heart, ariseth such an assurance to the man so sanctified, that he is so sure, his sins are forgien him, and that Gods favour and love is given to him, as he is sue his Lord who wholly bought and freely gave his mercy to him was once dead, than raised, and now liveth for ever, never to die againe; this is the love of God shed abroad in his heart, the Garment dipt in the bloud of the lambe, the answere of a good conscience to his good and gracious God, that as was his Father Abraham, so is be fully perswaded, and in truth of Faith, with Saint Paul can say, I am perswaded that neither death nor life, principalities, nor powers, things present, nor things to come, nor height nor depth, or any other creature whatsoever shall be able to separate me from the love of God which is in Christ Iesus my Lord; And this is the birth and Baptisme of fire, the blessing and accomplishment of the birth, the life and generation of Gods children, as that holy King singeth saying, Blessed is the man whose sins are covered, and whose God is the Lord Iehovah. Hym. Surely this must be the description of true justifying Faith, yet I pray make a definition of it. Silv. This is the peculiar Faith, the Faith of Abraham, that which justi∣fieth a sinner, and by which the justified liveth, as the Prophet speaketh,
and may be thus defined, that it is a gift of Gods spirit, whereby a con∣crite tender broken heart is given assuredly to believe that all his sins are forgiven him, and that he is reconciled to God in everlasting love and fa∣vour, through the precious bloud of Iesus Christ that hath bought and purchased it for him, Which Faith is cleerly declared and fully proved in every part in the prodigalls acceptance when he was received from death to life; the compassion of his Father was the only ground of the penitents forgivenesse, and he assured him of his love and favour by falling on his neck and kissing him, such kisses of love as there is none to be compared to them as appears by the multiplyed following favors, by clothing him with his own best robe, by putting a ring on his hand, and shoes on hs feet; ye, what is this all? but to be clothed with the compleat and perfect righte∣ousnesse of Iesus Christ, and what more certain assurance then to eate Christs flesh and to drink his bloud, this was the fatted calfe, the lambe without spot, who is the only food to eternall life, and on whom whoso∣ever eateth and believeth, cannot but rejoyce with joy unspeakable and full of glory. Hym. But is all justifying Faith an assurance? Silv. Yes, it is a full assurance for as much as it is witnessed to our spi∣rits by Gods spirit; and an assurance cannot be so true from any witnesse as from the spirit of God that beares witnesse with our spirits (saith the A∣postle) that we are the Sonnes of God and so to the Hebrews he exhorteth in these words: Let us draw neere with a true heart in full assurance of Faith, having our hearts sprinckled from an evill conscience and our bodies washed with pure water: That which makes the heart true or good is the breaking it by repentance, and the purifying it by Faith; which Faith ariseth from the bloud of Christ shed abroad in the heart expressed by sprinkling, and the same Apostle beareth witnesse, that Abraham believing the promise, was fully perswaded, Ro. 4. Hym. But what say you of the Church of Christ which was our first dis∣course? Silv. The regenerated man before declared is the matter of the true Church. Of these precious living stones is built Gods spirituall house, and of this heavenly nature is the whole building, being all begotten from a∣bove of water and the holy Ghost. As Saint Peter speaketh of these new born babes, and calls them Stones, and so he calls their Lord also to whom comming as to a living stone; disallowed indeed of men but chosen of God and precious, use also (saith he) as lively Stones, are built up a spirituall house, a holy Priest-hood, to offer spirituall sacrifices, acceptable to God by Iesus Christ▪ And this is the same Apostle which our Lord spoke to, when he said, thou art Peter or a Stone, and upon this Rock will I build my
Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevaile against it. In which Scripture our Lord acknowledgeth himself confessed by Peter to be but the chief foundation and corner-stone, and the whole building to consist of such spirituall living stones as Saint Peter was. Hym. I pray expresse in manner how they do become a Church? Silv. The power of God as I have shewed before, doth (by repen∣tance) cut these stones out of the Quarry of this world, that is out of the e∣state of nature, and thereby cuts, squares and fits them for this building; and the power of God (by justification and acceptation) layes on these stones on the lively building, the spirit of God which proceeds from the Father and the Sonne Cements and soders all together, by ingrafting or joynting them with the bloud of Christ, the love of God poured out on them all, and this is the holy Catholique Church, the Communion of Saints, as the Creed confesseth: Agreeing with that of Saint Paul to the Corinthians, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God, and the Communion of the holy Ghost be with you: as also to the Colossians, The head from which all the body by joynts and bands having nourishment ministred & knit together increaseth with the increase of God, this is Christs body, his spouse, the lambs wife who though they be many Graines, yet make but one loafe. Hym. What authoritie and priviledge hath this Church? Silv. Great authority and many priviledges in this present suffering estate of hers: for of these our Lord saith, if two of you shall agree in earth (as touching any thing they shall aske) it shall be done for them of my Father which is in heaven; And also where two or three are gathered together (saith our Lord) in my name, there am I in the middest of them; where (by name) he meanes his spirit, so that none can be so congregated but such as are led by the spirit of God, these have the priviledge to be called the Sonnes of God, even such as believe in his name, which were borne not of bloud nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, these onely are the house of the living God, the ground and pillar of truth; these are as it were Gods privy Counsell on earth, the Scripture stiles them the keepers of his truth, and his dwelling place as say the Prophets. Though the heaven of heavens cannot containe me, yet will I dwell with him that is of a contrite spirit; & God dwelling with them teacheth them, and declareth his will, his mind and purposes to them, as he did to Noah, Abraham, and Moses: to these doth the Lord (that hath the key of Da∣vid that openeth and no man shutteth, and shutteth and no man openeth) give the power and authority of the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, yea I say againe that great power and authoritie, to bind and to loose, to re∣mit and to reteine sins, by a decree intailed on them till time shall be no more in these words, whose sins you    whose sins
you do reteine they are reteined, this is the commission of the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, who by his own words hath bound himself thus to be with them to the end of the world. Hym. I pray tell me how may a man know this Church? Silv. None can truly know this Church but they that are of her, for as they are spirituall themselves, so they are spiritually discerned as the A∣postle saith, the spirituall men discerne all things, even the deep things of God; Yet I will briefly declare some of her excellencies and some of her miseries by which she is manifested, for may a candle burne and not bewray her light? may the Sunne shine and not shew his beauty? can a Ci∣ty built upon a hill hide her face from the passer by? or may a sacrifice salted convey his seasoning from the mouth of the taster, and if these crea∣tures could forget their natures, yet cannot the true Saints in whose heart the eternall covenant of love is once ingraven, forget to burne with like affection, first towards God, that first hath loved them with love of God, as the sap puts forth this fruit, as the Apostle saith: We love him because he hath loved us first. And none can love the Lord with all his heart, with all his strength and with all his soule, as Moses speak∣eth, but such only whose booken heart the love of God hath comforted, refreshed and healed. So also loveth hee his neighbour as himselfe, hee sorroweth, rejoy∣ceth, lamenteth and is comforted, wanteth and aboundeth with him; as the Apostle saith, Who is weak, and I am not weak, who is offended and I burne not? remember them that are in bounds as bound with them, and them that suffer adversity as being our selves also in the body; So saith Saint Iames, the wisdom that is from above that is the children of wis∣dom, of whom Ierusalem from above is Mother to all, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be intreated, full of mercy and good fruits; and Saint Paul saith, their fruit is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentle∣nesse, goodnesse, faith, &c. They are filled with peace and joy in believe∣ing and it is given unto them not only to believe but to suffer for his sake, that is for the sake of their beloved Lord and Redeemer. I might be large in all these excellencies, but I know you can inlarge them in your minde Friend Hymeneus. Hym. How can this excellent Church be miserable? Silv. The Apostle answereth in these words: If in this life only we had hope, we were of all men the most miserable, so that the misery hath only respect to this life. Hym. How can that be? Silv. Paul and Barnabas makes it clear, saying, we must through much tribulation  the Kingdom of God▪ this suffering and tri∣bulation
was it that was the cause why our Lord in these words comforts his Church, Feare not little flock it is your Fathers pleasure to give you the Kingdom; for none shall raigne with Christ in the world to come, but he that suffers with him in this life. Now as it was in Abraham's Family between Ishmael and Isaack, so is it now between the outward and false Christian, and the inward and true, for then as he that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was borne by promise, so is it now, saith the Apostle, the Christians in name onely which are overcast with a profession of Religion, cleane in skin and not in heart, like the Pharisees, lay claime to be the true Church, and call her that is so indeed barren, forsaken and desolate, and cast her out with termes, let God be glorified and such like, when notwithstanding with hatred they beate her; so the Church cryes out in one place, My Mothers Children were angry with me when they were no more the true Mothers Children then Ishmaels, which was not Sarahs but the bond-womans, neither were the Pharisees the children of the promise though Abraham's after the flesh, nor righteous although they justified themselves. This Jerusalem that is from below, the common Christians, I call them so because they are not capable but of common gifts, of which they may partake and perish, and except they repent so it wil be with them, yet not∣withstanding these fil the world with voices of the Church of God, the cause of Christ, bragge and boast of their righteousnesse, duties and perfor∣mances, when notwithstanding they never yet knew what it is, that is the true worship of God, the acceptable sacrifice, they bragge of their prayers, their fasts and their charity, and yet know nothing at all of either as they are the offerings and sacrifice of the truly faithfull, but as the fat cattle the Prophet speaks of, push, gore and oppresse the leane, so do these whole hearted, faire, rich, fat and full seeming comfortable Christians, contemne and despise, the humble, the low and emotie, although notwithstanding the Lord filleth the emptie with good things, and sendeth the rich emptie away. I could inlarge my self in this exceedingly, having felt their cruelty and oppression, as being slighted by them dayly, and made as the dirt in the street under their feet by treading dayly upon me, but as they are men for and of this world, so we will leave them to it, and proceed to shew you how miserable the Saints are here in this life in regard of their own corruptions, the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and many times so captivates it, that they cry out, Oh wretched Men that we are who shall deliver us from this body of death? what is worse then a dead body amongst the living? and yet so and worse are the corruptions of Gods people to their pure mindes, vexed
and grieved by them dayly, as Righteous Lot in Sodom inclosed by them in a Citie whose buildings are transgressions, whose streets are wayes of error, whose bul warks are the strength of death, whose gates do lead to hell, which makes them to dye dayly, to be tormented dayly, and cry day∣ly to be delivered from sin and from the body thereof. Lastly, the misery of Gods people is aggravated by the devill, for, so saith the Apostle, he goth about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may de∣voure; And so it is said, The Devill shall cast many of you into prison, The righteous man Iob had miserable experience of this adversary Misery in regard of the destruction of his wealth, misery in the losse of his health, and misery to his mind in regard of his wife and his childrens death, be∣sides the many temptations against his soul, and this the Apostle knew well which moves him to exhort the Corinthians on this wise, For I am jealous over you with Godly jealousie, for I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a choyse Virgin to Christ, for I feare lest by any meanes, as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. Hym. You have clearly proved the miserable sufferings of the Church in all these particulars you promised, but is your meaning that the Church shall never be free in this life? I meane from misery and sufferings by mens persecution, and Sathans, their sworn enemies. Silv. So long as there is any enemy, that is so long as death and sin raigne, so long shall Gods people suffer and undergo misery. Hym. Then your meaning is to the end of the world. Silv. You understand me truly. Hym. How answer you this Scripture, And Sathan was bound for a thou∣sand years, and the Saints lived and raigned with Christ a thousand years, this is the first resurrection? Silv. This error of the Millenaries is ancient, and as groundlesse in the text you alleadge, as many more new mistakes are, which were all forged in the Devils work-house of lyes, and that they may all be answered if truth will do it, by their turns they shall be tried and condemned. Hym. The Millenaries first alleadge the words of Saint Paul to the Thes∣salonians, The dead in Christ shall arise first, (that is say they) there shall be a generall Resurrection of all the Martyrs and righteous people a thousand years before the generall Resurrection, and they shall have great plentie and ri∣ches, abounding in worldly felicilic and greatnesse, injoying Christs bodily pre∣sence in this corruptible earth, grounding their opinion on the twentyeth chapter of the Revelation, as I said before, where it is said, Sathan shall be bound for a thousand years, and they lived and raigned with Christ a thousand years; this is the fist Resurrection, but the rest of the dead, that is say, they the
wicked, as by the first Resurrection, we are to understand the righteous, so by the rest of the dead, the wicked, which lived not againe till the thousand years were finished. Silv. The Scriptures they alleadge do not prove their conclusion, and we trye it thus, the Apostles words to the Thessalonians do clearly prove the generall Resurrection, both of them that are out of Christ, and of them that are in Christ in the great day of the Lords coming, and that we, which shall continue living till that time, shall not prevent tem that sleep, and this the same Apostle sneweth to the Corinthians; behold I shew you a My∣stery, we shall not all sleep but we shall all be changed, that is though all should not be alike dead and buried yet their change shall be all alike, that is to say, as our Lord speaketh, they that have done good to the Resurre∣ction of life, and they that have done evill to the resurrection of damna∣tion, and both shall come forth or be raised. And whereas the Apostle saith, the dead in Christ shall arrise first, he there sheweth the order of the Re∣surrection, as in another place he saith, as in Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be made alive, but every man in his own order: Christ the first fruits in that he speaks of our Lords resurrection that at this time was past; afterwards they that are Christs, that is, they that are dead in Christ, and the time, when, is at his comming, and the reason why he doth not nomi∣nate the wicked by name aswell as the righteous, neither to the Thessalo∣nians nor to the Corinthians, as our Saviour Christ doth to the Iows, is be∣cause they are to rise to their condemnation, and therefore not worth the naming, yet to the former the terme of distinction, the dead in Christ shall arise first, strongly proves the dead out of Christ shall rise next, and in the latter, even so in Christ all shall be made alive comprehends good and bad. And for their second ground, they lived and raigned with Christ a thousand years, and as it follows this is the first Resurrection: The A∣postle speaks of the spirituall Resurrection through regeneration from sin, as Saint Paul speaks to the Ephesians, Awake thou that sleepest and arise from the dead and Christ shall give thee light, agreeing with that in the Colos∣sians, if ye then be risen with Christ, &c. And this first and second Resurre∣ction our Saviour proves plainly as this faithfull witnesse testifieth in his Evangelists, Verily, verily I say unto you, hee that heareth my word and belie∣veth on him, that sent me hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condem∣nation, but is passed from death unto life; And againe verily, verily I say unto you, the houre is comming, and now is, when the dead shall heare the voice of the Sonne of God, and they that heare it shall live; here he proves the first Resur∣rection by Faith, and be your self judge if in the next words he doth not, pove the generall Resurrection; Marvell not at this for the houre is com∣ing,
he doth not say, and now is, as before but saith in which all that are in the graves shall heare his voice and shall come forth, &c. And by this word, all, here, as before is plainly proved good and bad. And for the thousand years of Sathans binding for any man to think it to be a time of peace, plentie, outward glory and felicity in this world, I think him to be more blind than Bartimeus who saw men walk like trees, because the text it self declares such wicked men to sit in seates even in the whole time of his binding as should persecute the Saints even to death because they would not receive the mark of the Beast in their hands nor in their foreheads, and though for their wickednesse they are not worthy to be named, as another Apostle describes the same Antichristian power in the same manner, then shall that wicked be revealed, not giving him the name of Angel, man, no beast, because exceeding the worst of all sorts; a∣gaine even him saith the Apostle, whose comming is after the working of Sathan with all power and signes and lying wonders, this evill power and subtill wonderfull lyes, he gives his person no name but him, just, as Saint John speaks, as if they spake by one spirit, though two voices, as they did indeed, and I saw Thrones and them that sate upon them, and Iudgement was give unto them, the difference is only this, Saint Paul speaks in the singular, Saint Iohn in the plurall number, and both one, for the succession of wicked ungodly men for a thousand two hundred and six∣ty years of domineering over, killing and oppressing the Saints, they all in the totall summe make but one Antichrist, one, that is the man of sin, the sonne of perdition. Hym. Good Friend, me thinks this must verily be the meaning of the place, but that which they much talke of is the binding of Sathan thereby affirming that all wickednesse and wicked men shall be restrained by the censure of the true Church. Silv. If they rightly did know the condition of Sathan in his loosed or his estate of liberty, both before and after the time of his being bound, then they would plainly see there is no such thing as they conclude from it. He was loose and at large before in the Roman Ethnick estate, when the Divell raised the primitive persecution against Christ and all that profest him, so that it was present death for any man to professe the Faith of Iesus Christ, as appears by the wofull sad stories of the ten first persecutions, in which storme and great persecution, the Devill is the Generall in the heart of the heathen Emperors, for which respect the holy Ghost calls him the great red Dragon, thereby declaring his great cruell and unmercifulnesse in killing and destroying all that did acknowledge Christ and professe the Faith, and this appears plainly in the Scriptures, no sooner was the Lord ascended, but his servants for teaching in his name, were beaten, whipped
and imprisonned, as Peter and Iohn at Ierusalem, Paul and Barnabas at Lystra, Iames killed by the sword, and Stephen martyred without any mercy, and so it continued for many years in all manner of sufferings as cruell mockings, scourgings, bonds and imprisonments, some stoned, some sawen asunder with sawes, their flesh torne to pieces, others slaine with the sword, with wilde beasts, and burnt to death: so implacable was the Divell when he was at liberty that no tongue can expresse his crueltie, and as the battel was strange and wondrous, so was the victory more strange and glorious, for verity overcame crueltie, by suffering as it is written, and they overcame him by the bloud of the lambe, and by the words of their testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death, and when the Dragon saw that he was throwen down into the earth, he persecuted the woman which brought forth the man child, for although in those days, the bloud of the Saints was the seed of the Church, and the more there died, the greater number were brought to live, yet the Divell still continued his persecution by the hands of the Christian Emperors, for though they were Friends to the outward State and name of Christianity, yet they persecuted the inward grace and power of it, and from the prima∣cy of the Emperiall Church of Rome, grew up the abominable supremacy of the Church therof, and the Divell then went into the false Prophets and began to play the Christian, and to distinguish between the Christian Em∣perors, and the governement and rule of Antichrist the false Prophet; the holy Ghost saith, And I saw another beast comming up from the earth, and he had two hornes like the Lambe, but he spake like the Dragon, by which the Apostle discovers the Mystery of iniquity whereby the Divell would turne himself into the shape of an Angell of light, and as Daniel saith by policy or deceipt, prosper or prevaile pretending Christ, the Church, the truth, and all the names and titles which belong to the true Spouse there in putting Christs coat upon Iupiters back, cunningly turning the wor∣ship of God into Paganisme; marke but the description, the holy Ghost makes o his person, that in outward shew is the very cognizance of the Lambe, the Law and the Gospell his own two hornes, wherewith he doth save and kill, but the dscription of his doctrine is the voice of the Dragon, that when they did open either to teach the Law, or preach the Gospel, they taught like the Priests of Iupiter, teaching and preaching to the children of the world, that they ought to worship the God of heaven as the Dragons Priests had taught their Fathers to worship the Gods of the Heathen, and by Sycophanticall Princely Priests, under colour of pro∣moting the Lambes affaires should cunningly clap Iupiters coate upon the Lambes back, and bestow all the ceremonies and rituals of Idolatry upon Christ, as in stead of their idolatrous bloudy sacrifices, Antichrist
must have their abominable Masse, as the Heathen had Idolis, so Anti∣christ hath Images, and as their Temples were dedicated to their Idolls, so Antichrist must dedicate Churches to he Saints and she Saints, so that earthly minded men were so strongly seduced, that they verily thought the mystery of iniquity fore-spoken by Daniel to be pure and un∣defiled Christianity. In this respect only it is said, the Devill is bound, that is all the time of Antichrists reign, which shall be 1260 years pretending Christianity and working by deceiptfull meanes, & yet all that receive not the mark of the beast in their hand or in their fore-head, are killed, and slaine by him. Hym. But it follows in the Text, And after that he must be loosed a little season. Silv. That is as our Saviour Christ saith, Immediatly after the tribula∣tion of those days shall the Sun be darkned, and the Moone shall not give her light, and the Starrs shall fall from Heaven, the powers of the Heaven shall be shaken. Where by the days of tribulation, he meanes the time in which the Di∣vell should work by the false Prophet, and in the expiration of those days he should come out of him as out of prison: as it is in the Revelation; And I saw three uncleane spirits like Froggs come out the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet, for they are the spirits of the Divels, working myracles which go forth unto the Kings of the earth and the whole world, to gather them to the battel of the great day of God Almighty. By the Kings of the East and the whole world is meant the Turks, and the Divell entring into them doth thereby inlarge himself againe into his former libertie, as in the heathen in setting himself in open hostility against Christ and the profession of his name, for so much is intimated, And the Sun shall be darkned: now if Christ be denied to be the light, that inlight∣neth every one that comes into the world, then all man kind, that is re∣sembled by the Moone, must lose their light, for she hath none other light but from the Sun, then the Starrs; that is, all ministers and professing Christians shall fall from their professing of Christianity that are not faithfull indeed to believe in the false Prophet Mahomet, as the holy Ghost saith; Revelations 6, 12, 13. And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seale and loe there was a great Earth-quake, and the Sun became black as sack∣cloth of baire, and the Moone became as bloud, and the Starrs of Heaven fell unto the Earth: And in the next words expounds Saint Matthew, saying; Even as a Figg tree casteth her untimely Figgs when she is shaken of a mighty wind; meaning by untimely Figgs untimely Christians, that is, such as are outward only, and in name amongst ministers and professors, and not in∣ward,
truly and spiritually, even all such as have not true grace shall fall off from Christ to receive the false-hood and abomination of Mahoumisme, and that this wicked inlargement of Sathan in his cruell persecution and oppression of the Gospell of our Lord Iesus Christ appears in this, that the Elect then shall cry day and night, and more certainly shall God heare his own Elect to avenge them, then the unjust Iudge, the importunate wid∣dow, neverthelesse our Lord makes this question by reason of the great persecution that shall be in those days, When the Sonne of man comes, shall he find Faith on the Earth? The consequence of the question is this, there will at my comming be scarce a faithfull man found on the Earth, and that this last Enemy shall continue till the comming of the Lord to Iudgment; we need no other proofe then Saint Johns Testimony in Revelation 20. verse 7. and so to the end; And when the thousand years are expired, Sathan shall be loosed out of his prison; And shall go out to deceive the nations that are in the foure quarters of the Earth, that Gog and Magog fore-prophesied by Ezechiel the Prophet, and as it followeth, to gather them to battel: the num∣ber of whom is as the sand of the Sea; Therein declaring the multitude of the Enemy, the Turk to whom there is none of the earth like for multitude, nor for power as followeth, And they went on the breadth of the earth, and compassed the camp of the Saints about, and the beloved City; By the Saints and the beloved City is meant the Elect of God called and sanctified, which Saint Matthew calls The shaking of the powers of Heaven. And when the Devill by his last battel shall think to accomplish his envious ends, utterly to destroy Christ and all that are his, then shall Christ the Lord arise and scatter his enemies in these following words: And fire came down from God out of heaven and devoured them; And the Iudgement of the enemie follows: And the Devill that deceived them was cast into the lake of fire and Brimston, where the beast and the false Prophets are, and shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever. And so the holy Ghost goes on in the description of the generall udgement by describing, first the Iudge himself in these words: And I saw a great white Throne, and him that sate on it, from whose face, the earth and the heavens fled away, and there was found no more place for them; And so proceeds to describe them that are judged: And I saw the dead, small and great stand before God, and the books were opened; That is, all those meanes were manifested, and those se∣verall ways, by which the Gospell and way of salvation had been preached to them, whether they had the Scriptures or the Creatures, or only the more secret dictates of conscience, all which preached the word of grace, and although it prove a Savour of death to some, yet to others a Savour of life by every of those books as it followeth▪ And another book was opened which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were
writen in the books, according to their works &c. There needs no Paraphrase, the Scripture is so clear to prove the thing intended. Hym. It doth appear to me that the Millenaries opinion hath no ground in the Scriptures they alleadge, yet I must tell you plainly in my judgement the Resurre∣ction is past already, & proved by your self in your description of the first Resur∣rection. Silv. That was an old error which S. Paul condemns in his 2 Epistle to Timothy, where he taxes one of your name, saying; their word doth fret as doth a gangrene of whom is Hymeneus and Philetus, who concerning the truth have erred, saying, the Resurrection is past already, and overthrow the faith of some. Hym. Shew me how that doctrine may be said to overthrow the Faith. Silv. This doctrine is the Religion of Homo-novus or of the new-man falsely so called, in plaine termes the Familists doctrine, who turne the whole Faith of our Lord Iesus Christ into an allegory, affirming Christ to be a quality, saying righteousnesse is Christ, and sin is Antichrist, teaching that all the Articles of the Creed are fulfilled in every one of their illumi∣nated ones, and that now they themselves are dead and buried, raised and ascended, set at the right hand of the Father, descend, and come, and judge the world the quick and the dead, that they are the holy Catholique Church, that they only are the forgiven people and have the Communal∣ty of the Saints, and enjoy life everlasting, infinitely succeeding one ano∣ther in this coedified condition, affirming also that God is cohominified with them, and so this estate and condition, even this present evill world to continue for ever, saying that as we come from God, so againe we re∣turn to God at our death, affirming no other Resurrection then from that sinfull estate to be illuminated, in which illumination they say, they are conceived of the holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, &c. Hym. You know the Apostle speaking of two seeds of Abraham, one born of Hagar the bond woman, the other of Sarah the free woman, and he saith that by them another thing was meant. Silv. As at the first I told you, that Christians when they speak, they ought to speak as the word of God, that is according to the meaning of the Scriptures, for though Saint Paul say the two seeds are an allegory in regard of the two Covenants that either stood in, the one thereby the child of death, the other the child of life; Yet he doth not, as you do, make them nothing but an allegory, turning the person of our Lord Iesus Christ into a quality, and the person of Antichrist into sin, which is no substance but a privation of good; take heed of this Hymeneus for it calls to my mind the Apostles words, who saith, that such doctrine to the soul is as dangerous and destructive as a gangrene is to the body, which is in∣evitably
destructive: for nothing can prevent the saving of the next member but the death, the cutting off of that which is but infected. Hym. I am sure if I be mistaken in my opinion, yet that which you have de∣livered in other respects concerning the short time of this worlds continuance crosses most Ministers opinions both in new England and here too. Silv. What is that which they teach, that I have said, doth oppose their Tenents? Hym. They almost all with one consent hold the nationall calling of the Iews, and that there shall be a great and glorious estate of the Church both of Iews and Gentils, alleadging all the Prophets that speak of the deliverance of Syon from all her Captivities, and bring the Jews into their own Land out of all Countries whither they have been disperst and scattered. Silv. What Scriptures do they bring to prove that the Nation of the Iews shall be called and brought out of every Countrey into their own Land. Hym. The 11 Rom. in these words: I would not Brethren, that you should be ignorant of this mystery, lest you should be wise in your own conceits, that blindnesse in part is hapned to Israel, untill the fulnesse of the Gentils be come in. And so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written, &c. Silv. In these verses there is not one word of the Nationall calling of the Iews, but shews that the Apostle declared to the believing Romans a Mystery to take off their vaine boasting of themselves, who thought that God had forsaken the seed of Abraham wholly, and therefore he se∣cretly reproves them and saith, It was but a part of the seed that was hardned or blinded, as in the seventh verse he clearly distinguisheth between the Elect part and the rest: what then? Israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh for, but the Election hath obteined it, and the rest were blinded or hardned, and in this verse he saith, They shall be hardned, untill the ful∣nesse of the Gentils be come in, that is for ever; Agreeing with the Prophet, lt their eyes be darkned, and bow down their backs alwayes; thus God put∣ting no diffrence between the Iews and the Gentils extends his free grace to both for the calling of the full number of his Elect in all the world; and so all Israel shall be saved, that is the whole house, even every one freknown and chosen of God shall be clled, sanctified, and saved both Iews and Gentils throughout the world, and this word saved, hath respect unto the estate of perfection in the world to come, according to the Prophet Esays words, Israel shall be saved in the Lord with an everlasting salvation he shall not be ashamed nor confounded, world without end; That is all Gods Elect wheresoever, of all kindreds, tongues, nations and people.
Hym. In this Scripture it doth not appeare there is any word as they infer from the text, but what say you to the words of the Prophet Ezechiel 34. 14. And I will bring them out from the people, and gather them from the Countrys, and will bring them to their own Land, and seed them upon the moun∣taines of Israel by the Rivers, and in all the inhabited places of the Coun∣trey; As also the Prophet Ieremy 33, and 26. For I will cause their captivi∣ty to returne, and have mercy on them. Silv. It greives me to see the Ignorance, and yet boldnesse of many Mi∣nisters amongst us, who erre for want of reading the Scriptures, for the very literall expression might teach them better then to tell us that from these two testimonies is declared the calling of the Iews from their dis∣persed and scattered estate to the belief of the Gospell in this last age of the world. For both these Prophets writ within few years one of another, Ieremy a little before Ezechiel and both of the Babylonish Captivity, and of their returne againe into their own Land, which according to the word of the Lord was performed above two thousand yeares ago, for their returne was in the days of Ezra the Scribe some years after the Prophet Daniels death. And if you read the second chapter you cited with a searching affection you shall find the Prophets both of them speaks of also the deliverance of Sion, the whole house of Israel from all their Captivities; Therefore will I save my flock, they shall be no more a prey, I will judge between cattel and Cattel, and I will set up one shepheard over them, and he shall feed them even my servant David he shall feed them, and he shall be their shepheard, and I will be their God, and my servant David a Prince amongst them. In those days Iudah shall be saved and Ierusalem shall dwell safely, and this is the name wherewith he shall be called the Lord our righteousnesse: But this deliverance we will more largely open hereafter. Hym. Master Cotton in new England doth much preach of these things of the calling of the Iews and of the flourishing estate of the Church of the Gentils, and sence I came to London I heard a preacher say, if the two last Chapters of Esay were not to be understood of the glorious estate of the Church before the comming of the Lord to Judgement, I do not know (saith he) what is meant by chose Scriptures. Silv. By what he saith, I believe he doth not understand what is meant by those Script. for the Proph. words are these, Behold I create new Heavens & a new Earth, & the former shall not be remembred nor come into mind, but be thou glad & rejoyce for ever in that which I creat, for behold I creat Ierusalem a rejoyceing and her people a joy. And I will rejoyce in Ierusalem and joy in my people, and the voyce of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voyce of
crying, and there shall be no more thence an infant of days, &c. In which the Prophet speaks as clearly (to my understanding) as words can expresse it of the world to come after the Resurrection, the salvation, that brings Gods chosen people Jerusalem from above into the same perfection a∣gaine, which by sin we lost and fell from, in the day of our transgression▪ and this agrees with Saint Peters and Saint Johns exposition, the two most excellent and beloved Disciples and Apostles; Saint Peter speaks directly of the end of this world, the dissolution of this present Heaven and Earth, in these words: But the Heavens and the Earth which are now, that is now present, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of Iudgement, and perdition of ungodly men; And so proceeds to other argu∣ments, and proves that the Earth also, and the works that are therein shall be burnt up, and the Heavens and the Elements shall be dissolved, con∣cludes with notwithstanding or neverthelesse, we according to his pro∣mise look for new Heavens and a new Earth in which dwelleth righteous∣nesse; First, the time when these things shall be fulfilled is twice spoken to be in the day of the Lord which throughout the Scriptures notes unto us the day of Iudgement, as the time of his second comming; Secondly, the manner how it shall be when righteousnesse shall dwell in the Earth, which must needs be understood of the world to come, for in this world righteousnesse is a Pilgrim, a stranger, and a sojourner; and Saint Iohn transcends in his expressions of it after the generall Iudgement, in order after the Resurrection of just and unjust, saying; And I saw a new Heaven and a new Earth, for the first Heaven and the first Earth were passed away, and there was no more sea, and I Iohn saw the holy City new Ierusalem, comming down from God out of Heaven prepared as a bride adorned for her husband, and I heard a great voyce out of Heaven, saying, behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them and be their God, and God shall wipe away all teares from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor shall there be any more paine, for the former things are passed away. The former things are the corruptible things, and the things that shall take place are the new created things of God which are all good, for no∣thing can proceed from him but what is very good, the words are so plaine that they need no exposition. The other proof, they do bring to prove their mistaken opinion, are these words, As one whom his Mother comforteth, so will I comfort you, and you shall be comforted in Ierusalem, and when you see this, your hearts shall rejoyce, and your bones shall flourish like an herb, and the hand of the Lord shall be known towards his servants, and his indignation towards his enemies, for by fire and by sword will the Lord plead with all flesh: And the slaine of the Lord
shal be many, for any man to think that the Prophet in these words speaks of any time of the Churchs sufferings in this life, doth as much as if he should tell me, it was his own foolish conceit, and that he did not at all search the Scriptures, no labour in the word and doctrine, for Saint Paul to the Thessalonians to me doth directly comment upon this place of the Prophet saying, it is a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you who are troubled, rest with us when the Lord Iesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking ven∣geance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospell of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord and the glory of his power, when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe, And further note, that Pro∣phet names the place where Gods people shall be comforted, and he saith, it shall be in Ierusalem, that is in new Ierusalem. Hym. I confesse it appears to me, the Scriptures are not rightly understood by them for you have answered them fully, but many of them have told me it is Master Brightmans opinion, and I am sure it is Master Cottons. Silv. Master Brightman is very corrupt and so is Master Coton much to be blamed as I have read him in a Sermon preached in the West-Coun∣trey, and in an exposition of his, on the Canticles, I remember the Text of his Sermon was in 1 Chron. 17. & 9. And I will ordaine a place for my people Israel, and will plant thm and they shall dwell in their place, and shall be moved no more neither shall the Children of wickednesse, waste them any more as at the beginning. This Scripture speaks directly of the Resurrection as our Saviour saith, Let both grow together untill the harvest, &c. Then shall the oppressor and Children of wickednesse be separated and ot before, not till then shall spoyling and wasting cease, the fat cattel and the leane, the sheep and the goates shall not be separated so long as this world lasteth, and the Prophet David forespake of the Resurrection in this place, and not of any tempo∣rall Translation as Master Coton expouds it, and for that Treatise upon the Canticles, he speaks often of the calling the Iews, ut proves nothing so, as uncertain words I give no credit to them. Hym. Is it not true, that many Ministers preach that the Government of the Church of England is Popish and Antichristian? Silv. No, for I have heard Master Callamy say in his prayer, that he thankt God that the evills in our Church were not a nationall sin, that is, as I un∣derstood him, that the Statutes and Ordinances of this Nation were free from those superstitions and corruptions that were brought in by such corrupt men as were in chief and hih places heretofore amongst us. Hym. Then you justifie the Church of England ever since the reformation in King Edwards dayes.
Silv. I do affirme that those Laws which were then made and since confirmed did wholly free us, and break asunder the Antichristian yoake and bondage of their abominable Doctrines, and though England were be∣fore one of the ten hornes of the beast: That is a Kingdom that mainteined the abomination of desolation, and supported the whore that sate upon the waters; that is, did rule over peoples, multitudes, nations, and tongues, yet then it pleased God that his faithfull people, the Martyrs, did prevaile against the filthy fornications of the whore, the lyes and false Doctrine of their Kingly Priests, and the Kingdom might then truly be said to fall off from Rome, and so still hath continued an opposer and hater, and not a mainteiner. Hym. I remember you spake thus long ago, but within this twenty yeares, things have been worse with you than before. Silv. Corrupt men endeavoured to bring in many innovations, but that is no more to the Christian profession established by Law in the Church of England, then rust to pure mettall, soyle to a cleane garment, or dust in Gods temple, which scouring, brushing and sweeping will do a∣way, so that the truth shall seeme more glorious. Hym. But what do you think of the Church of England in comparison of the Church of Scotland, Low-countries, France, Germany, and other re∣formed Churches? Silv. I am sure I have had either conference with, or reading of the most religious professors in Europe, and truly of all both nationall or no∣minall, I have found none in all respects so free from superstition, nor so sound in Doctrine as the Chrch of England, I meane as it stands by acts and ordination of Parliament, not but that some things may be altered, but I would Christians had wisdom to pray for, and waite on our King and that great Councell which our good God hath guided already to prescribe such a forme as I know none extant like it, that they that have done so much, may in their wisdomes do the rest, and we to further it by obeying and praying. Hym. I have often heard you speak of the short time that this world shall last, and that here is to be expected no such reformation nor deliverance as many have conceived, I pray let us heare your Judgement of the Scriptures in this par∣ticular. Silv. The Scriptures indeed are plentifull, fluent and large in their Te∣stimony and witnesse of the world to come, the glory, felicity, and perfe∣ction of that world without end, a world endles, a world deathles, a world sinnelesse, a world curselesse, a world harmelesse, in which there shall be nothing but holinesse, Godlinesse, thankfulnesse, and righteousnesse, and joyfulnesse with the Saints, their captivity shall be ended, then shall the
great deliverance and salvation come to Sion when God shall put away all her sins; Therefore thus saith the Lord to his deare daughter and her little children, Refraine thy voyce from weeping and thy eyes from teares, for thy work shall be rewardd, saith the Lord, and all that devoure thee shall be de∣voured and all thy adversaries every one of them shall go into captivity, and they that spoyled thee shall be a spoyle, and all that prey upon thee will I give for a prey: And I will (saith the Lord) undo all that have afflicted thee, and I will restore health unto thee, and I will heae thee of all thy woud, saith the Lord, because they called thee an ut cast, saying, this is Sion whm no man seeketh, the Sonnes of them that afflicted thee shall come bending unto thee and all those that dispised thee, shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet and they shall cal thee the City of the Lord, the Sion of the holy one of Israel. Whereas thou hast been forsaken and hated so that no man went through thee▪ I will make thee (saith the Lord) an eternall excellency, then shall be the time of Sions eliverance, which the Devill nor mans wicked∣nesse ca no more prevent, then they can prevent the spring when the Sun by its operation causes the arth to put it forth. Hym. This is the thing I have a great desire to heare, having had formerly some speech with you about it. Silv. That I may the morefully describe the unspeakable glory of Christ the Lord, and the Church his spouse, I will observe this Order, the time, when this Kingdom, heavenly Countrie, City with foundations, the in∣heritance of the Saints, the purchased possession, the glory, the eternall life, the masters joy, the promised Land, the perfection, the resurrection, the deliverance, the restauration, and aboundance more of such names the holy Ghost gives to the Church, the new Ierusalem, the lambes wife, the time when I say the Scriptures that foretell of, shall be fulfilled. Secondly, the place where it shall be injyed; Thirdly, who shall be the King in this glorious Kingdom; And lastly, what are the subjects and in∣heritors thereof. Hym. The names that the Scriptures give unto the eternall estate are very many and excellent, and your method very good, therefore I pray proceed. Silv. The time of the Churches deliverance to the estate of perfection is at the end of this world, when he that ascended, shall descend, as saith the Scripture, whom the heavens must conteine and receive untill the re∣stitution of all things forespoken by all the holy Prophets, hath been since the world began, which things therefore the world might not be ignorant of, which are testified by so many witnesses; for so saith the spirit, every one that have spoke, have spoke of these things, but the cause of mens ignorance in this as in many other truths of God, is in regard people do not labour with God to understand and know the Scriptures, for although
every one (for the most part) hath a Bible, yet generally they are as igno∣rant of the intent and meaning of the Scriptures as he that never saw the written word of God at all, but no more by way of digression. And that the time of the Lords glorious Kingdom and the Churches deliverance shall be at the end of this world is clear by our Saviours own words in pa∣rable, The harvest is the end of the world, and the reapers are the Angels. As therefore the tares are gathered and burnt in the fire, so shall it be in the end of this world, the sonne of man shall send forth his Angels and they shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that do offend and them which do iiquity, as also in that Scripture where the question is made by the servants to the house-holder, whether the tares the envious man sowed a∣mongst the good seed should be pluckt up, the Master answers, nay, let them both grow together untill harvest, and sheweth what shall be done then both with the wheate and with the tares, saying at his glorious com∣ming shall be gathered before him all nations, and he shall sever the Sheep from the Goates &c. Then the King shall say to them on his right hand comeye lessed inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the begin∣ning of the wold, and to this agreeth the Angels words to Daniel; Go thou thy ways Daniel, at the end of the days shall the end be, and thou shall stand up in ty lot; meaning thou shalt then be raised to shine as the brightnesse of the Fimament amongst them that have turned many to God, even to shine as the Stars for ever and ever; There is none in all the world but the Child of God, the heires of salvation have the benefit of the Prophet Iere∣mies exhortation in these words, Ier. 31. Refraine thy voice from weeping and thine eyes from teares for thy work shall be rewarded, saith the Lord, and they shall come againe from the Land of the Enemy; there is the returne from captivity of the naturall Israel, and there is hope in thy end (saith the Lord) that thy Children shall come againe to their own border, there is the delive∣rance of th sirituall Isael at their Resurrection, as the Patriarks have exprest their hope, as is more clearly proved in the next particular, the place where the bride shall for ever enjoy her bridegroome, the King of glory his gloriou Kingdom, which the holy Ghost calleth he earth in these wors, Behold the righteous shall be recompensed in the earth: And so saith our Lord, Blessed are he meek for they shall inherit the earth; Their in∣heritance is their recompence, then and not before shall the earth be filled with the knowledge of God, as the waters cover the Seas, which must needs be understood of the new earth promised and to come, such an earth as the Lord shall make when he will make all things new, for the contra∣ry is most true now, here in this old cursed earth, that ignorance fills this earth as the waters cover the Seas. Hym. This is not understood in these days; for I never heard these Scriptures so applied before.
Silv. To make it more plaine, we will first cite the Testimonyes of the Prophets, our Lords and his Apostles, and then I will shew you how plainly and clearly the heires of the promise have particularly declared her hope and confidence in it. Job had the true knowledge and comfort of it which ravisht him, and made him thus to cry out as if he were out of himself: Oh, that my words were now written! Oh that they were printed in a book, that they were graven with an Iron Pen in a Rock for ever, for I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth, and though after my skin wormes destroy this body yet in my flesh I shall see God, whom I shall see, for my self and my eyes shall behold, and not another. In which he clearly expresses that the place of his blessednesse after the resur∣rection shall be in the earth where his Saviour shall stand, that is, shall rule and raigne for ever. David a man after Gods own heart excells in this Faith and hope, what man is he that feareth the Lord? (saith he) him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose, his soule shall lodge in goodnesse, and his seed shall inherit the earth: And againe, Let all the earth feare the Lord, let all the inhabitants of the world stand in aw of him, for evill doers shall be cut off, but those that waite upon the Lord, they shall inherit the earth, and though it be but a little while, and the wicked shall not be, saith he, and his place shall not be found, yet the meek shall inherit the earth, and delight themselves in the aboun∣dance of peace, for such as be blessed of him shall inherit the earth, and they that be cursed of him shall be cut off; And so he singeth Psa. 48. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised in the City of our God, in the mountaine of his holinesse, beautifull for situation, the joy of the whole earth is mount Sion: And also in another place, The Heaven, even the Heavens are the Lords, but the earth hath he given to the Children of men; So testifieth the Prophet Esay, saying, Thus saith the Lord, that created the Heavens, God himself that formed the earth and made it, he hath established it, he created it not in vaine, he formed it to be inhabited, I said not, saith the Lord, to the seed of Iacob seek you me in vaine, I the Lord speak righteousnesse, I declare things that are right, And the same Prophet makes proclamation; Behold (saith he) I create new Heavens, and a new earth, and the former shall not be remembred nor come into mind, and as the new Heavens and new earth, (which I shall make) shall remaine before me, saith the Lord, so shall your seed and your name remaine; Which clearly shews the intent of the promise to the Patriarks, and so accordingly they understood it, as shall be proved hereafter; The Apostles Peter and John both testifie to this truth without question, as before I have briefly shew∣ed, and that it may be out of question here, what Saint Iohn saith of the Testimony of the foure and twenty Elders, praising and lauding the lamb their Lord, and they sang a new song, saying, that art worthy to take the
book and to open the seals thereof, for thou wast slaine and hast redeemed us unto God by thy bloud out of every kndred, and tongue, and people, and atin, and hast made us unto our God Kings and Priests▪ and we shall raigne on the earth, Which Scripture without explanation is a full answer unto all such thoughts that concerne this inheriting the earth, may be in his life in a Mystery; all which agrees with ur Lords words to the Apostles at his parting from them, let not your hearts be troubled &c. In my Fathrs house are many mansions, and I go to prepare a place for you, and if I go an prepare a place for you I will come againe and receive you unto my self, that whee I am there you may be also. Now our Lord is gone into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of the Father, where he is preparing the blessed and glorious estate for us, as the Apostle Peter saith, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his aboundant mercy hath begotten us againe unto a lively hope by the Resurrection of Iesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance incorruptible and undfiled; and that fadeth not away, reserved in the heaven for us who are kept by the power of God through Faith unto salva∣tion ready to be revealed in the last time, of which last time and revelation of the glory, S. Iohn speaks, where e saith, and I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away, and there was no more sea; In that he saw no more sea, he declareth that the great oppressors of Gods Church consisting of heathen as open enemys, or Christians, as se∣cret and cunning enemys shall all cease, there shall be none to hurt nor de∣stroy in all my holy mountaine saith the Lord. And S. John goes on and declares the place where the Lord shall be with his at his returne, and I Iohn saw the holy City new Ierusalem comming down from God out of heaven prepaed as a bride adorned for her hus∣ban, And I heard a great voice ur of heaven saying, the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them▪ and thy shall be his people, and God him∣self shall be with them and be their God; and so goes on in describing the perfection of that condition, tha there shall be no more death▪ sorrow, crying, and paine▪ and as it follows after, no more curse; This is the glorious condition of Christ comming againe to his own people according to his promise, and that he will abide with them forever in the new things which he shall create, & that it may appear unquestionable that the Saints shall inherit the earth after th Resurrection, heare Gods promises to the Patriarks and their un∣derstanding of, and ho and expectation in them; and first we will begin with Abraham, where it is said and the Lord appeared unto Abraham, and said, unto thy seed will  give this Land; and againe, I will give unto thee & thy seed after thee, the Land wherein thou art a stranger, all the Land of Canaan for an everlasting possession, and I will be their God. Noe here that the Lord promiseth the possession of the Land to Abraham himselfe, to his owne
person, as well as to all, and every one of his spirituall seed, and so witnesseth the Author to the Hebrews, saying, That Abraham was called to go into a place which he should afterwards receive for an inheritance, Marke it is, said he, that is himself not others for him as some unwarily have affirmed in these last times, and  this sence nly Saint Paul calls A∣braham the heire of the wrld, by promise and grace included in Gods pro∣mise above, and I will give unto thee &c. So the the Lord Almighty engages himself to Isaack that he would performe the oath that he sware unto his Father Abraham, saying unto thee and thy seed will I give all these Countries, and God appeared to Ia∣cob his chosen at Lusse in the Land of Canaan, saith to him, the Land whereon thou lyest to thee will I giv it, and to thy seed; and their seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the West, and to the East, and to the North, and to the South, and in thee and thy seed shall all the families of the earth be essed. Hym. Most Christians understand that hse promises were fulfilled by Ioshua when he divided the Land of Cannan by lot or a possession to the Tribe of Israel. Silv. But had our Ministers and Christians read and laboured to un∣derstand the Scriptures they would have been of the Apostles mind who affirmes and clearly sheweth that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the faithfull and holy servants of God, ever understood thereby the everlasting inheritance and possession to them and their seed for ever, when they in their own persons that never enjoyed it, yet shall inherit it, for the holy Ghost saith by the testimony of faithfull Stephen the Martyr; That Abra∣ham had no inheritance in Canaan, no, not so much as to set his foot on, yet he (that is God) promised that he would give it him for a possession and to all his spirituall seed, which the aforesaid Apostle to the Hebrews in the eleventh Chapter, proves beyond all exception to be the heavenly Countrey: and the temporall Canaan no other or further, neither in pro∣mise nor possession of the following seeds, nor otherwise (I say) then that it was a speciall representation, a tipe figure and shaddow, preaching and teaching unto them, the spirituall, heavenly, holy, new and everlasting Land, wherefore thus saith the Apostle▪ These all dyed in Faith not having received the promises, but having seen them a far of: and were peswaded of them and imbraced them: and confessed that they were strangers and Pilgrims on the earth, for they which say such things declare plaily that they seek a Countrey, and truly had they been mindfull of that Country from whence they came out, they might have had opportunitie to have retur∣ned but now they desire a better Countrey, that is a heavenly, where∣fore God is not ashamed to be called their God, for he hath prepared for them a City, which City new Ierusalem is that before spoken of, even that
new and heavenly City that comes with our Lord at his descension to the earth, where, and in which he will dwell for ever. Hym. I did not think the Scriptures had been so plain for this matter as now I see them: I pray now proceed to the third particular, the King of this new and heavenly world. Silv. The King of Sion is her Saviour, and the Scriptures call him the King of Glory, and that title that was written on his Crosse in his humi∣liation, in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, that is the title of his Crown and Dignity in his Exaltation, This is the King of the Iews; And as himself saith, for this end was I born▪ and for this end came I into the world; and so te∣stifies the Angell unto the Virgin Mary, and tells her that her Sonne Iesus should be great, and called of all, the Sonne of the Highest, and the Lord shall give unto him the Throne of his Father David, and he shall raigne over the house of Israel for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end. Thus that great favourer and much beloved of God, the Prophet Da∣niel, speaking by the holy Ghost of Iesus the Lord, he calleth him the Sonne of God, and in the spirit of prophesy saith, that there was given him Domi∣nion and Glory, and a Kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should feare him, his Dominion is an everlasting Dominion which shall not passe away, and his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. The same Prophet in an∣other place saith, In the days of these Kings (meaning the great oppressors of the earth) from the beginning of the world to the end: In their days, as be∣fore I told you of the Kings of the East and the whole world. For although there be many differing powers, as of gold and silver, &c. yet they all make but one enemy, one adversary, as it is said of Rome, in her shall be found the bloud of all the Saints and Prophets, and of all that were slaine upon the earth. It is so said, because all persecutors make but one genera∣tion; and it follows, and in the days of these Kings shall the God of heaven set up a Kingdom, which shall never be destroyed, and the Kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these Kingdomes, and it shall stand for ever. For David saith, though the heathen rage, and the wicked people ima∣gine vaine things, yet saith the Lord, I have set my King upon my holy hill of Sion, who shall speak to them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore dispeasure, his Dominions is from Sea to Sea▪ from the River to the ends of the earth, they that dwell in the wildernesse shall bow before him saith the Prophet, and his enemies shall lick the dust. How full doth Almighty God prove this himself, its more clear than the Sun in its full light, In these words thou art my Sonne, this day have I begotten thee, ask of me and I will give thee the Heathen for thy inheri∣tance,
the utmost parts of the earth for thy possession, thou shalt rule them with a rod of Iron, and break them to pieces like a potters vessell; Thus reasoneth the Apostle for unto the Angels he hath not put into subjection the world to come whereof we speak, but unto the Sonne he saith, Thy Throne, oh God is for ever and ever, a Scepter of righteousnesse is the Scepte of thy Kingdom, thou hast put all things in subjection under his feet, and of that subjection more hereafter. And thus speaketh another of the Prophets, the Lord is King for ever and ever, and againe the Lord sit∣teth King for ever, for the Lord most high is terrible, and he is a great King over all the earth. And againe, sing praises with understanding, for God is the King of all the earth, fr all Kings shall fall down before him, all nations shall serve him, so long as the Sun and Moone endureth, Oh worship the Lord in the beauty of holinesse feare before him, all the earth say amongst the heathen that the Lord raigneth, the world also shall be established that it shall not be moved, he shall judge the people righteously, and governe the nations on the earth. These Scriptures are so plaine, they need no exposition, therefore let the Heavens rejoyce and let the earth be glad, et the sea roare and the fulnesse thereof, let the field be joyfull and all that therein is, then shall the trees of the wood rejoyce before the Lord, and the reason the holy Ghost giveth in these words following, for he cometh, for he cometh, that is the Lord cometh to judge the earth, he shall judge the world with righteousnesse, and the people with his truth, Oh sing unto the Lord a new song for he hath done marveilous things, his right hand and his holy arme hath gotten him the vi∣ctory▪ for its the Lord that sitteth upon the throne of his holinesse, it is the Lord that raigneh over the heathen; And another (saith the Lord) shall be King over all the earth, and in that day shall there be one Lord and his name one: And the Apostle calls him the everlasting King Iesus, who is the faithfull witnesse and first begotten of the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the earth, who alone is the Lord of Lords and King of Kings thus one & all the mes∣sengers of salvation say unto Sion, thy God raigneth, and the same language the Lord himself speaketh; Thus saith the King of Iaob, the Lord, the King of Israel, who is thy redeemer, even the Lord of hosts, I am the first and I am the last, and besides me there is no God; and a another time he saith, all power is given unto me of my Father both in Heaven and earth; great and speciall things do the Scriptures declare of this Kingdom, of its power and glory of which our Saviour acquainted his servants. Within these fourty days, speaking to them of the things pertaining to the King∣dom of God, which made them so desirous of the injoyment and possession of it, that before his descending from them, their generall request was un∣to him in these words, wilt thou at this time restore the Kingdom to
Israel, just like the Mother of the two Sonnes of Zebedee in the behalf of her Children, Lord, saith she out of a true affection of that perfection she desired; that her two Sonnes might sit, the one at his right hand, the other at his left in his Kingdom, and truly now may we say, for thine is the Kingdom power and glory, for now we see it is the Lords only, and if all what hath been said will not satisfie, we have Gods own oath for it, say∣ing, by the mouth of the Prophet, I have sworn by my self, and the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousnesse and shall not returne, that un∣to me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall sweare; and the Apostle affirmes it from the Prophet, that at the name of Iesus every knee shall bow of things in heaven, and things on earth, and things under the earth, and that every tongue shall confesse that Iesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father; I will adde one place more, which proves all that hath been said of the time, the place, and the King, and that is shewed in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, when it shall begin to sound, there shall be time no more, the mystery of God shall be finished; theres the end of the world, the time; and the voice he sounded saith, the Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord and his Christ, and he shall raigne for ever and ever; theres the place and the King both as he hath declared to his servants the Prophets. Hym. To me the consent and harmony of the Scriptures thus applied, give great satisfaction and is very comfortable; I pray Friend, make good your pro∣mise in the other particulars. Silv. The next thing I promised, was to consider what the Scriptures declare concerning the Subjects of this glorious King and Kingdom, for the Prophet saith, the Lord shall build up Sion when he shall appear in his glo∣ry; by Sion we are to understand Gods faithfull people, and by building them up a restoring of them to an estate of perfection according to his promise. Now because the Subjects of the world to come in a generall re∣spect is the whole creation, for so intimateth the Apostle, not only we, saith he, but every creature also waiteth for the glorious Liberty of the Sonnes of God; therefore we will consider them in their order; and first for the Angels to prove they shall be subject, it is written, and let all the Angels of God worship him; Angels, saith the Apostle, they are mini∣string spirits sent forth, &c. that is Subjects or Servants, and the re∣probate Angels, they are included in the generall dimensions of the Pro∣phets and Apostles before mentioned. Now in the next order of creatures we will consider man-kind; first, the Saints, then the wicked. And that the Saints shall feare and serve their Lord the King, is clear by that Oath which he swore unto our Father Abraham, witnessed by Zacharias the Priest, that we being delivered out of the hands of our ene∣mies,
might serve him without feare in righteousnesse and holinesse, be∣fore him all the days of our lives: and these (of all other) the Prophet Da∣vid calls the most free faithfull and loyalst Subjects in these and other words: O come let us worship and bow down, let us kneele before the Lord our maker, for he is our God and we are the people of his pasture: and againe, Praise ye the Lord, sing unto the Lord a new song and his praise in the Congregation of Saints, let Israel rejoyce in him that made him, let the Children of Sion be jy∣full in their King; for the Lord taketh pleasure in his people, he will beautifie the meek with salvation, let the Saints be joyfull in glory, let them sing aloud upon their beds. And Saint John hee joynes in the Angels with all the Saints, saying, And I beheld and heard the voice of many Angels round about the Throne, and the holy Beasts and Elders, and the number of them was ten thou∣sand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands, saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the lambe that is slaine to receive power and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing, and the foure Beasts said Amen▪ and the foure and twenty Elders fell down and worshipped him that liveth for ever and ever; so David calls upon the house of Israel, the house of Aaron, and the house of Levy: Yee, that feare the Lord, blesse the Lord, blessed be the Lord out of Sion which dwelleth at Jerusalem, praise ye the Lord. I find foure things in Scripture that doe set forth and declare the ex∣cellency of the glorious estate of the Saints in light; first, by a chast spouse for purity and beauty; Secondly to a goodly City, for glory and safety; Thirdly, to a high Court of commission for authority, wisdom, and Iudg∣ment; and fourthly, to a curious planted garden for pleasure and delight, and all these are subject and subordinate to their King, and that the Saints in their glorified estate, are set forth by a bride or chast Virgin, is plain, ful and admirably described in Scripture, the Prophet Esay is very elegant, in this, speaking of the Churches glorification, saith, thou shalt also be a Crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a Royall Diadem in the hand of thy God, thou shalt no more be termed forsaken, neither shall thy Land be any more termed desolate, but thou shalt be clld, my delight is in her, and thy Land married, for the Lord delighteth in thee, and thy Land shall be married, for as a yong man marrieth a Virgin, so shall thy Sonnes marry thee, and as the Bridegroom rejoyceth over the Bride, so shall thy God rejoyce over thee Isa. 62. So the Apostle speaks to the Corinthians, that his ministery, his labour and Godly jealousy over them, was to pre∣sent them a chast Virgin unto Christ, and they that sung before the throne as it were a new song which no man could learn but the hundred & four∣ty, and foure thousand which were redeemed from the Earth, these are they which were not defiled with women faith the holy Ghost for they are Virgins, and so also this holy Apostle saith, And I Iohn saw the holy
City, new Ierusalem comming downe from God out of heaven prepared as  Bride adorneá for her husband: So also she is called the Lambs wife; and againe, Let us rejoyce and be glad, and give honour to him for the Marri∣age of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made her selfe ready: And to her was granted that she should bee arrayed in fine Linnen, cleane and white; for the fine Linnen is the righteousnesse of the Saints; in the time of her temptation and sufferings shee was the Kings daughter, and all glorious within; but now in her exaltation and nuptialls she is also all glorious without, excelling in ornament and perfection; and in that shee is the Lambs wife, she hath right & interest in all his glory, that is, honou∣rable above all Lords and Kings, being their Lord and King; for shee is flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone. And as her chastity and purity ex∣cells, so doth her beauty, so that the Lord her Bridegroom calls her the the fairest among women, glorious as the morning, faire as the Moone, cleare as the Sune. My beloved, saith the Church, spake and sayd unto me, Rise up my Love and faire one, and come away, for loe the winter is past, the raine is over and gone, the flowres appeare in the earth, the time of the singing of Birds is come, the Figge tree putteth forth her green figs, and the Vines with the tender Grapes give a good smell: Arise my love, my faire one, and come away: which place shewes plainly these speeches of love and beauty are spoken to, and of the Church in her perfection and restauration, and what speeches can exceed for love and beauty these ex∣pressions? Secondly, the eternall glory of Gods people is set forth under the name of a City; And so saith that holy Prophet, Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God; yea even as a City stately builded, glorious∣ly ordered, impregnably fenced, prudently governed, soundly and fully taught and instructed, safely kept and watched, the beauty and lustre of whose building astonishes and amazes all that passe by which consider and behold it: For thus saith the Lord, Looke upon Sion, the City of our Solemnites, thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a Ta∣bernacle that shall not be taken downe, not one of the starks thereof shall be removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken; and the in∣habitant shall not say, I am sick; the people that dwell therein shall bee forgiven their iniquities: And I will, saith the Lord, make thy Officers peace, and thy exactions righteousnesse; Violence shall be no more heard in thy Land, wasting nor destruction within thy borders; but thou shalt call thy Walls salvation, and thy Gates prayse: And be you glad, saith the Lord, and rejoyce for ever in that which I create; for behold I create Jerusalem a rejoycing, and her people a joy; and I will rejoyce in Jerusa∣lem, and joy in my people; and the voyce of weeping shall be no more
heard in thee, nor the voyce of crying, for from henceforth shall no more come into thee, the uncircumcized nor the unclean; none shal enter into this City but such only, which are both in heart and in flesh circumcised, as the Prophet Ezeck saith: And the holy Citizens of this heavenly Citie, the Sun shall no more burn them by day, nor the Moon by night, they shall neither suffer hunger nor weeping, nor sin, nor dye more, saith the Lord: Wherfore awake, awake saith the Prophet, put on thy strength, O Syon, puton thy beautifull garment, O Ierusalem, the holy City: This is the City of the great King, wherefore arise and shine; for the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee: For thus saith the Lord, I will extend peace unto thee like a River, and the glory of the Gentiles as a flowing stream: As one whom his mother comforteth so will I comfort you, and you shall be comfor∣ted in Jerusalem: This is Sion whom the Lord hath chosen, he the Lord hath desired her for his habitation, this is my rest for ever, saith the Lord, here will I dwell. The glorie and safety of this Citie is so amply set forth by the Apostle, when he saw her in a vision, where he saith: And he car∣ried me away in the spirit to a great and high mountaine, and shewed me that great City, the holy Jerusalem descending out of heaven from God, having the glory of God, and her light was like unto a stone most precious, and describes the great City in her glorious building, her walls great and high, having twelve Gates kept by twelve Angels, and that she had twelve foundations, so precious for the matter of it, that it ex∣ceeds pure gold, and all pretious stones and pearles, magnificent for form, the length, the breadth, and the heighth of it equall; upon the twelve foundations were written the names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb, the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof, the Nations of them that are saved shall walke in the light of it, and there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth, &c. Here is both the glory and safety of this happy City described; this is the City that God prepared for the Patriarchs, the City with foundations before shewed, which all the faithfull expected and looked for, whose builder and maker is God: And upon one and all the Citizens of this City I will write upon him saith the Lord, the name of my God, and the name of the Ci∣ty of my God, which is new Ierusalem, which commeth downe &c. And these faithfull Subjects of God the holy Ghost calls by the name of the City it selfe, speaking of the evill reigne and time of Antichrist: And they shall saith he tread the holy City under foot forty and two moneths; but when those dayes of the Cities desolation shall be ended, then she shal have a Commission under the great Seale of heaven, to tread her enemies under her foot, for so faith the Apostle, The Saints shall judge the world. And now we are come to the third particular, The commission of power
and authority that the Saints shall have with their Saviour, which the Scriptures doe largely declare. And thus the Lord saith to prove it, He that overcommeth will I grant to sit with me in my Throne: There is the com∣mission and authority too, even as I have overcome, and am set with my Father in his Throne: and so promiseth our Lord to his Apostles, and assures it with an asseveration, Verily I say unto you, that yee which have followed me in the regeneration, when the sonne of man shall sit in the Throne of his glory, yee also shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel: and what in this he said unto them, he said unto all. And this the Prophet David well knew, when he sung this song, Ierusalem is buildeá as a City that is compact together, whither the Tribes goe up, The Tribes of the Lord unto the testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord, for there are set Thrones of judgement, the Thrones of the house of David. And so in another place, Let the Saints be joyfull in glory, let the high prayses of God be in their mouth, and a two edged sword in their hands, to execute vengeance upon the heathen, and punishment upon the people, to binde their Kings with chaines, and their Nobles with fetters of Iron, to execute up∣on them the judgement written: This honour have all the Saints, praise yee the Lord. And thus saith the Lord to the Church of Thiatira, To him that overcommeth, and keepeth my word to the end, to him will I give power over the Nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of Iron: As the vessells of a Pot∣ter shall they be broken to shivers, even as I received of my Father. So like∣wise doth he speake to the Angel of Philadelphia, Behold I will make them of the Synagogue of Sathan, which say they are Iewes and are not, but doe lye; Behold I will make them to come and worship before thy feet, and they shall know that I have loved thee; So speaketh Solomon in his Proverbs, the prudent are crowned with knowledge, the evill bow before the good, and the wicked at the gates of the righteous, then shall it be most true in the world to come, as hereafter shall be shewed: So the Lord by the Prophet Ieremiah, speaking of Israel, The rod of the Lords inheritance saith, thou art my battell Axe and Weapons of warre, for with thee will I break in pieces the Nations, and with thee will I destroy Kingdomes, and with thee will I destroy old and young, and with thee will I break in pieces the Chariot and his rider: And I will render unto Babylon, and to all the Inhabitants of Chaldea all their evill that they have done in Sion, in your sight saith the Lord: And when thine eyes shall see this, thine heart shall rejoyce, as I have shewed before; Sing O daugh∣ter of Sion, shout O Israel, be glad and rejoyce with all thy heart O daugh∣ter of Jerusalem, for the Lord hath taken away thy judgements, and hath cast out thy enemy: the King of Israel is in the midst of thee: thou wast humbled, but now thou art exalted; thou wast oppressed, but now thou
art delivered, thou wast judged, but now thou art freed; thou wast of low degree, but now thou art raised: Ierusalem is set up the praise and Iudge of the whole earth. According to this speaketh the Prophet Micah to the Church concer∣ning her deliverance from sufferings to reigning: Behold at that time, saith the Lord, I will undoe all that afflict thee, and I will save her that halteth, and gather her that was driven out: and I will get them praise and fame in every Land where they have been put to shame: At that time will I bring you again, in the time that I gather you, and I will make you a name and a praise amongst all people of the earth when I turn back your captivity befoe your eyes, saith the Lord. Hym. I am much beholding to you for this excellent discovery of Gods servants condition in the world to come; I pray declare to me the fourth parti∣cular you promised. Silv. I said that the state of perfection the Scriptures did well illu∣strate by a Garden for pleasure and delight, And in this the Prophet Isaiah is very fluent in speaking of the perfection of Gods people & saith; for the Lord shall comfort Sion, he will comfort all her waste places, and he will make her wildernesse like Eden; and her desert like the Garden of the Lord; joy and gladnesse shall be found therein, thanks-giving and the voyce of melody. And so in another place he saith, And the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfie thy soule in drought, and make fat thy bones; And thou shalt be like a watered Garden, and like a spring of wa∣ter, whole waters faile not. So saith the wise King Solomon in the per∣son of Christ; A Garden inclosed is my sister, my Spouse, a spring shut up, a fountaine sealed, thy plants are an Orchard of Pomegranets, with pleasant fruits, Camphire, with Spikenard, Saffron, Cinamon, with all trees of Frankinsence, with all the chiefe spices: Awake thou North∣wind, come thou South, blow upon my Garden, that the spices thereof may flow out: And the Church saith again, let my beloved come into his garden, and eate his pleasant fruits: All which expresse nothing but plea∣sure and delight in reciprocal affection between Christ and his Church, the King saith the Lord dwelleth in the garden: and the Lord him selfe saith, I have chosen Sion to dwell in her. The beauty and excellency of this Church in her perfection was shewed to Balaam in a vision: And made him thus fall into admiration: yea, how goodly are thy Tents oh Iacob, and thy Tabernacles O Israel; as the vallies are they spread forth, as gardens by the River side, as the trees of Ligna aloes which the Lord hath planted, and as the Cedar Trees by the waters. And there is a great deale of reason that the holy Ghost in the testimony of the Prophets should set forth the estate Eternall, the estate of perfection by a
pleasant Garden, for so God created it at first in that perfect conditi∣on in which it stood, where he gave his holy man Adam Domini∣on over all, over the Fish of the Sea, and over the Fowle of the Aye, and over every living thing that moveth upon the Earth; And just so it shall be againe in the Restauration, the second Adam the Lord from Heaven, shall have a never fading and a perpetuall Dominion, as the Apostle speakes; for unto the Angels hee hath not put in subjection the World to come, whereof we speake: But one in a certaine place speakes, which is David, admiring what was prophesied of Christs Kingdome, breakes out in a Question (being amazed at the great Glory and Dominion prophesied of) and asked, What is man O God, that thou art so mindfull of him, or the Sonne of man, whom thou so visitest to give him Domini∣on over the Worke of thy Hands! Thou hast put all things in sub∣jection under him: And this the Apostle understands the Prophet speakes of Christ and his Kingdome. That holy Scribe Ezra, being largely shewed the glorious e∣state of the Churches Deliverance in the World to come, sayth, For unto you is Paradice opened, the Tree of Life is planted, the Time to come is prepared, plenteousnesse is made ready, a Citie is builded, and Rest is allowed; yea, a perfect Goodnesse and Wise∣dome. O happy are they that have thus the Lord to bee their God, happy are the peohle that are in such a case: Arise, shake thy selfe from the dust, arise from trouble, and sit downe in quiet; Oh Ierusalem en∣ter into your Masters joy. Him. Good friend, seeing the glory is so great of such as shall be saved which are willing and obey; and therefore eate the good things of the promised Land, what shall become of such as perish? Silv. They that would not in their life time learn obedience by mercy shall be constreined after death by paine; its true that Hagars generation the bond-womans Children shall be cast out from inheriting with those that are free born of Sarah, for so directly speak the Scriptures by a doube witnesse, the Lord himself and one of his servants: Cast out this bond-wo∣man and her Son for the Sonne of this bond-woman shall not be heire, with my free born Sonne even my Sonne Isaac; Where its plaine and without all que∣stion that this generation shall not inherit, that is, shall not participate of the glory in the world to come, (whereof we speak) with Sarahs free born Children, but that they shall serve, and be subject to their King and his Saints for ever, and this appears plainly by Scripture, thus speaks Noah by the spirit of prophesie, Cursed be Canaan, a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren, and Canaan shall be Shems servant, and againe the
Lord saith in another place, the elder shall serve the yonger, and that the yonger shall be Lord over his brethren, and then as all things shall be made new, so righ∣teousnesse and judgement shall have the victory, and then shall Esay serve Iacob, Ishmael Isaac, and Cain Abel; and although in their former life time, they hated, persecuted, scorned, disdained, and killed them, even serving them∣selves of them whom they ought to have served, if truth had taken place; yet at the returne of the Lord, as all his enemies shall be subdued to him and brought under his feet, these enemies amongst the rest shall be subje∣cted: now the principall enemies to God, Christ his truth and his children are the Devill, and these hard hearted, stif-necked rebells his Children, that as their Father, so are they implaceable and unreconcilable, and as he, so do they resist the holy Ghost, and will not have this man to raigne over them, that is the Lord Christ; but they do and will break his bonds and cast his cords from them: and as they have always done, so they do now and will continue, (till he comes to raigne in power and Majesty) professe themselves sworn enemies and adversaries to him and his; but when this world shall come to an end, and that world is come of which our Saviour saith, his Kingdom is of; then even shall he take, and slay be∣fore him all those his enemies, Slay them before me, saith the Lord, then shall the head wholly prevaile and triumph over him that ever hath so exceedingly bruised, mortified and persecuted his heele, then he shall so subdue and break in sunder Sathan and his Children, by his invincible power and regall authority, that he shall undo, frustrate, and make void Sathans whole plot and work; and the Scripture then shall be fulfilled which saith, and he, that is Christ, shall break his head, then the Devill that hath deceived mankind ever since the world began, shall be cast into the lake of fire and brimston, and shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever. Then there shall not be one knee amongst all the reprobate Angels and men, but shall bow, nor any tongue but shall confesse (to the glory of God the Father) that Iesus Christ is both Lord and King, and although now they rage and take Counsell together against the Lord and against his annointed, and invent lyes and mischiefs against the Lords truth and all his faithfull servants, yet he that sitteth in the Heavens doth laugh at them, the Lord shall have them in derision, for the begotten of God the King of Sion, shall rule, governe and subdue those heathens, yea, he shall break them with a rod of Iron, saith the Prophet, and dash them to pieces like the vessell that the potter makes of clay, as was before mentioned, and as the Lord, so shall all that are his, have dominion over all the out-cast, heathenish▪ hard hearted and unregenerate gentilish generation, for such names the Scripture gives them all, and therefore thus saith the Lord him∣self, he that overcometh and keepeth my words unto the end, to him will
I give power over the nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of Iron, &c. even as I received of my Father, that is, they shall execute the same power my Father hath given me; to this agreeth that Scripture which saith, All nations shall feae and obey him: And againe, the Children of those that afflicted thee, shall be sold for slaves unto thee; And againe, With thee will I break in pieces Captaines and Rulers, the old and yong man and maide, Kings & subjects, none exempted of what language, sex, estate, or degree whatsoever: Fi∣nally, the last particular is, that the whole Creation, that is to prove all o∣ther Creatures besids men and Angels, they shal for ever serve, that is, mag∣nifie, set forth and further the glory of the great King and his Kingdom for ever without any opposition, cruelty, savagenesse or evill whatsoever, and therefore its conteined in Scriptures, that every creature that is in Heaven and on the earth and under the earth, and such as are in the Sea and all that are in them, heard I saying, saith Saint Iohn, blessing ho∣nor, glory, and power be to him that sitteth upon the Throne and unto the Lambe for ever and ever; this proof is so generall, as it takes in all places, Heaven and Hell, the whole Earth and the Sea, and all that are within them, are heard by the Apostle, to praise, honour & obey the Lamb, and this truth, the Prophet David declares excellently, where he saith, What is man that thou art so mindfull of him, or the Sonne of man that thou vi∣sitest him? thou hast made him a little lower then the Angels, thou hast crowned him with glory and honour, thou hast made him to have Dominion over the work of thy hand, thou hast put all things under his feet, all sheep and oxen, yea, & the beasts of the field, the foules of the aire, and the fishes of the Seas; which makes the Prophet cry out in admiration and wonder, O God our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! Now the Apostle to the Hebrews declares this, that David spake of Christs Kingdom the world to come, as hath before been described, and therefore, saith he, for unto the Angels he hath not put in subjection the world to come, whereof I speak, but one in a certain place testified rehearsing the very words before repeated of the Prophet David, so that if any man say, the Prophet is not so to be understood, the Apostle himself makes answer and gives us an assurance so to believe, and this doctrine he preaches for truth without exception to the holy Ro∣mans, where he saith for the earnest expectation of the creature, waiteth for the manifestation of the Sonnes of God, and he gives the reason cleare and plaine, because saith he, the creature it self also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious Liberty of the Sonnes of God, for we know, saith he, speaking as if it were so well known to them, as certain, as their hoped for inheritance, that the whole creation, that is e∣very creature groaneth and travaileth in paine together untill now, note how exact and elegant he is, he expounds the whole creation to be every
creature, & that all these by a speciall instinct of nature are like a woman in travel that nothing in the world can prevent her bringing forth; & so it shal be with the whole creation in its restitution to its perfection, & lest it should not be clear enough, the Apostle goes on and in particular and a∣part speaks of the adopted of God, the heires of the world to come, the in∣heritance of the salvation, saying, and not only they, but our selves also, which have received the first fruits of the spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the adoption, to wit the redemption of our bodies; the words are so plaine they need no exposition, proving the restauration of the whole creation as well as the Saints, which is further confirmed by that knowing Evangelist Saint Luke, who saith, And he shall send Iesus Christ, which before was preached unto you, whom the heavens must receive untill the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world began, which truth in times past was well known unto men, although now the world through ignorance understand it not, for the Lord saith by a holy Prophet; that his covenant with Sun and Moon, day and night is for ever, and a∣gaine he saith he made not the Earth for nought, but to be inhabited, and he hath established it that it shal not be moved; and in another place speak∣ing of the generall restitution as Saint Paul doth, he saith with righteous∣nesse, shall he judge the poore, and with the breath of his lipps shall he slay the wicked; and then from man-kind goes on to other creatures, and saith, then shall the Wolfe dwell with the Lambe, and the Leopard shall lye down with the Kid, and the calf and the yong Lion, and the Fatling and a little Child shall lead them: and the Cow and the Beare shall feed, their yong ones shall lye down together, and the Lion shall eate straw like the Ox, and the sucking Child shall play over the hole of the Aspe, and the weaned Child shall put his hand on the Cockatrises den, they shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountaine, saith the Lord, for the earth shall be full of the knowledg of the Lord as the waters cover the Sea; & in another place the same Prophet saith again, that the Wolfe and the Lambe shall feed together, and the Lion shall eate straw like the Bullock, and dust shall be the Serpents meate; and againe he saith, seeke ye out of the book of the Lord, and read, no one of these shall faile, none shall want her mate, for my mouth it hath commanded, and his spirit it hath gathered them, and the beast of the field, saith the Lord by the same Prophet, shall honour me: and againe, Oh Sion break forth into singing, and let all the trees in the field rejoyce and clap their hands, for in stead of the thorne shall come up the Figg tree, and in stead of the bryer shall come up the mirtle tree, and it shall be unto the Lord for a name and for an everlasting signethat shal not be cut off; and another of the Lords faithfull ones, saith, moreover
even the woods, and every sweet smelling tree shall over shadow Is∣rael by the commandement of God, for God shall lead Israel with joy, with the light of his glory, even with the mercy and righteousnesse that commth from him. Hym. That all Creatures shall be restored, me thinks the Scriptures are plaine and evident for, so that I cannot but acknowledge it is so; yet many obje∣ctions also appear to me, some of the Scriptures you alleadge because such ex∣pressions are used which concern this present life, as the Calf, a Child, and Straw, as if there should be plowing▪ and sowing, and increase, and multiplica∣tion of Creatures againe. Silv. As you say the Scriptures, in some particulars, do seem so to speak, both for fructification and sustentation; for the last our Lord speaks as if there might be such a thing, even as Adam had for his delight and pleasure to eate even in the time of his innocency in Paradice, the fruit of all the trees in Eden, and excepted none but the tree of knowledg of good and evill, and the words of our Lord are these, but I say unto you, I will not drink hence forth of this fruit of the vine, untill I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom: Note here this fruit of the vine, as distin∣guished from that which shall be new when the Kingdom of God comes, as Luke saith, as also that our Lord speaks further these words, & I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father hath appointed unto me, that you may eate and drink at my Table in my Kingdom, and sit on Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, and that there shall not be any more marrying or giving in marriage, by which I understand there shall be no further increase, but that man shall be as the Angels of God in Heaven in the re∣surrection; secret things belong unto God, and things revealed belong to us and our Children, and seeing the Scriptures have revealed so much, therefore break forth into joy, sing together ye wast places of Ierusalem, for the Lord hath comforted his people, he hath redeemed Sion, the Lord hath made bare his holy Arme in the eyes of all the nations, and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our God: thy faithfulnesse, Oh God, is unto all generations, thou hast established the earth and it abideth, they continue this day according to thy ordinance, for all are thy servants. Who shall not feare thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou only art holy, for all nations shall come and worship before thee for thy Iudge∣ments are made manifest. FINIS.
