L1471 e451_16 R205256 99864673 161932
A LETTER from Hampton-Court: OF 600 Horse and Foot risen for the King at Hounslow-Heath, and Hare-warren. The Duke of Buckingham with them. AND The Lord Francis, The Duke of Rich∣mond, The Lord Peter-borough, and divers Lords, Gentlemen, and Officers of the Kings old SOULDIERS, And their designe to take Lambeth House, and plant Ordnance against the Parliament, and to sur∣prize the Committee at Derby-House. And to raise the siege, or relieve Colche∣ster with 2000 horse and Foot. LONDON, Printed for the generall satisfaction of moderate men. MDCXLVIII.
A LETTER FROM HAMPTON COVRT OF 600 Horse risen for the King; And the Duke of Buckingham and divers other Lords in the Head of them. Deare Sir, WEE are here suddainly surprized, and in I know not what conditi∣on, we had talke yesterday and some days before that Surrey was
rising for the King, but could not understand the meaning of it: But there is now a party risen, and quar∣ter upon us, who declare for the King, and they expect a conjunction (and that sud∣dainly) of a very considerable number. The number of these horse that are alrea∣dy amongst us are about 600. Many of them came from London last night amongst which number divers apprentises, and some Citizens and others, And many of them of the County of Surrey, and Sussex, amongst which was serving men and others. Here is also the Duke of Buckingham, and the Lord Francis his brother, whom the Horse-men say are to command them, And they say further that the Duke of Richmond, the Earle of Holland, the Earle of Peterbur∣rough, and divers others, Lords and Gentle∣men are amongst them, And it is said there is expected 700 to be with them this day or to morrow if they be not hindred. They are now this morning meetng at Hounslow heath, whither divers come from the City of London, and out of the Coun∣ties.
Divers of them are already here, and at Henly, and the Villages hereabouts. The Earle of Kent was at Henly, and they came within some two houses of his Lord∣ships house when he was there (for his Lord∣ship came from London, and had laine there that night) But his Lordship having adver∣tisements of their comming so near him, got away out of the backe-yard, and so escaped them. They have seized on divers horses of Sir John Dinglies and others, out of their grounds and stables, for the service of the King (as they say) Their Designe (so farre as I can learne, upon diligent inquiry) is thus (intentional∣ly). First to randezvouze (this day) after din∣ner at Hare-Warren a great Moore some two miles from hence And then and there (if they be not impeaded) to receive Orders. For which purpose here are come divers of the Kings old Officers, under whom it is supposed that they will be settled; for I be∣leeve they were most of them listed before.
Having seized all the horse and Armes that they can light on (this morning) they are to mount; divers Foot come to them, and towards night (it is feared) they will sculk a∣bout all grounds between this and London for what Horses they can finde, to mount the rest. It is said that there are 3 or 400 Foot that are to seize upon Lambeth house this night, And these horse to come up and guard them and that there are 2 or 3 Drakes which they have to bee conveyed to them, (which are some whereabout London in readinesse) to be planted there, against the two Houses of Parliament, and Derby-house. To morrow they expect to receive some Instructions from the Lord Goring (as it is said) there are other parties of horse and foot to joyne with them from London, and di∣vers severall Counties. They expect within three or foure dayes to be in a body of 2000 Horse and Foot. When they are thus joyned, then they are (as it is said) to go to raise the seige at Col∣chester, or to relieve the Cavaliers within, if they can,
There is some speeches as if they had a de∣signe to attempt the surprizing of the Com∣mittee, some evening as they are sitting at Derby-house if they can, before they goe to relive Colchester. This upon the best intelligence that I can have at present (upon my diligent inquiry) is the summe of their intentions, And as for their resolutions; I know not what it may prove, but they seem to be very sterne and resolved. They pretend to rise to fetch the King home to the Parliament, that so there may be peace, and so draw in many to them. There is just now newes come hither (as they say) that the Common-Councell of London are gone with a Petition to the Parlia∣ment for the King to come to London, and to desire a Personall Treaty. It is also given out here that there is 30000l. ready in banke, in the hands of some that are chosen Treasurers, for the payment of the forces for the King, upon this present expe∣dition. There are divers Lords and others, that
are to sit in Counsell by and by (as I heare) about some Instructions to be made ready a∣gainst the Randezvouze. I am confident that within this two nights they will give an Alarme to London, either on Lambeth side, or Westminster side. Hampton Court July 5. 1648. Die Martis 5 July, 1648. THe Commons have passed an Order for the Committee of Derby House to take care for the suppressing of these Forces, And securing of Lambeth House. Westminster the 5 of July 1648. FINIS.
