L1514A N23589 99896083 154036
A LETTER FROM The Bishops of Scotland, to the Bishops of England. May it please Your GRACE and Your LORDSHIPS, SInce the lamentable Suppression of the Apostolical Order of Bishops in this Kingdom, some hundreds of the inferior Clergy, have been turn'd out of their Cures and Benefices, and thereby reduc'd with their poor Children and Familles to such deplorable Misery, as it does extort Compassion from their bitterest Enemies, and as hitherto they have been almost altogether supported, by the pious Bounty of good People, amongst our selves, so now the Scarcity of Money here, and the Poverty of this Nation is such, that it is not able to afford them what may be necessary to preserve them from the last extremities, and unless they be assisted from abroad, we don't see by what other human Means they can be preserved from starving. Wherefore as it is our indispensable Duty, and that with the greatest Fervor, to recommend them to Your Grace's and Your Lordships Care, so hereby we most earnestly beseech You, in the Bowels of our common and most adorable Saviour, to commiserate their sad and desolate Condition, and to contribute to their Relief, not only by Your own Christian and fraternal Charity, but also by exciting the Clergy in Your respective Provinces and Diocesses, to do the like, as God shall enable them, and open their Hearts and Hands in so pious and necessary a Work. Your Lordships well know, that in the Apostolical Age, not only did the flaming Love to God possess the Souls of the Primitive Christians, but that a Sympathizing Charity, warm'd them to all their fellow Christians, which vigo∣rously exerted it self in liberal Contributions, for the Relief even of Lay-Pro∣fessors in their Sister Churches, who were in Want; And it may be easily con∣jectur'd, how much more warm and enlarg'd it would have prov'd, towards an intire Body of Persons consecrated to Christ at his Altars, reduced to such in∣expressible Straits as ours are now. Wherefore as Almighty God, who in the Depths of his Wisdom and Justice has so Sadly visited us, has been pleas'd to preserve Your Church in a prosperous and plentiful State; So we doubt not but Your Lordships will be ready on this extraordinary and crying Occasion, to follow so glorious and charitable an Example and will not fail to maintain the Character of Your Church, so famous over the World (besides many other excellent things) for its liberal and extended Charity. What shall be collected may be trusted to Such as your Lordships think fittest to transmit it to us, who shall be careful to apply it to the Relief of our Presbyters, and their desolate Widows, according to their several Sad Circum∣stances, and to Send back an Account of the Distribution thereof according to the Ends and Purposes of the pious Donors. There are no more of these few now surviving of our Order here in this City of Edinburgh, Save we, who by reason of that circumstance, are not only best acquainted with our Clergy's condition, but have also the burden of this concern of theirs immediately devolv'd upon us; Wherefore we hope, seeing our Colleagues live at a great distance, and their Subscriptions cannot be conveniently got, your Lordships, will take no exception, that this most Serious and passionate application comes only from us who are One directed to his Grace of Canterbury, and the Bishops of his Province, with another of the same Tenor to his Grace of York, and the Bishops of his Pro∣vince, and both to the Care of the Reverend Dr. Scott. May it please your Grace and your Lordships, Your most Affectionate Brethren and most Humble Servants, Jo. Glascow Alex. Edenburgen.
Credentials to the Reverend Doctor Scott. THE infinitly wise God, having in his unsearchable Providence, permitted some hundreds of our Episcopal Clergy in Scotland, to be violently rabbl'd out of their Cures and Benefices, by armed Companies of furious Men, acting without Commission, contrary to the known Right of the Lieges, and Establish'd Laws of the Nation, by which they and their Families are reduc'd to extreme Wants and Necessities, and have continu'd under this grievous Affliction, now, for many Years, which the present impoverish'd Condition of our Country is not able any longer to relieve in any tolerable Measure. Therefore to prevent the utter starving of so many good Ministers, with their Children and Families, which cannot now be otherwise reliev'd, than by the pious Charity of good Christians from abroad whose Hearts God shall open and incline to so good a Work which will be graciously accepted and rewarded by God. These are humbly and earnestly to recommend their sad and deplorable Conditon, to the Compassion and Charity of all good Christians, very fervently beseeching them in the Bowels of Jesus Christ to extend their pious Charity on this bleeding and crying Occasion. And because our Reverend Brother Dr. Robert Scott Dean of Glasgow and Parson of Hamilton, hath consented to collect what the Bounty of the Well-dispos'd and Charitable-affected shall allow, for the Re∣lief and Subsistance of the said suffering indigent Clergy: We whose Names are subscrib'd do recommend him, as a Person of such Piety, and Integrity, as none may in the least scruple to trust him with their Bounty and Beneficence, as he shall have Occasion to apply himself for the same; He being to send his Collections to us, and to the other Administrators of the Charities which devout Christians contribute for the Relief of our said suffering Clergy. In Te∣stimony whereof, (written by the Hand of the Arch-Bishop of Glasgow) these Presents are subscrib'd by us, to which we affix our little manual Seals, Jo. Glasgow. Geo. Aberdon. Will. Moravien.
