L1829 E416_4 99863960 116178
The Samaritans Box Newly opened: Powring his Oyl into the wounds of a distresled Kingdome; And communicating wholsom advice to all Estates, especially to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, the Honourable Councel of War, together with the Agita∣tors of the ARMY. Wherein is laid down 1. The particular causes of all our calamities. 2. Divers Considerations tending to Moderation. 3. Rules to prevent growth of Evils. 4. Assured means to procure Peace, and put an end to all our Troubles. By WILLIAM LEVITT. I speak it to your shame, is there not a wise man among you, no not one that can Judge between his brethren, but a brother go∣eth to law with a brother, & that under Insidels. 1 Cor. 6. 5. 6. The Prophet is a Fool, and the spirituall man is mad, for the mul∣titude of thine Iniquity, therefore the hatred is great. Hos. 9. 7. Let your Moderation bee knowne to all men, the Lord is at hand. James 3. 17. Beati Pacifici. Matth. 5. 9. LONDON, Printed by James and Joseph Moxon, at the signe of the Sugar loaf in Hous-ditch. 1647.
Gentlemen and loving Friends, THat due and Dear respect I ow to you all, together with that Obligation lies upon me, in regard of God and my Native Countrey, enforces this un∣dertaking: and indeed such is my interest in, and affection to you, so far as God hath made you Instrumentall to clear the Kingdom of those Catterpillers that threatned con∣sumption both of Church and State, that I desire death, rather then detract the least iota of your noble deservings: such ha∣ving been the foot-steps of God with you, that no power could stand before the aw and Majesty where with your Army was clad: witnesse those many matchlesse Victories and Successes obtained by Gods blessing upon your un-defatigable and un∣daunted resolutions, so that generations to come may blesse God for you, and from whom, under God, the well-affected receive their present protection. Notwithstanding, such are the various occurrences of Church and State, that all the vast expence of Treasure and Blood, and all your unparalleld pains, to deliver this poore Kingdom from oppression and Tyranny, is like to be utterly lost, if God unexpectedly strike nor in, i snders by may say or see any thing. I dare not have the least thought of any ill Intent, in your meanest Instrument; yet our divisions and distractions are so great, their consequences so destructive, that your faithfullest ends fear overthrow of all. Time was, when our externalls only were corrupted, the disease not half so dangerous; but now our very Vitalls are in∣fected, and we become more destructively incurable. The
difference is not now between the Malignant and well-affe∣cted; but the envyous man hath sowed Taes among the ains, who under God, are the life and being of a Nation; Nay, and these unhappy jrrs in a time when all expected Peace! Thi hath been the stratagem of Satan from the first rise of our unhappy commotions, to set the Godly together by the ears; he well knowing the designe would not stand with his honour: neither could he so easily effect to divide his own, they being wiser in their generations then the children of light. I have adventured his prevention, either by an endeavour of reuniting the dissenting parties, (viz.) he Presbyterian and Independant; or at least, a moderation of that violence which is too too apparant in each, when prevalent. And al∣though I may meet not only with mis∣apprehensions, but harsh Censures for my pains, and peradventure accounted a Self-seeker, although (impartially considered) there's little cause. I am in this, as in all other my publique undertakings, armed against both good and evill reports; and would willing∣ly have shunned that occasion, had not the Ordinance of Parlia∣ment forced me to be more publique then otherwise I would. I thank my God, I never was sinister, or do I at all plead for imployment: I am not so low wintered to seek an Office, (I abhorre the thoughts) being better able to passe by personall injuries, then to see general despite cast upon the well-affected, who for some circumstantiall difference, are generally cast out of places of Honour and Trust, or shamefully neglected; in whose behalf, I have taken upon mee this thanklesse task: In prosecution whereof, I shall lay down, 1. The particular procuring Causes of all our Cala∣mities. 2. Divers Considerations tending to moderation. 3. Rules to prevent growth of distempers. 4. Certain approved means, to put an end to all our Troubles.
Only let me premise that I detest to speak one word in be∣half ofany man of publique dis-affection: or justifie the illegal proceedings of any, of what Judgment soever, utterly disclaim∣ing that giddy ingagement, although divers honest men were drawn in to it: and condeming that unparalled peece of vio∣lence offered the Parliament so dishonourably permitted, nei∣ther the Actors enquired after, or the actions declared against; I mean when the Votes were forced, by which the second Mi∣litia sat the second time: neither do I in the least own the de∣clining and neglect of our Independant friends, who had both in Militia and Command sufficiently declared their fidelity: But as I said, in behalf of such as have been found faithfull, and are either by mis-representation, or only for that they are Pres∣byterian, dishonourably intreated; being willing to own a Godly man of either Judgement. 1. For the Causes of our Calamities. 1. The originall and oot of all our maladies, as they pro∣ceed from God, is sin, both Nationall and personall: as pride, prophanenesse, Idolatry, uncleannesse, fullnesse of bread, Con∣tempt of the poor, oppression, violence, light esteem of the Gospel, formality, unthankfullnesse, unsuitable walking with God in the midst of manifold mercies and deliverances; for these things the land mourn. 2. Carnall Confidence, too much trusting in an arm of flesh, one Idolizing a King, another a Parliament, a third an Army, a fourth a Synod, (in reference to Church settlement peradventure) a fifth a Common Councell: God now lets us see all is vain, He infatuates our Councels, shakes our founda∣tions, so that our Prophets are as in the dayes of Hosea, turned Fooles, the spirituall man is mad, all our Champions from whom we expected deliverance, become rotten reeds, all tell∣ing us there is no trust in secundary causes: God hath been, God will be our Reformer, our Deliverer: He it is must speak Peace, and he only must settle the affairs of Church and State, that his Name may have more praise. 3. Idolizing our own opinions, though never so mon∣strous,
every one hugging his own Apes, because they are his; and hence is it not only the Godly Learned, but the ballance of the Sanctuary are so much sleighted. 4. Corrupt men in places of Honour and Trust, seeking themselves, not the publique. 5. Ingratitude, and more then ordinary incivility and dis∣honour offered those that under God have delivered us from our common enemies, not taking care either for their payment, or making sufficient provision for Indempnity, or Tender Con∣sciences, before endeavours of disbanding. 6. Jealousies, mis-understandings, and mis-representations of each others words and actions. 7. From our corrupt hearts, each party being partiall to it self; the Presbyterian sleighting and outing men of Indepen∣dant principles, although never so faithfull and Godly; the Independant as unworthily sleighting and outing all that cor∣respond not with them, although otherwise without excepti∣on: Certainly these warrings and jarrings proceeds meerly from our Lusts, and its in vain to expect peace so long as any one party seeks to set up it selfe. 8. Too much indulgency to Delinquent Clergy, who in all places rake up their old Reliques, and poyson the people with their Egyptian hotch-potch, imboldened hereunto by hope of generall Tolleration. 9. Ignorance of that small difference thats between Pres∣byterian and Independant discipline. Certainly if the gene∣rallity of each knew the Government to be one, only in point of appeal, as indeed it is; they would never be so mad to emu∣late: they must have both Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Deacons, the same Officers, the same Ordinances, the same Church Cen∣sue: to speak tuth, the Independent Churches are all Presby∣terian, but Presbyterian as now stated, not Independent; yet easily might be reconciled if the Lord would open our eyes, and cline ou hearts to Love and Peace. 10. Want of Christian affection, which breeds ill constru∣ctions on each side. If a Godly Minister shall zealously presse on to that government to which his principles and Conscience
leads, without which, he cannot be found faithfull, this must be called rigor, malice, violence, &c. both charging that upon violence, thats often done out of pure zeal to God and his Cause. 11. Playing so long Fast and Loose with the King: Cer∣tainly the expence of lesse Treasure and Blood, would have ser∣ved turn, if wee had dealt roundly with him at first; neither would our warrs have worn out one Generall; the truth is, we sought him so long, till we have almost lost the Kingdom; beleeve it He shoots well in the Long Bow; yet let no man mistake me, I wish his Majesty as much honour and happinesse as he that peradventure may shoot his first bolt; but I wish also for his and his posterities and kingdoms good, that speedy pro∣vision may be made for the Kingdoms Indempnity and future security, without which, we have been fighting to small pur∣pose. 12. Former suffering so many base scurrilous scandalous Pamphlets, so frequent about City and Countrey, nursing cor∣rupt humors in malignat and discontented spirits, and deluding abundance of ignorant people, bringing the Vulgar sort gene∣rally into dislike both of Parliament and Army. 13. Permitting so many corrupt Magistrates, and notori∣ous Delinquents in offices of Trust, in most parts of the King∣dom, who have (as much as in them lies) made the well-af∣fected objects of their revenge. 14. Accounting all Presbyterians that are not Indepen∣dants, and all Independants that are not Presbyterians, when the major part is owned by neither, nor sit for Communion with either; nay, indeed are enemies to both: the Indepen∣dant reckoning all Prophane to the Presbyterian; the Presby∣terian accounting all men of rotten and unsound judgements Independants; and there is a great fault in both, for their in∣dulgencie one to the prophane, and the other to the erronious in not declaring against them. 15. The Pride, Covetuousnesse and Prophanenesse of the generality of our Clergy, who have thereby caused many (o∣therwise well-affected) not onely tobecome enemies to go∣verment
but even to lothe the Ordinances of God for their sakes: yet blessed be God wee have as many Godly learned whose hearts mourn in secret for these things, as any Nation under the Sun. 2. Divers Considerations tending to Moderation. 1. Consider the Presbyterian hath gon hand in hand with you, against the Common enemy, have neither spared person or purse; but have been as prodigall of their bloods for you, as you for them; I mean the well-affected: therefore let us take heed of that foolish pastime of taking one another by the beard, &c. 2. Remember you cryed out on them that cast out your Independent friends, for non-correspondency in opinion: Why then will ye write after so foul a Coppy? I dare presume you cast out many that were heartily grieved for that mis-car∣riage: Thou that sayest a man should not steal, wilt thou com∣mit Sacriledge? 3. Although all Independents are not Saints, nor all Saints Independents; yet you proesse Sanctitie, and I hope, not in vain; and if so, be mercifull as your heavenly Father is: and emember the Apostle James tells us all, that the Wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easie to be in∣treated, full of mercy, and good fruits, without judging and hy∣pocrisie. James 3. 17. 4. Consider the things for which many are now condem∣ned, was (when acted) very disputable, not things ordinary in our Kingdom, for an Army not to dis-band when com∣manded by the State, by whom raised, imployed, and from whom they received their power and entertainment; the de∣manding the Impeached Members with a menace; the change of the Militia in like manner; the seizing the Kings person, and disposing of him contrary to command, &c. things which men of ordinary capacities could see neither Law nor Presi∣dent for; nay, of that nature that I beleeve puzled both Par∣liament and your selves to accomodate: Your best plea then necessitas non habet: although blessed be God well blown
over: and although men wied you never so well, and your intentions were never so good, yet many of your best fiends were dubicus: now in such cases best constructions should be made of mens dispes and actions: and if when such an Army move toward such a considerable City and Ga∣rison as London then was, men were willing to be put into a capacity to receive Friend or Foe, Certainly they might, they ought to do it, and remain your Friends, much lesse be accoun∣ted aytors; especially men of known sidelity and trust, not guilty o mis-demeanour: you may please to take notice, at that time the City was utterly out of all military capacity, their Commanders all oued by change of the Militia, and indeed had not (the power by which they sat, viz.) those forced Votes, been questionable, which was one grand cause why myself and divers others declined the businesse; the law of God, Nature and Nations, would have rendred them ridiculous, and they had certainly swerved from the principles either of Soldiers or sen∣sile Creatures, had they neglected a businesse of such concern∣ment; If any had any further designe, I will not open my mouth in their defence: I am sure when the question was put to the Militia, they protested against any further proceedings, Calling God to witnesse their Integrity. 5. Consider ear of Non enjoyment of your own liberties, estates, &c. was one grand cause of your non dibanding, and might not the Cry upon like reason, put themselves in a posture, without breeding o much ill blood? You feared all in the Parliament were not your friend; the City that all in the Army neither were or could be expected faihull; whether they might have commanded their ommanders at the sight of Boty, who knew? (Opportunity makes a Theefe) However, God be thanked for so reall a Remonstance to the contay, as neither we nor you could promie. 6. That that gave you entrance into the , was the good affection of the Citizens, who would not engage against you, who are now put into the scale with netes and malignants, who opposed you most. 7. In idged proceedings you imite the Malignant, not
the Godly party of the Presbyterians, who were much grieved at that suddain outing of your and our Independent friends. 8. Consider you are now upon the Pinacle of temptation; A man is never tryed till he hath power to do good or hurt, to be mercifull or oppressive; the eyes of the whole Christian world is upon you. Suppose ye were naked, and those ye now look upon as enemies, were armed: Thik upon that good old rule, What ever ye would men should doe to you, doe ye to them, for this is Law and Prophets. 9. Hereby ye exasperate the spirits of Neuters and Malig∣nants, who would be glad of opportunity to bee avenged both upon you and the Presbyterian Godly, and who onely wait a turn of the wheele, now by dealing unworthyly with the Godly party, although different in Judgement, you give but occasion of more violence if opportunity serve, unlesse God be the more mercifull, the breach will be then more wide then ever. 10. This causes men to say, You seek your selves, not the publique, when men of Gallantry and Fidelity, (otherwise without exceptions) are neglected, because not of opinions with you in all things; and putting into place of Honour and Trust, men of sinister and unworthy principles, some of them who (to my knowledge) never lent Ten groats freely to the publique, either hazarded life or fortune in the Kingdoms cause, or could (till very late) give you a good word, while many neglected have pleaded your Cause before God and man, when you were at greater distance and lesse strength: and let me tell you, in such generall negotiations you were better spare ten knaves then deal unworthily with one honest man. It is true, the City of late have kept their purses, whatsoever is said to the contrary, not being so able as formerly the well-affected in it; having had divers occasions of weakning, yet peradventure some others have too unworthily dealt this way; doubtlesse Nabal dealt as unworthily with David, and it never repented him to spare the Churls blood. 11. Give the Presbyterians their due, although they neg∣lected your and their Independant friends, yet they loved
them better then to send them by Troops (as it were) into pri∣son: therefore take heed while ye plead against persecution and tyranny, you your selves act not that part. 12. Did your Master the Parliament forgive you ten thou∣sand talents, when ye refused to disband, seized the Kings per∣son, changed the Militia, demanded the impeached members with a menace, and will you pull your poore brother by the throat for an undred pence, for one act, yea so disputable, they acting by Command, you contrary? Gentlemen, I must deal plainly with you, I cannot, I may not, I dare not to speak Souldier-like, I will not flatter; and I am consident I speak to those that regard more the reproof of a friend, then the flattery of a foe. 13. This makes Religion ridiculous, in that there is no for∣bearing one another, not a wise man amongst us to moderate, but we must jar before the uncircumcised, that would gladly see us both ruined: for shame let not this be told in Gath, or published in Askelon: Let not the daughters of the Philistims rejoyce in our divisions. What, shall wee now at last, that have been joyning against the Common enemys, become the devils Pack horses to drive on the designe of him and his? God forbid: What (say they) is this your harmlesse Army? Is this your Reformation? Have we not a Church and State well setled? Is this the fruits of your Fastings, and Prayers? these are your brethren the Saints; Marry God send us a King upon any termes. This is the Language of your and our e∣nemies at home and abroad; and I verily beleeve our divisi∣ons adds more to the strength of Antichrists Kingdom, then all his Champions; and I do as verily beleeve, that he hath a competent number both in City and Army, (viz.) Jesuits, that are the fomenters of this mischief; God grant the Parliament be clear of them. 14. Consider how wide a dore our domestick dissentions sets open to a Forreign Adversary: Certainly, but that God unexpected and undeservedly on our parts hath engaged them one against another, we had heard more of them ere this. 15. Take notice the hand of God is upon us, he's plead∣ing
with us by his Judgments: the sword hath devoured much flesh, and still threats his pestilential arrows are flying about us, striking on the right and lesc hand, and although the sea∣son promise better then a famine, yet price of bread corn &c. is sach, as that the poor are not a little pincht: I Gods con∣troversie on foot, and shall we provoke him by our unnatural contetions? I look upon the jarrings of the godly, as a spi∣ritual and heavie Judgment: Surely our hearts are divided from God, therefore he divides us. Let us not be in ensible of his hand, and take heed of biting one another, least we be devoured one of another, 16. Violence and Oppression are grand causes of Civil commotions and insurrections: believe it, the whole King∣dom is in ardly disturbed: Oppression makes a wise man mad. Our studiet erefore should be, to ease, not burthen; if fire break out, its not easily quenched. 17. Shall Pagans, Papists, Heathens and Tuks agree, and shall Christians be the onely men of contention? Let us not give occasion to blaspheme. Are the arch enemies of God and Kingdom overcome, and shall we now breatne out threats and slaughters one against another? Remember the Apostle saith, If any man lust to be contentious, the Churches of Christ have no such custom. 18. Consider you have a har task to undergo; I believe in the accomplishment whereof, you Iave need enough of the assistance of ali the well-affected in the Kingdom: work which would have been carryed on with les difficulty, while the affections of the Kingdom were warmer toward the Par∣liament, and you also, then now. 19. Hereb, you sad the hearts of many faithful Instruments of Church and Sae, and discourage divers of those you em∣ploy  with ife: a minister much matter of mirth to a l∣malignants, to see uch now sligted by you, who were ever envied by them for their activity and sidelity. 20. Fear of violenc both from within and without, cau∣sed the Ciy to endevour a capacity of desence; no this being over sufficient satisfaction to Saints, is vindication of their own
innocencie, not revenge. Have ye done all for God? Trust all with God. 21. Forget not Wat the Citie hath done for you and the Kingdom: A man will ever be tender of a friend, and make best constiuctions of his actions: Suppose that with Diogenes it hath once in its sise gone backward, me thinks that ever forward∣ness and freeness that hath been found it it, should cover one fault. 22. Herein you seem to prfer shaddows before substance: Is there any man slighted that is Independent, though never so erroneous and unsound in his opinion? while men though ne∣ver so Othodox, if dissering in that punctillo, are neglected: so that it seems a less matter to be an Anabaptist, Antinomian, Anti Scripturian, Anti Sabatharian, an Anti-God, or an An∣ti Christ, then a Semi-Anti Independent. 23. This mightily corrobocats and consirms all the Roman Catholick crew: nay the prophane wretches in the world are encouraged hence to abominate our Religion, and the very name of it; while they are unanimous, though never so Ido∣lauous and prophane; and we thus extremely fill'd with con∣tentions and divisions. 24. Consider harsh dealing from friends goes harsh, goes neerest the heart: What thou my familiar friend that sate at my Table, that are my bread, with whom I took sweet coun∣sel, with whom I ven uredlife and fortune may this Citie well say, especially the well affected in it: Truly should Cavaliers and Maignants oppose the godly, it were no wonder; for wolves to vour sheep is natural, but it would astonish a man to see one sheep shouldering and devouring another; I am sure our shepherd will not well like it. 25. Let the Cities former service prevail so far with you, as to bish: he thught of billerting upon i; is very fit the soudier should have his pay: but I hope the Parliamnt both can and have made better proviion then billet, of Ordinances are not obeyed where men are able, let them suffer distress: for want of which, many dis affected laugh at such, whose free∣ness and obedience to the State, hath dis inabled them to do as
formerly, while others malignantly disposed are much in ar∣rear, with whom speedy and strict course should be taken: but the houses and shops of Citizens are fit to entertain better guests then common souldiers. 26. Lastly, although not the least consideration, Poor bleeding dying Ireland which lies gasping for our help, while we lie cuslesly contending one with another: Wo be to them that are cause of that ad retard of their relief, I believe if God call him once to account, who ever it be, it were better that a milstone were hang'd about his neck, and he cast into the Sea, then to bean Instrument of shedding so much Christian blood, wel is it while we in effect say it shall be destroyed, the Lord saith no, in the absence of humane help I will save and deliver it. Friends, I pray God grant when he makes Inquisition, that Irelands blood be not charged upon Englands account, for all we do is to talk of their relief; we say to the hunger star∣ved, be ye warmed, and be ye filled, and to the naked, be ye clothed, and to the wounded, be ye healed; but who admini∣sters help? Surely we are all Priests and Levites. 3. Remedies to prevent growth of future evils. 1. Take heed of too much listning to whispering Inform∣ers, who do more hurt in private, then ever they'l do good to publique; especially give them no ear when they strike at men of publike Trust, fidelity, and spirit. 2. In placing or displacing, consult not with men of self-ish and peevish spirits, although otherwise godly: he is fittest to advise withal, that loves a godly man, let him be Presbyterian or Independent. 3. Let not a single report serve in point of publike con∣cernment. 4. Judge no man by a particular word or action, that gene∣rally hath appeared faithful. 5. Make best constructions of the words and actions of any godly man, of what opinion soever in circumstantialis. 6. Condemn no man till called to answer his chage, nor gve much hed to one that gapes for preferment.
7. If the Parliament would acquiesce in their own Judge∣ment and determinations, it would prevent much discontent, they being the proper Trustees and Representative Body of the Kingdom, and not the Army; and then would likewise the Kingdom acquiesce in them. 8. Avoid all things that may breed dis-union, and listen to any thing that may promote peace, or tending to a Religious accomodation. 9. If they would be more caresul to keep their credit in paiment of the publique faith, then solicitous to reward them∣selves, tere would be less heart-risings against them: Take heed of cutting too large thongs, neither slay the poor mans Ewe-Lamb. 4. Means to put an end to all our Troubles. 1. Let us break off our sins by righteousnesse, and our ini∣quities by shewing mercy, for they are cause of all our troubles, Corrupt Councellours and States-men have slain their thou∣sands, but our sins their ten thousands. 2. Let every one of us in particular seek the Lord, call upon him, and wrestle with him by prayer, for setling Peace and Truth, and let both Presbyterian and Independent joyntly and solemnly seek the Lord in publique, for his direction and bles∣sing, that however our opinions differ, our affections may bee one for God; like a wise Father, if he see his children altoge∣ther by the ears, will never leave lashing till hee make them agree. 3. Let the difference be publickly debated, by men of moderate spirits, able and Godly, that the Kingdom may re∣ceive satisfaction. 4. Every one deny himself, Let all Estates, King, Parlia∣ment, Army and City too, smite upon the thigh, all confesting their mis-treadings, for so long as each stands upon his own Justification, there can be no true Peace. 1. For the King. None can deny that his doings have been destructive;
the sad stories whereof, may be yet read in lines of Blood. 2. The Army. However happily owned by the Parliament since their re∣fusing to disband, &c. although the most renowned in the Chriian world: I beleeve no age can produce so many sum∣pome and trophis of Honour in so short a time as they; yet this cannot be reckoned lesse then a digression. 3. The City extreamly too blame In permitting it not countenancing that mischievous com∣bination and ingagement, that horrid ryot and violence upon the Parliament, neither punished, nor declared against: As also in outing the Militia, and their Commands, their Indepen∣dent brethren, who had been faithfull and active in worst times. 4. The Parliament. 1. In sleighting such an Army, who under God, were their and the Kingdoms deliverers, endeavouring their dis∣banding, before sufficient provision, either for Pay, Indempni∣ty, or Tender Conscience. 2. In pleading a Force, some of them saying they were for∣ced to Vote: a shameful plea for any man intrusted with a Kingdom: Coscience certainly cannot be compell'd; were the sword at the brest, a man ought rather lose his life then be∣tray a Kingdom: if a man could not sit without apparent ha∣zd of life, he were better of the two, protest and withdaw: but if there come lie or death, he ought to spak his Consci∣. Now if all this would cuse out a Committee of able, godly, , considerable mn, confess all their failings, and let their business be onely to accomodate, using hose fore∣going , of Fasting, Prayer, Repenance. &c. I am con∣sident a short and seasonable period would be put to all our Troubles. 5. Let after all this provision be made, if both parties agree
not, for the dissenting: What though they cannot joyn with us in our Discipline, cannot we allow our own Country-men as much priviledg as the Dutch and French had in the Bishops daies, whose discipline ever differed from ours? That which is of God will stand, if not, it will undoubtedly fall. Lastly, Short and seasonable advice to the suffer∣ing Party, whether Presbyterian or Independent. 1. Take heed of suffering as an evil doer, and then be not at all troubled, it is and hath been the portion of the most precious, to be evilly entreated: neither art thou alone. 2. Be comforted in that God is the avenger of the oppressed, neither do extremes last long. 3. Be comforted that thou hast discharged a good Consci∣ence while entrusted. 4. Let this thy condition be so far from causing thee to take part with malignants, which thy corrupt heart will be apt to, that it cause thee to walk more closely and circumspectly with God; and let patience have its perfect work. 5. Be not perplexed for that providences are promiscuous, or for that Gods dispensations are misterious, in that, notwith∣standing all our expence of Treasure and Blood, after so much wrastling with God in publique and private, our hopes of Re∣formation is so much clouded, but honour God in staying thy heart upon him in most unsetled times, yea even in the dark, who is able to bring light out of darknes, life out of death, nay heaven out of hell: consider he that is faithful hath promised, no crosse occurrences can alter his purpose: He that preferred Joseph by the prison, Led Israel to Canaan through the Sea, Created all things of nothing, can, nay doubtlesse will, after a while exercise of our Faith and Patience in the wildernesse of our unhappy divisions and distractions, bring us to a blessed Land flowing with milk and hony of peace and truth. Yet will he give us pure Ordinances, perfect the work of Reformation; yet will he set his Son upon his holy hill of Sion, It is good to see Sions beauty in the very dust thereof.
Object. If any shall object I have pleaded the Presbyterian cause more then the Independent. Answ. 1. I answer, At this time there is more need the Presbyterian being most despicable. 2. Time was not many years since, when the Independents were as much despised, when (under God) I was as instru∣mentall for their entertainment; I desire to look upon the suffering party whichsoever, desiring to heal and compose, not to make wider the wound. Thus having freely unboweld my self, (peradventure not without displeasure on all sides) some will say I have spoken too much against the Army: another that I have wronged the King: others that I have wronged the City: others I have abu∣sed the Parliament, which is the least of my thoughts in any par∣ticular, I honor them all; only I love them all too well to flat∣ter any: and if every one will but enter into his own heart, and smite upon his own thigh, I know none will condemne me. However, if I have come neer the quick, I hope all will consider that a faithfull Physitian takes more care to cure then please his Patient; neither is he a good Chirurgeon that cannot cut and lance when need is: the ore must bee thorowly searched lest skinned over, again putrify: I I have by this poor ling and stone, struck our Gyant-like jings in the fore-head: I by this clay and sptl God please to open our eyes, and inle our heares to a happy accomodation: i I have pleased my God, and been aithfull to my Countey, I passe not: and if the physick be not so toothsom, I am sure it is wholsome; The Lord make it effectuall to the leasing our unappy di∣erences. FINIS. Imprimatur JOHN DOVVNAME.
