L1582 E640_24 R202837 99862997 115177
A LETTER OF THE SVRRENDER OF STERLING-CASTLE, VVith 5000 Arms, 40 peece of Ordnance, provision for 500, men for above a yeare, 30 barrels of laret and Strong-Water, 26 barrels of Powder, all the Records of Scotland, with the Chaire, Cloath, and Sword of State, and much furniture of the Kings and Parli∣ament Robes. VVith the Articles at large for Surren∣der of the same. Published by speciall Order. LONDON, Printed for Francis Leach. 1651.
A LETTER Of the surrender of STERLJNG-CASTLE. SIR, THis day sevenight we perfected our Platforms for the reducing of Sterling, and 2. Morter pieces brought up from Leith for the reducing of Sterling Ca∣stle, the Enemy shot through and through our bat∣teries, but did not hurt any of our men, they plaid hard against our men that were in the steeple of the Town Kirk (which did much annoy them) they shot through the steeple, but in all their shot hurt but one man, 2. Morter pieces were drawn to the Platforms this evening. All things being in readinesse to go roundly to work with the Castle, the Lieut. Gen. sent a summons into the Castle, requiring the Governour to deliver the same to
the use of the Parliament of England, to which he returned a verball answer, That he would keepe the Castle as long as he could, the Lieut. Gen. also sent about exchange of prisoners for some of ours he had in the Castle, but it seemes he would ex∣change none, in hopes to make terms by them. Col. Pinchbanck an Englishman, and one of the Colonels that Col. Blake gave pass to come from Scilly into Scotland, kist the Kings hand, went as far as Glasco with him towards England, but is come backe hither, declaring much disaffection and dissatisfaction to the enemies designe, and sayes he will not meddle any more with them. Wednesday the two Morter pieces were planted and Mr. Hean the Engineer which was sent from St. Iohnstons for that purpose, made two shots with each of them for triall, two of which fell and brake in the midst of the Castle. Thursday the 14 both Guns and Morter pieces plaid hard against the Castle, we made two of their Guns unserviceable, they hurt us two Gun∣ners with small shot. In the afternoon whilst our Morter pieces were playing hard, they in the Castle beat a parley, which being harkned unto, they sent out a Drum∣mer with a letter containing desire of a treaty, the
Lieut. Gen. sent in a letter, wherein he took no∣tice of the Governors slighting his first summons, but proposed 3 Articles to him, which he would grant if he would render forthwith; hereupon a∣bout half an hour after the Governor sent out Capt. Iames Cunningham and one Mr. Wright as Commis∣sioners to Treat, but the Records of Scotland which the Governor desired might be conveyed to some other Garrison of theirs, being denied them, Mr. Wright said his commission was blown up, and would not Treat, so that by night the Articles in∣closed were agreed and Hostages sent forth. The reason of their hasty surrender was from a mutiny of the Soldiers in the Castle, being a commanded party of theirs, and most Highlanders, and not accustomed to Granadoes were much affrighted, and beat the Drum without Order, threatning to throw over their Officers i they should disturbe them, saying, they would fight for their King and Kingdom, but not for their countries Geer, The next day the Governour with about 300 Officers and Souldiers marched forth according to Agreement; the Souldiers had the night be∣fore broken open many of the Trunkes in the Castle, and went away with as much Geere as they could carry: There was in the Castle 40
peece of Ordnance, viz. 27 were fair brasse pee∣ces, 2 great Iron Guns, and 11 Leather Guns, pro∣vision of meat to serve 500 men above 12 moneths 40 or 50 barrels of beef, about 5000 arms (new muskets and pikes) 26 barrels of powder, 30 or 30 vessels of Claret Wine and Strong Waters, great store of match with other Ammunition, Lances, Swans, feathers, Darts, and other instruments of war in that nature: all the Records of Scotland, the Chair and cloth of State, the Sword and other rich furniture of the Kings the Earl of Marres co∣ronet and stirops of gold, with his Parliament Robes, there was also store of goods of the coun∣trey and Towns people in the castle, which they had liberty to carry away according to Articles▪ and came in great numbers for three or four days together, little or nohing being imbeazled, but what had been taken away by their own men. VVe had released a little before our entrance thirty two prisoners, among which Mr. Cornelius van Behmen Engineer, Lieut Iones▪ and others taken at Newark. Thus hath God in lesse than a weeks space, nay lesse than a dayes space (for we did not play so long with our Guns and Morter peeces) given into our hands one of the strongest and most mag∣nificent
Castles in Scotland, and the most (if not only) considerable passe into the Country, when we came before it, a quaere was made who should lead us into the strong Castle, it was an∣swered, the Righteous shall possesse the gates of their enemies, and surely the mercy is not the lesse for being gained with so little losse, but the greater, and is a pledge of what he will do for those that are now like to be engaged in England; since my coming into the Castle (which is one of the most statelest buildings I have seene in Scotland) I observed this motto over the Chappell doore, I. R. Nobis haec invicta miserunt Centum sex proavis 1617. it seems it had past the 107 uncon∣quered but not the 108. Colonell Okey is returned with his party who went into the West, he hath taken the Laird Os∣boston, Mr. Alexander, and Mr. Hnderson, and o∣thers, who were sitting at Peisley for the raising of a Regiment to be under the command of Col. Cockram, which their King had sent out of England for that purpose, though he had before promised it to M. G. Van Ross, they were both in the Towne the day before, but got away with the Lord Blands troop into the holds. We are now preparing for a march with our
little handfull of 2 Regiments of Horse and 2 Re∣giments of Foot towards Dundee, we have left all our field pieces in this garison, where Colonell Rede with his Regiment is left, and marcht with three battering and one morter peece, not doubt∣ing of the continuance of the good hand of God with us. Sterling 19 August, 1651. POSTSCRIPT. When our convoy had brought those that marcht out of the castle of Sterling as far as St. Iohnstons they all went to their several homes ex∣cept about 7 score. Articles agreed on between Col. Edward Grosveer, and Col. Rich Ashfield, commissioners on the behalfe of the Right Honorable L. G. Moke, and Capt. Iames Conygham on the behalfe of the Honorable col. William Conyngham, Go∣vernour of the castle of Sterling for the Renditi∣on thereof. 1. THat the Governour and all Officers and Souldi∣ers shall have liberty to march with their horses (not exceeding six) arms, beat of drum, lighted matches, and what baggage belongeth to them to any part of this
Kingdom, and to have a sufficient convey for five miles beyond any of the Garrisons or Guards belonging to the forces of the Parliament of England, and such of them as shall be desirous to go to their owne homes shall have liberty and passes for that purpose. 2. That all Noblemen, Gentlemen or Inhabitants of the towne of Sterling who have goods in the Castle shall have eight dayes liberty to transport their goods to such place as they shall please, provided that no bedding be re∣moved out of the towne without order. 3. That the Castle of Sterling with all the Ordnance, arms, ammunition and other Provision of War therein be delivered unto L. G. Monke or whom he shall appoint without any spoile or imbezlement, by ten of the clock to mor∣row morning. 4. That all prisoners which are now in the Castle of Sterling be forthwith released. 5 That hostages he forthwith sent out for performance of these Articles. Ed. Grosvener; Ri. Ashfield: 4 August 1651. I do hereby ratifie and confirm these Articles. George Monke. FJNJS.
