L2002 E155_15 99859521 156857
THE LIFE AND DEATH OF KING RICHARD THE SECOND, Who Was deposed of His Crown, by reason of His not regarding the Councell of the Sage and Wise of His Kingdom, but followed the advice of of wicked and lewd Councell, and sought as farre as in him lay, to deprive many good English Subjects of their lives and estates, who stood wholly for the good of the Commonalty; but at a Parliament holden, His Counsellors were all called, whereof some fled, others recei∣ved condigne punishment according to the Law. Published by a Well-wisher to the Common-wealth, being worthy the observation of all men in these times of Distractions. LONDON, Printed for G. Tomlinson, and T. Watson, 1642.
The Life and Death of King Richard the second. RIchard the second born at Burdeaux, the sonne of Prince Edward, being but eleven yeers old, began His Reign the 21. day of June in the yeer of our Lord God 1377. In beauty, bounty and liberality, He farre passed all His Progenitors, but was over much given to rest and quietnesse, loving, little deeds of Arms, and for that He was young, was most ruled by young Councell, and regarded nothing the Councells of the Sage and Wise men of the Realm, which thing turned this Land to great trouble, and himself to extream misery, as is by these Verses declared. When this King first began to Reign, the Laws neglected were, Vox cla∣mantis, Joh. Ga∣wer. Wherefore good Fortune him forsook, and the earth did quake for fear, The people also whom He polled, against Him did rebell, The time doth yet bewail the woes, that Chronicles do tell. The foolish Councell of the Lewd, and young He did receive, And grave advice of aged heads, He did reject and leave, And then for greedy thirst of Coyn, some Subjects He accused, To gain their Goods into His Hands, thus He the Realm abused. THe Duke of Gloucester with other, entred the Tower of London, and having a little talk with the King, they recited the conspiracy, whereby they had been endited, and they shewed forth also the Letters which he had sent unto the Duke of Ireland, that he should assemble an Army to their destruction, &c. In the end, the King promised on the next morning to come to Westminster, and there to entreat at large for reformation of all matters. In the morning, the King came to Westminster, where after a little talk, the Nobles said, That for His Honour and Commodity of His Kingdom, it was behovefull, That the traiterous whisperers, flatterers,
and unprofitable people were removed out of place, and others to be pla∣ced in their rooms. The King, though sore against his minde, when he saw how the Lords were bent, and that he wanted power to withstand them, condescended to do what they would have him; and to conclude, the King, at the request of the Lords, commanded the suspected persons of his Court and Family to be awarded to prison, to answer at the next Parliament; which persons were, Sir Simon Burghley, Sir William Elmham, Sir Nicholas Dagworth, Sir Iohn Golfar, which was not yet returned out of France: All these, with ma y more, were apprehended as evill affected persons, and enemies to the State. The third day of February the Parliament began at Westminster, which Parliament continued till the 13 of Iune next following, except from the Vigill of Palm-Sunday, untill the Octaves of Easter: This Parliament was named, The Parliament that wrought wonders. The Lords came to this Parliament with a sufficient Army for their own Sureties: The first day of this Parliament were atrested as they sate in their Places, all the Iustices, ex∣cept Sir William Skipwith, and Sir Roger Fultharp, Sir Robert Belknape, Sir Iohn Carey, Sir Iohn Holt, Sir VVilliam Borrow, and Iohn Alecton, the Kings Serjeant at Law; all these were sent to the Tower, and there kept in severall places. The cause was, for that where in the last Parliament divers Lords were made Governours of the Realm, both by the assent of the Parliament, and also by the advice and counsell of all the Iustices and yet notwithstanding the said Iustices ill Councell holden at Nottingham did the contrary: where∣upon it was now determined, that they should now make answer to their doings. Moreover, in the beginning of this Parliament were openly called Robert Vere, Duke of Ireland, Alexander Nevill, Michael de la Pool, Duke of Suffolk, Sir Robert Trisilian, Lord chief Iustice of ENGLAND, and Nicholas Brembar, whom the King oft times made Lord Maior of London, against the minde of the Citizens, to answer before Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Glocester, Richard Earl of Arun∣dell, Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, Henry Earl of Darby, and Tho∣mas Earl of Notingham, upon certain Articles of high Treason, which these Lords did charge them with: And forasmuch as none of them appeared, it was ordained by the whole assent of Parliament, That they should be ba∣nished for ever, and their Lands and Goods to be forfeited into the Kings hands, their Lands entailed excepted, which should descend to their heirs. The Processe against those five Lords, comprised 38 Articles. King Richard (after the Parliament) discharged the old Officers of His Court, and also his Conncellors, appointing others at his pleasure: He took the Seal from Thomas Arundel, Archbishop of York, and delivered it to William Micham, Bishop of Winchester, and made him Chancellor: The
Bishop of Exceter his Treasurer, having taken that Office from the Bishop of Hereford, and Edmund Staford, Keeper of the Privy Seal, and made many new Officers, putting down the old, he removed farre off from the Councell the Duke of Glocester, the Earl of Warwick, and other worthy men, and put in their places (in despight of his Commons) such as pleased him. The King being at Dublin in Ireland, with an Army of men against the Irish, wondering in all that time he heard no news out of England, the pas∣sage was so dangerous, the winde being contrary, and Tempests so great; at the length came a Ship with heavy News, how the Duke of Hereford, and now by the decease of his father, Duke of Lancaster, was arrived in Eng∣land at Ravenspurg, besides VVadlington in York-shire. Vpon this News the King, being perswaded to make haste over, summon∣ed together all the Welsh and English, to participate of his Fortunes, to meet the Duke of Hereford to Battell. The Duke of Aumraile, Constable and chief Governour of the King. Army against the Duke, hearing the King was fled, and he left to the mercy of his enemies, said unto the Souldiers, Let us shift for our selves, my Ma∣sters, for the King is fled: whereupon the men ran away; Sir Tho∣mas Percy. Steward of the Houshold, talking with the Constable, departed and took their way thorow VVales, but the VVelch-men seeing such disor∣der, refused their assistance. The King being at Conway, now in great discomfort, sent the Duke of Ex∣ceter and Surrey, to Henry Duke of Hereford and Lancaster, to know what his meaning was, himself remaining at Conway in great perplexity, with him the Earl of Salisbury, the Bishop of Carlile, Sir VVilliam Fercle Knight, in all but sixteen persons, then was news brought to the King, how his Consta∣ble had demeaned him, and likewise his Steward, which had caused his riches to be brought to Land, and going thorow VVales with it, the VVelch∣men had taken it. Vpon this the King going towards the Duke, some that he sent as embassies to treat with the Duke, but he stayed some of the Kings followers, and im∣prisoned them: So the King, though contrary to his minde, wanting force against the Duke to assist him in his wars, took the advice of some of his Bishops, who advertised him of the strength of VVales, and advised him to treat a Peace with the Duke, only on policy to regain new strength in Wales. After an agreement and peace made of these wars between the Duke and the King, they were both pacified, and promised each other to meet at Lon∣don, where, when the King was come to the Castle Walls, where he beheld the Duke, with all his Hoste, of a hundred thousand men: there came before (that were departed from the Army) the Archbishop of Canterbury, Sir Tho∣mas Percy, and the Earl of Rutland, from whom the Duke had taken the Office of Constable, more for a colour, then for displeasure, for they bare the Dukes Order, and not the Hart, which was the Kings: The Archbishop
entred first, and after others with a great train, they went up to the Dungeon, and then the King came down from the Wals, unto whom they did reverence lowly on their knees; the King took them up, and took the Archbishop apart, and they two talked long together; but the Earl of Rutland kept him aloof: They took horse again, and rode towards the Duke, that now was approach∣ing neer. The King went up again to the Wals lamenting; for when he saw the Dukes Hoste within two Bows shoot of the Castle, who compassed it round about, down to the Sea, the Earl of Northumberland went forth to the Duke, who after long talk, concluded that the Duke should not enter the Castle before the King had dined, for he was fasting: so the Hoste returned, and the King was set to dinner, with whom sate his assured friends, the Earl of Salisbury, and the Bishop of Carlile, Sir Stephen Scrope, and Cecile: they sate long and ate little, for they had no haste to rise. After dinner the Duke entered the Castle, all armed, his Basenet excepted; King Richard came down to meet the Duke, who assoon as he saw the King, fell down on his knees; and coming neer unto him, he kneeled the second time, with his hat in his hand, and the King put off his Hood, and then spake first fair, Cousen Lancaster ye are right vvelcome: The Duke bowing lovv down to the ground, answered, My Lord, I am come before you sent for me, the reason vvhy I vvill shevv you; The common fame among your people is such, That ye have for the space of 20 or 22 yeers, ruled them very rigo∣rously; but if it please our Lord, I vvill help you to govern better: The King ansvvered, Fair Cousen of Lancaster, sith it pleaseth you, it pleaseth me very vvell. The Duke spake as ye have heard to the King, he spake also to the Bishop of Carlile, to Sir Stephen Scrope, and to Cecile, but to the Earl of Salisbury he spake not, vvhereby the Earl perceived that the Duke hated him deadly. The Duke vvith a high sharp voyce, bade bring forth the Kings horses, and then two little Nags, not vvorth forty Franks, vvere brought forth; the King vvas set on the one, and the Earl of Salisbury on the other, and then the Duke brought the King from Flint to Chester, vvhere he vvas delivered to the Duke of Glocesters son, and to the Earl of Arundel his son, that loved him but a little, for he had put their fathers to death, vvho led him straight to the Castle. The Duke novv coming towards London, the Maior and the Companies in their Liveries, vvith great noyse of Trumpets, met the Duke, doing more reverence to him then to the King, rejoycing that God had sent them such a Prince that had conquered the Realm vvithin one onths space. When the Duke came vvithin tvvo miles of the City, he caused the Hoste to stay, and then said to the Commons of the City, My Masters, behold here your King, consider vvhat you vvill do vvith him: they answered, They vvould he should be led to Westminster: Whereupon he vvas delivered to
them, and they led him to Westminster, and from thence by water to the Tower of London. The Duke entered into London by the chief Gate, and rode thorow Cheap to Saint Pauls, where he was after lodged in the Bishops Pallace five or six dayes, and after at St Iohns without Smithfield, where he remained fif∣teen dayes: from thence he came to Hertford, where he abode three weeks; and then came back to London to hold the Parliament that began the first Wednesday of October in Westminster-hall, which they had hung and trim∣med sumptuously, and had caused to be set up a Royall Chayr, in purpose to choose a new King; neer to which the Prelates were set, and on the other side sate the Lords, and after the Commons in order. The Archbishop of Canterbury made a Sermon, and took for his Theam, habuit Iacob benedictionem a patre suo; which Sermon being ended in Latine, a Do∣ctor of the Law stood up and read an Instrument, in the which was contain∣ed, That King Richard had by his own confession, disabled himself to be worthy to Raign, and that he would resigne the Crown to such a one as was sufficient to rule: This Instrument being read, the Archbishop perswaded them to perswade to the election of a new King; and perceiving they were all contented, for there were not past four persons of King Richards side (and they durst say nothing) he asked each of them which they would have for their King. Whether the Duke of York or not, and they answered no: He asked if they would have his eldest son the Duke of Aumrale, and they said, No: He asked if they would have his youngest son, and they said, No; and so of di∣vers others: Then staying a while, he asked if they would have the Duke of Lancaster; and then they answered, They would none other: This demand being made, there they drew certain Instruments and Charters, and read them in presence of all that were there. Then the Archbishops coming to the Duke, fell on their knees, declaring to him how he was chosen King, and willed him to take regard if he would consent thereunto: Then the Duke, being on his knees, rose and declared that he accepted the Realm, sith it was ordained by God: Then the Archbishop read what the new King was bound unto, and with certain-Ceremonies, signed him with the Crosse: then he kis∣sed the Archbishop: Then they took the Ring, to which the Kings be wed∣ded to the Realm, and bare it to the Lord Percy that was Constable, who re∣ceiving it, shewed it to all the Assembly, and then put it on the Kings finger, the King then kissing the Constable: And then the Archbishop led him to the Siege Royall, and the King made his prayers on his knees before it, and after spake unto them all, first to the Prelates, and then to the Lords, and all the other, and so set him down in the Seat; and thus he was invested, and King Richard put down: He sate a good while and kept silence, and so did all the rest, for they were in prayer for his prosperity in his Government, And when they had ended, where the Offices were voyd, the King created new.
After this the Archbishop spake certain things in Latine, praying for the Kings prosperity, and the Realms, and after spake in English upon this fol∣lowing, Vir dominabuntur in populo, Reg. 9. &c. And then exhorting all there present to pray the like, every man sate down: Then the King arose, and made his eldest son Prince of Wales: Then the Lords were svvorn to be true to the Prince, as before they had done to his father: his second son vvas there made Duke of Lancaster. Thus vvas King Richard deposed vvhen he had raigned 22 yeers, 3 months, and odde dayes, in such manner as ye have heard, vvhose Royalty had been such, That vvheresoever he lay, his Person vvas guarded by 200 Cheshire-men: he had about him 13 Bishops, besides Barons, Knights, Esquires, and others, more then needed, insomuch that every day came to the Houshold to meat 10000 people, as appeared by the Messes told out of the Kitchin to 300 Servitors, &c. He vvas buried first in the Church of the Friars Preachers at Langley, be∣sides St Albanes, and after by commandment of King Henry 5 removed to Westminster, vvho after him Raigned: Henry Plantagenet, born at Bulling∣brook, son to Iohn of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster, vvas ordained King of England, and began his Raign in the yeer of our Lord God, 1399 and raign∣ed many yeers vvith much peace and tranquillity, and banisht all King Ri∣chards favourites, so that he brought this Nation to so happy a Vnion, that the vvhole Realm enjoyed many graces of his favour in his Raign, of vvhich many good Acts are still in force. Verses made then against the Bishops and Clergy. PLangunt Anglorum gentes crimen Sodomorum. Paulus fert, horum sunt Idola cause malorum. Surgunt ingrati, corrupto Semine nati Mentum Praelati, hoc defensere parati, Qui Reges estis populis quicunque pae estis, Qualiter his gestis gladiis probibere potestis. FINIS.
