L2777A 99897508 170880
A Further Account of EAST-NEW-JARSEY By a LETTER Write to One of the PROPRIETORS Thereof, by a Countrey-man, who has a great Plantation there. TOGETHER With the Discription of the said Province, as it is in OGILBIES Atlas, Printed in the year, 1671. EDINBURGH, Printed by John Reid, Anno DOM. 1683.
LONDON, June the 2d. 1683. For ROBERT BARKLEY, &c. Sir, BEing credibly informed, that your self, with some other Gentlemen of Scotland, have purchased an Interest in East-New-Jersey, (my being a Scots-man, and Well∣wisher to that Nation) puts me upon giving you this short Narrative, or account of it in general, (having lived there many years, which gave me full knowledge and experience of the same) lest you may be discouraged from the prosecution of your Intention of Settlement, as many others of your Countrey-men in like nature have been; (after a seeming Resolution to effect their Designes) to our great dishonour and detriment, and to enthraldom, and perpetual Slavery of some thousands of our poor Labourers; who, if they could be made sensible of the difference between their present State or Condition, and the hight of good Living, which in a few years (by GODS Blessing and their own Industrie) they may accomplish with half the Labour, many of them use in their own Country, (the Soil being so Rich and Fer∣tile, and rendring Increase beyond Imagination, and surpassing ours) would use all means possible, for their speedy Transportation thither. The Country is in general as followeth, Impr. As to the Climate, it is Moderate and Healthy, having Win∣ter and Summer as Britain, the Summers there being a little shorter, and in the Winters their dayes longer. Item. As to the Soyl, it is Rich and Fertile, endued with much good Timber, and great quantities of Fresh and Salt Meadows; as also, much Meadow-ground, which is Arrable, and so Rich and Deep of Black-mould, that it is never to be worn out; well accommodated with Salt and Fresh Rivers, good Fishing, great plenty of Deers, and wild Fowl; Produces all sort of English-grain, with great Increass, besides In∣dian-corn, upon which is unexpressible Increase.
Item. There is great stocks of Cattle, Sheep, and Hogs, good Oxen, and plenty of Horses, all sort of Dunghil-fowl, and all to be purchased at very reasonable rates. Item. There is settled upon the same very good Towns, and many out-Plantations, and good Buildings, good Orchards; and affords much Syder. Item. The Countrey is vast and large, and wanteth nothing, so much as People which would certainly be supplied in a little time were this Discrip∣tion published, and the truth of it so well known to many, as to my self, who am not capable at present (in respect of time, and this being only general) to describe half of what may be for your and their encouragement. Onely this, that the difference is unspeakable (as I appeal to every Mans reason) between settling a Countrey remote from your Plantations (where cannot be expected any speedy Supplies of Provisions, Milk, Cattle, and many other things; and that wherein is plenty of every thing already) I shall desist from giv∣ing you further trouble at present, and take leave to subscribe, Sir, Your Friend and Servant, GEO: LOCKHART.
The Discription of AMERICA, By JOHN OGILBIE, Printed in the Year 1671. In his Book, Fol. 168.181.182. WEstward of After-skull-River before mentioned, about 18. or 20. miles, runs in Rariton-River Northward, into the Countrey some scores of miles, both sides of which River are adorned with spacious Meadows, enough to feed thousands of Cattle. The Wood-land is very good for Corn, and stored with wild Beasts, as Deer, Elks, and an innumerable multitude of Fowl, as in other parts of the Coun∣trey. This River is thought very capable for the erecting of se∣veral Towns, and Villages on each side of it; no place in the North of America having better convenience for the maintain∣ing of all sorts of Cattle for Winter and Summer food. Upon this River is no Town settled, onely one at the mouth of it; but next to it, Westward, is a place called Hewasons, where are 2. or 3. Towns and Villages settled upon the Sea-side, but none betwixt that and Delawar-Bay, which is about 60. miles, all which is a Rich Champain Countrey, free from Stones, and indifferent levell, having store of excellent good Timber, and very well Watered, having Brooks, or Rivers, ordinarily, one or more in every miles travel. This Countrey is Peopled onely with wild Beasts, as Deers, Elks, Bears, and other Creatures; so that in a whole dayes journey, you shall meet with no Inha∣bitants, except a few Indians. It is also full of stately Oaks, whose broad-branch-tops serve for no other use, but to keep off the Suns heat from the wild Beasts of the Wilderness, where is
grass as high as a Mans middle, which serves for no other end, except to maintain the Elks and Deers, who never devour a hundred part of it, than to be burnt every Spring to make way for new. How many poor People in the World would think themselves happy, had they 1. Acre or 2. of Land? whilst there is hundred, nay thousands of Acres that would invite Inhabi∣tants, &c. We shall conclude our Discourse of this Countrey, with a notable Character given hereof by a late Writer, as to the great Advantage of Happy living in all respects, for whosoever shall be pleased to betake himself thither to live. If there be any Terrestical Happiness (said he) to be had by any People, especially of an inferiour Rank, it must certainly be here. Here any one may furnish himself with Land, and live Rent-free; yea, with such a quantity of land, that he may weary himself with walking over his Fields of Corn, and all sorts of Grain; and let his stock a∣mount to some hundreds, he needs not fear their want of Pasture in the Summer, and Fodder in the Winter; the Woods affording sufficient Supply, where you have Grass as high as a Mans Knees; nay, as high as his Weast, interlaced with Pea-vines, and other weeds, that Cattle much delight in, as much as a Man can pass through. And these Woods also every mile, or half mile, are furnished with Fresh Ponds, Brooks, or Rivers, where all sorts of Cattle, during the heat of the day, do quench their thirst and cool themselves. These Brooks and Rivers being In∣viron'd of each side with several sorts of Trees, and Grape-Vines, Arbor-like interchanging places, and crossing these Rivers, do shade, and shelter them from the scorching beams of the Sun. Such as by their utmost labours can scarcely get a living, may here procure Inheritances of Lands and Possessions, stock themselves with all sorts of Cattle, enjoy the benefit of them whilst they live, and leave them their
Children, when they die. Here you need not trouble the Shambles for meat, nor Bakers, and Brewers for Bear and Bread, nor run to a Linnen-draper for a supply; every one making their own Linnen, and a great part of their Wol∣len Cloath for their ordinarie wearing. And how prodigal (if I may so say) hath Nature been to furnish this Countrey with all sort of wild Beasts and Foul, which every one hath an interest in; and may hunt at his pleasure; where, besides the pleasure in hunting, he may furnish his house, with ex∣cellent fat Venison, Turkies, Geese, Heath-Hens, Crans, Swans, Dukes, Pigeons, and the like, and wearied with that, he may go a Fishing, where the Rivers are so furnished, that he may supply himself with Fish, before he can leave of the Recreation. Here one may travel by land upon the same continent hundreds of miles, and pass through Towns, and Villages, and never hear the least complaint for want, nor hear any ask him for a farthing. Here one may lodge in the Fields, and Woods, travel from one end of the countrey to another, with as much security as if he were lock'd within his own Chamber. And if one chance to meet with an Indian-town, they shall give him the best en∣tertainment they have, and upon his desire direct him on his way. But that which adds happinnss to all the rest, is the healthfulness of the place, where many people in twenty years time never knew what sickness is, where they look upon it as a great mortality if two or threee die out of a Town in one years time. Besides the sweetness of the air, the coun∣trey it self sends forth such a fragrant smell, that it may be perceived at Sea, before they can make to land; no evil Fog or Vapour doth any sonner appear, but a North-West, or Westerly wind immediately desolve it away. Moreover, you shal scarce see a house, but the South-side is begirt with hyves of Bees, which increase after an incredible manner. So that, if there be any Terrestical Canaan, it is surely here, where the land floweth with Milk and Hony. FINIS.
