M1328 E531_31 R205702 99865004 117237
THE CHRISTIAN SOVLDIERS GREAT ENGINE, OR The Mysterious and mighty workings of FAITH, discovered in a Sermon Preached before the Lord GENERALL in OXFORD, May 20. 1649. By JOHN MAUDIT Fellow of Exeter Colledge, and Senior Proctor of the Ʋniversity. . Gr. Nazianz. ad Gr. Nissen. Orat. 6ta. OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the Ʋniversity. An. D. 1649.
TO HIS EXCELLENCY, THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX, Lord Generall of the Parliament Armies within ENGLAND & IRELAND. MY LORD, YOur late Entertainment at Oxford, was all on a suddain, and therefore no marvaile if something meane & unsuitable (My Lord) unto your Excellencies merit, as unto our de∣sires and well wishes. If your tri∣umph here bore any proportion to your Victory abroad, it was on∣ly in this, that the one was as quickly over, as the other, your work short, your triumph short, both done in such hast, as if you cared for neither. Well may you on such an occasion as this, take up the Emperour of Romes three words, who to set forth how speedily all his work was done, wrote down thus in short, Veni, Vidi, Vici: So may you also say, adding one word to his Ve∣ni, Vidi, Vici, Triumphavi, all was speedily over, you went out, you looked on, you overcame, you triumph∣ed, you returned, and the newes of the first could scarce runne before, and get a foots ground of the last. Whiles you were here, every one most gladly brought you his Present, and all places strove to yeeld you some requitall for past kindnesses: The Schooles prepared a Banquet, remembring they had bin of late yeares con∣verted to Granaries, but you had purged them of their
Leaven: The Convocation-house called you to the Scarlet Robe, but that Reverend Senate there could not but acknowledge, that whil'st they gave you a Robe, by this last Victory they owe unto you even their owne. The Orators on all sides presented you with their rich and choise Eloquence, but they are these who must confesse, but for you and the worthy Champi∣ons that are with you, might have sung the songs of Si∣on in a strange land. I speak not this, that you should glory in your selves who are nothing all of you, but in the Lord Christ who hath drawn his sword, and musters the battaile & is the Generalissimo of his Church in those latter daies. Now whiles others like Arauna to David, thus made a noble offering, so it was with me (I must confesse) who am daily spent with publike services here, that I could not make you better provision on so short war∣ning, then Ahimelek did for that same David, setting be∣fore you and your Captaines a little Shew-bread, & to bring you forth Goliahs sword, and the Armes of the old Warriers, which hang up in the Sanctuary, Gidions, and Baraks, and Sampsons, and Davids experiences, that may strengthen your hands in battell, and by holding forth this discourse of the atchievments, and admira∣ble workings of Faith, to proclaime from God unto you, In hoc Vinces: which sithence you have so well ac∣cepted, I again recommend it to your remembrance, and to the blessing of Almighty God, to whom only be all Glory, and strength, and victory, and wisdome ascribed for ever By you, and by my Lord Your Lordships Faithfull Servant in Christ, JOHN MAUDIT.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE LIVETENANT GENERALL CROMWELL L. Livetenant of Ireland, towards the furthering of his expedition for IRELAND. Right Honorable, THE Prince of Peace and the Lord of Hosts, are two of Christs Titles in Scripture: Sometimes He comes forth in much meeknesse, as He rid to the great Cit∣tieupon a Colt, the fole of an Asse: and sometimes Hee ap∣peares dreadfull in battle, treading the wine presse, and dy∣ing all his rayment in the blood of his enemies. He ownes both Peace and Warre, neither is there any foundation in truth of either but in him: and shall we not complie with him in both, take either with him? If Christ speak peace, those that pray for the peace of Jerusalem shall prosper, blessed are such Peace keepers: and if Christ be in the Head of an Armie, those that come not up to the Help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord a∣gainst the mighty shall have Meroz Curse: Observe the Lord there∣fore in every administration of his that you may live upon it. You are now one of those who gather willingly unto him at the sound of his alarme, and lifting up of his standard for the rescue of his great name and cause in Ireland: there are that have wisht you over long since, but for this end that you might appeare an Exile frrom hence, but we trust your departure is no other then that of Abrahams from his house, when he went out after the foure Kings for the rescue of his brother Lot, who retur∣ned with much glory and triumph home: So may your returne be with all aboundance of Peace and Joy, to see the Temple in more glory here then when you left it, and to sing the songs of Sion in this Land againe, after a while that you have tun'd the Irish Harp unto them.
You are called to a good work, onely goe forth in the uprightnesse of your heart about it, that you may not miscarry. Let not your desires he after hou∣ses, and fields, & Vineyards there, as after the advancing of Christs throne in that Kingdome againe, and enlarging his dominion thitherward. Feare not your enemies, their owne guilt hath weakned them. You are sent over not to harme and oppresse the innocent, but to subdue and chastise the rebel∣lious, and take an account of the cruell massacres and aboundance of blood of the Lords owne deare ones, which they have shed. Your Commission is not to invade and disinherit those that are fairely possest of their right: those that are there, have either forfeited their own right, or usurped other mens: Feare them not, though you cannot match them in numbers, trust You in the Lord your God by Faith, which is the most that he requires from you: He can shake the hearts of your enemies, as the trees of the Forrest are shaken with an East winde, and make them fly when no one pursues them. I have set this word before you, that I may arme you with Faith; for by this you shall attaine unto high and noble atchievements. Take with you but a few, a strange word, when most call for many thousands, and say, where is the number that can equall our enemies? But have you not taken notice all this while for the strengthning of your Faith, how God hath pre∣served a few in that Land unto this day: surely the power can be no lesse in preserving a few against so many, then in destroying so many by you few. Thinke any of you, that the Lord doth stand in need of your great multituds to doe his work? Read this word over that I set before you that you may be convinced. And as for encouragements, God hath afforded you many: suffer me to minde you: First, behold the Lord Christ in a warlike posture through out Christendome in the Reformed Churches, and hath beene so these ma∣ny yeares: who would not engage himselfe in his quarrell, though he be one of those that must fall before the victory be wonne? Next remember you have seaven yeares prayers of the Church sent before you, which will meet you upon the Borders of that kingdome, and welcome you and those that goe with you. Again, consider & be truly sensible of the cries of those that are un∣der the Altar untill their blood be avenged on those that dwell on the earth: if the blood of one righteous Abel would not suffer heaven to rest, how think you is the full stream of blood like to prevaile with God of so many thou∣sands? I will be short, add unto all this how much of Gods honour lies at stake on your side for the fulfilling of his promises to his Church, and up∣holding the work which he hath begun: which though it may be hindred
and set back yet never can be quite everthrowne, but though carried on through many difficulties must be finished in due time. And lastly, lay a∣gaine to heart what large experiences You have already had, as so many pledges to hearten You in future exploits. And now say at length, or ra∣ther let those trembling hearts among you speak out, what should damp your zeale for the recovery of Ireland? Is not the time of Irelands delive∣rance yet come? We have long expected and prayd, and doe you yet want an opportunity? Shall jealousies and feares prevaile to keep you at home, when the cries of Orphans, and Widdowes, and besieged call you abroad? Dare You not trust us with God in Your absence, who can trust You with God in this service? Not that we want more love, but that You want more Faith. Or tell us must you goe far about to get thither, because of obstructions in the way: we trust there are not many, howbeit sure we are, God hath not discovered himselfe in a little glory lately, in checking and suppressing, both in this and the neighbour Nation, the Remora'es that would have retar∣ded Your motion, as if he would plainely speake his minde thus unto you: goe on these shall not hinder the expedition for Ireland. Wherefore (Right Honourable) I must beseech You zealously, and I thought it my ty upon this occasion to plead with You (as also some Ministers of Christ before me) in the behalfe of Ireland, that nothing that is not of God may divert Your Resolutions from that Noble and good service: & if any thing shall intervene, my prayer is that the Lord would rebuke it, and make a pro∣sperous way for You through it; and when you have fulfilled Your Work which he hath ordained You unto, and served Your generation, You may as the Elders here specified, obtain a good report in the Church of Christ Mili∣tant, and a waighty Crowne of Glory and life in heaven with his Church triumphant, which is the hope and prayer of him SIR, who owes you all honour and service in Christ Jesus J. M.
HEB. 11. 32, 33, 34, 35. 32 And what shall I more say? For the time would faile me to tell of GIDEON, and of BARAK, and of SAMPSON, & of JEPHTHAH, of DAVID also and SAMUEL, and of the Prophets. 33 Who through Faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought righteousnesse, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of Lions. 34 Quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weaknesse were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens. 35 Women received their dead raised to life againe: and others were tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they might obtain a better resurrection. THIS Text of Scripture, which gave me much comfort and support of spirit in the underta∣king of this present great worke, upon so suddain a call of God, I have chosen above all to com∣mend unto you, for your spirituall refreshment this day. Experiences ought to be communicated, that God may have the glory of his invisible & gracious and admirable workings in the World, and therefore it is that we find the Cherubims in the Tabernacle set in such a posture, their faces looked one towards another, and towards the mercy seat also were the faces Exod. 25. 20.
of the Cherubims: now what did this signify? it intimated unto us thus much, that what light and discoveries they had recei∣ved from the glory of God in the mercy seat, they were very ready mutually to communicate unto each other, and to till up each others joy. Now this Chapter, of which I have read a part unto you, is also much to this very purpose, we have here a list of the ex∣periences of the Worthies of old, recorded by the Holy Ghost, what God the Lord did for them, and by what meanes all was brought about, even by the mysterious workings of Faith, by this the Champions of elder times atchieved so many mighty works, and got unto themselves a good report, a good report and esteeme with God, though flesh and blood did much ma∣ligne them. That we may make our way the more cleere to the Text, we shall first consider upon what occasion this was written, The Church of the Hebrews at this time was under a cloud, undersore persecution for the Gospell of Christ, of which mention is made Heb. 10. 32. 33. and Paul labouring to bear up their hearts, as friends are wont to put pillowes under their friends in their fainting and swooning fits, and if need be, to bear them up in their hands, so does the Apostle here cast his armes about the Church of Christ, and props her up with se∣verall arguments, and administers unto her much consolation, that she might be strengthned in the Lord unto the most fiery triall and heaviest burthen. The first argument that he uses is from the reward Heb. 10. 35. will you at last cast your great reward away? what have you contended so long, and you have but little more to doe; and will you now saint and lose your reward, and triumph, for scare of this little worke that is behind, and that is yet to be done? cast not away your confidence which hath great re∣compence of reward; Those that runne in a race when they come within sight of their gole run the faster, and contend more earnestly, and bodies when they come nigh unto their center, eòvelociùs by so much the faster they move. O friends remember your reward, look upon it, 'tis not farre off, yea you may take hold of it, stay up your heart upon it, ,
which Has, which carries with it great re∣compence of reward, a reward that has in it a recompence, not a reward that comes short of your love towards Christ, but which shall abundantly recompence you for all, O doe not cast a way such a reward. Againe, a second Argument whereby he encourages them to bear the persecution of the world, and to fill up the re∣mainder of Christs sufferings in their flesh, is that there∣by they may give a testimony of the gift of patience, which is communicated to them through the spirit of grace that dwel∣eth in them, Heb. 10. 36. this excellent gift they have also re∣ceived, that as it is given unto them to believe in Christ, so al∣so to suffer for his names sake. why (saith the Apostle) are you gifted with patience, but to this very end, that you might be enabled to suffer for Christs sake, & to witnesse unto the truth even in death? This is the very end wherefore such a gift of the spirit, as patience, is bestowed upon you, and shall it not be exercised? shall this talent be unimployed? you have need of patience, it should be rendred rather, you have need of the exer∣cise of patience, that is to exercise it, to put it upon act,  signifies use of a thing, and some∣times need. now therefore so I render it, brethren it is needfull that you should exercise patience, which God has given you, and when is the time for this, if not in persecution. Patience is a most sparkling grace, an excellent jewell, should it be ra∣ked up in ashes and never shine? this Vide the Martyrdome of Thom. Hawkes at Coxehall Anno 1555. Iune 10. Ter∣tull. Apolo∣ger. Omne malum aut timore aut pudore natura perfudit: malefici gestiunt latere, devi∣tant apparere, trepidant deprehensi, negant accusati, ne torti quidem facile, aut semper confi∣tentur: certe damnati maerent, dinumerent in semetipsos mentis malae impetus, vel fato vel astris imputant, nolunt enim suum esse, quia malum agnoscant. Christianis vero quid simile? neminem pudet, neminem paenitet, nisi planè retro non fuisse, si denotatur gloria∣tur: si accusatur non defendit: interrogatus vel ultrò confitetur, damnatus gratias a∣git. Heavenly gift makes a gracious heart to shine, as Polycarpus body shined in the midst of the fire like pure gold, and Stevens face like an Angels. pa∣tience puts such a lustre upon Saints in time of triall, as that it allures many persecutors to the faith, it has converted many.
See how those Christians suffer, how they rejoyce that they are counted worthy to suffer for Christ, their persecutors are more tormented to see, that by all their torments they cannot make them recant, more then they are in all their torments they are under. O the strange working of grace, that takes a∣way the sting of all the torment from them that suffer, and casts a deadly sting of torments into the hearts of those that persecute them. Harmelesse patient men! they forgive those that wrong them, they pray for those that curse them, such is their love to Christ, that they count all too light and too lit∣tle that they can suffer for his names sake, certainly if the Christians God be the true God, how dearly must he love them, whom neither fire, nor imprisonment, nor wild beasts, nor death can force to forsake him, Thus God gets glory by the patience of Saints. Third Argument from the suddain appearing of Christ for our res∣cue, Heb. 10. v. 37. The Lord will come, he will come speedily to help you, he will not tarry, he will come and receive you into the Kingdome of his Father, and you shall walk with the Lamb in white garments, and with palmes of victory in your hands, He will give you the victory, he will set the Crowne upon your head, that the Father hath appointed for you, con∣tend therefore to the utmost, Christ has ordained some of you to come this way to the Crowne, you know how variously a Generall disposes of his Souldiers; they are all marching to∣wards the City which they are about to take, but some are placed in the forlorne hope, some in the maine body, some in the front of the Battle, and some in the reare, all are con∣tented with their station, and will you not give up your selves to the Lord Generall and Captain of your salvation, to be disposed of as he list, put case some Souldiers are sent out be∣fore the Army to prepare the way, though they suffer many assaults, yet they stand their ground, they consider the Gene∣rall is hard by, hee'l draw up for our rescue anon, so when you are put upon hard duty, and endanger'd by some soule assaults, consider this, Christ is comming up suddenly for your rescue and deliverance, this will make you endure more valiantly, much of the comfort of the Saints lies in the expe∣ctation
of Christs appearing. make hast my beloved (saith the This made the Martyr Glover forget his paine and danger, and laugh for joy: Oh he is come he is come. Church to Christ) and be thou swift like a Roe upon the mountaines of Bether, stay not long from me, I await thy coming, and with this word Christ comforted his Disciples, doe not think I will stay long away from you, and leave you without cōmfort, I will not leave you comfortlesse, I will come unto you: therefore beare up your hearts with this comfort in suffering times, that Christ will come shortly, yet a little while longer, and he that shall come will come and will not tarry. 4th Reason, Therefore be contented to endure persecuti∣ons for Christ's sake, that it may appeare that the just doe not live by sense but by faith. Heb. 10. 38. If we have nought but what this World affords us; we were of all men most miserable, nought to the eye of the World appears but that a Christian is miserable, they are hated by their Neighbours, and some∣times by their nigh Kinsfolke, I have known and heard of some parents that have forsook and disinheri∣ted their chil∣dren because they were precise. they are reviled and nick∣named and counted as the dirt of the World, if any in the Cit∣ty be plundered or oppressed, most likely they are they, oft a∣bused, ill requited for curtesies done: what was said of Christ to this purpose, may be said of Saints, their visage is so mar∣red, as that there is no comelinesse in them, now this is the ou∣ter part of a Christian and the World sees no more, and therefore judges them miserable, . Arist. Eth. l. 1. c. 9. but now that God may make it appeare that his children live upon inward secret principles of his Spirit, that they have the love of God, though the World hate them, that they have constant communion with the Father and with Jesus Christ, though their Father and Brethren forsake them that they have inward peace and consolations, though they find trouble in the World, that they can tast the sweetnesse of the promise and live upon it, though the brook be dried up, and the barrell of meale be come to the last handfull, that hee may make this appeare, (I say) that his people can live by faith as well as by sense, therefore he would have them to endure afflictions and sore tryalls, you have inward comforts that supply the want of outward mer∣cies, live upon them what ever becomes of the other. The Plant called  can live of it selfe upon what is in it, when it is taken out of the earth.
5th Argument is from the perdition of false Professors, Heb. 10. 39. that fall away in time of persecution, they draw back but woe worth the day unto them, they draw back unto perditi∣on. don't think you may play fast and loose with Christ, if there be any of you that draw back, I declare from the Lord unto you, that you are children of perdition, better were it for you, that you fell on upon the strongest push of Pikes, ra∣ther then draw back, verily (saith Christ) whosoever of you seek∣eth to gaine his life shall loose it, but whosoever shall be contented to loose it for my sake, shall gaine it. take heed what you doe, there's nought behind you but death, eternall life is before, presse on towards it. I have scarce ever heard of an Apostate, that did fall wholly from his profession and deny Christ, and betake himselfe to the world, and profane and evill courses, but that soule was remedilessely lost, some examples there have been but very rare and few. S. Iohn the Apostles con∣vert, of which Eusebius speaks, and some of which the Councels speak, that had renoun∣ced Christ in time of per∣secution, but afterward upon great repentance found mercy with Christ and were re∣ceived into the Church. 6th Argument is contained in the 11th Chapter, which is drawn from the experiences of the faithfull, consider those that have been upon the Theatre before you, have so many noble cham∣pions gone before you this way, and will you through da∣stardly cowardise runne away & yeeld, whereas if you goe on you are sure of a victory as well as they, that now are trium∣phing in eternall glory? Oh doe but remember what mighty comforts they have brought about to themselves by Faith in times of tryall, what great workes they have atchieved and overcome in their sufferings, & what glory they have brought to God through their faith in time of persecution, I am sure the glory of God is most deare to the hearts of Saints, their own life is not so pretious, if Christ call for it, he shall have it with all their hearts: therefore if Gods glory arise this way, be contented and yeeld to God in it: The Elders of old time did yeeld to God in this way, consider (saith the Apostle) these mens experiences, and draw strength even from their strength, the same God can beare you out also. Now this whole Chapter containes a list of the most glori∣ous atchievements of Faith, and shewes of what use Faith is to beare up the spirits of believers in times of triall and perse∣cution, and the words which I have read unto you are the
conclusion of all, and they have a great deale of strength in them, in one breath he summes up all together which he had to say, He makes a stop and corrects himselfe, what should I goe on farther, and weary you with this one particular, I have not time if I had a mind to doe it. The time would faile me to tell of Gideon, and of Barak, and of Sampson, and of Jephthah, of Da∣vid also, and of Samuel, and of the Prophets, who through Faith subdu∣ed Kingdomes, wrought righteousnesse, obtained promises, stopped the mouthes of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weaknesse were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens. Women received their dead raised to life againe: and others were tortured not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection. THis Text hath many parts that might be prosecuted, but I have but little time, and therefore must be as thrifty of it as I can. You read here what strange effects are attributed to Faith, I shall reduce them to severall heads, in the prose∣cution of this one observation, That Faith is mysterious and migh∣ty in working. we shall take this abroad, and consider those  three particulars in it, which are chiefly intended in the Text. Faith is a grace most mysterious & mighty in working. First whereas here is a faire discovery made of the grace of Faith; we shall consider the nature of it, What this Faith is. 2ly Whereas here are many strange workes attributed to it, we shall take into speciall consideration, what are the myste∣rious workings of Faith, and take a view of the great works and mighty atchievements which it brings to passe, many of which are here specified, and hereby shew evidently That the workings of Faith are mysterious and mighty. 3ly What is that large influence and effectuall power of Faith, whereby it availes to atchieve so mighty works. These particulars being made evident, I trust through the light of Gods holy spirit, it will be evident to all your hearts and consciences, That Faith is mysterious and mighty in working, A grace wherein the secret power of God is much laid forth within us. First What is Faith? I shall give you no other description of it at this time, then what the Apostle laies downe in the first
verse of this Chapter, . The subsistence of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. by the way note, that the A∣postle does not speak of Faith as justifying, as Faith is taken in that main act, to wit of our justification, but as its actings are in the largest extent and universall circumference, as it acts upon all the promises of Gods word; which are either con∣cerning this world or the world which is to come, and now he calls this Faith the substance of things hoped for, Hope and Faith may sometimes have the same object, but see the diffe∣rence of their motions and actings, and efficacies, Hope gives us a prospect of that which is a farre off, but Faith brings the substance of it home, it has so great a power, as that it layes in the substance of the promises, it gives a man in a great mea∣sure to have the fruition of that which is dispensed in the pro∣mise to a believer, it makes the object to have in some measure a reall existence in the soul, which is held forth in the promise, as all things that are to come or past, are present with God, so also in some way are they present to a believer who enjoyes God, and this is a great mystery, they have the victory before they engage in battle, they have their Crowne before they have contended for the mastery, a poor gracious child of God may say already, heaven is mine I have God for my por∣tion, I have already eternall life, I am already set downe in heavenly places with Christ, there is a reall enjoyment through faith, of that which the promise holds forth, now this must be carefully understood, for some have hence inferred that they can sinne no longer being once in Christ through faith, they have no more sinne upon them then the Saints in Heaven have, they are already in heaven because of their uni∣on with God, but here is some mistake, although here be also some truth, It's true Faith gives in the substance of the thing promised, heaven, and eternall life, and union, and commu∣nion with God, are received in the promise by faith, and sinne done perfectly away, but all this must be understood in statu imperfecto. Faith does all this, but it does it not so perfectly as we shall enjoy it hereafter in the glory of God our Father, when our vision and fruition shall be such, as that Faith and
its object shall be quite changed, through the glory that shall be revealed, as the light of the starres are swallowed up with the light of the sunne, in its zenith and midday, so when we shall be swallowed up into Christ, and made partakers of his fulnesse, and glory, as farre as poor creatures are capable of it, then there shall no sinne dwell in this mortall body, then e shall know God as we are known, and enjoy him at fullest, the glory of the Moon shall be seaven fold then more then it is, but here in this estate in this world Faith gives in its object unto us in truth and reall subsistence, but not in its perfect e∣state, for then 'twere vision, and faith no longer on the pro∣mise, our fruition of the promise which faith gives us is but weak and imperfect, and this is the meaning of that place in 1. Cor. 13. 12. , now we know but in part, Faith gives in its object truly but not fully, verè sed non plenè, and we doe not want only a full manifestation, but also a full fruition, for our fruition in truth is not full in this World nor can be, But what has been said cleerly evinces that Faith is not fancy, a supposall and vaine imagination but that which is reall and substantiall, it was but fancy that which was in Laodica, she thought her selfe to be rich, and full, and cloathed, whereas there was no such thing 'twas but a fancy, and a dreame, but Faith makes a believer really blessed and happy, and there∣fore see to it doe not delude your own selves, if you believe indeed, shew me where is the substance and reall subsistence of the promise within you that you shall enjoy. Againe it is called  a firme argument, it does per∣swade the mind, and not that only (as Bellarmine conjectures) Liber 1. cap. 5. Iusti. who makes Faith only to be knowledge, but it does also per∣swade the heart with such powerfull arguments that what God gives out in the promises shall come to passe, as that al∣ready in some measure it becomes present with them. God has drawn out a legacy for us, and sealed it by his Sonnes blood, and has put it into our hands, here is Christ, and here is eternall life, here is peace with God for thee, and here is deliverance out of all temptation, here is resurrection from the dead, and glory everlasting made over to thee, and rati∣fied unto thee, whereupon a believer is perswaded in heart
sure all God has given me is true, I may rely upon it, God will be faithfull who has promised, why then I am rich, I am an heire, here is my inheritance; Faith takes hold of what God gives to us, ah Lord! it is true that thou hast spoken, now I find I begin to live indeed, Christ is given me of my Father, and what is all this in this world in comparison of Christ, I am impatient, I cannot endure that it should be compared unto him, ah Lord! keep me in this frame, let me not fall from my first love. Let us come now to the object of Faith, , Austine renders it otherwise then our translation, Epist. 112. ad Paul.  i. e.  hominum sperantum, but the word  coming after puts it out of dispute with me, its meant rerum speratarum or expectatarum, and so the most generall current of interpreters runnes, things that are hoped for, and are future, yea and whatsoever are invisible, be they things past or present, if spirituall, and set beyond the eye of sense and reason, or things future, all these are the object of Faith, Faith looks upon them as if they were before a believers eye. First of all for things past, to wit the Creation of the World, the deliverance of Israel out of Aegypt, the birth of Iesus Christ of a Virgin, his death and his resurrection, and ascension, and that he was justified from all our sinnes that lay upon him, and hath received an acquittance for every poor sinner that hath faith in him, Faith acts upon all these truths, and brings them so home to the soule, as if they were now done before the eyes of a believer, They believed (saith our Saviour) that thou diddest send me, speaking to the Father of his Disciples that believed on him, God sent Christ into the world long before his Disciples knew of him, but Faith makes it present, as if they had seen Christ come downe from God out of heaven, so firmely they were perswaded By Faith that God sent him. Againe for things present, which are spirituall, and passe the sense, these are the objects of faith too, and faith is the sub∣stance and evidence of these in the soule, such are our justifi∣cation in the blood of Christ, Christs sitting at the right hand of the Father, and interceding there for us, though it is not given
unto us as it was to Stephen to see Christ in the humāe na∣ture, standing on the right hand of God, yet faith apprehends it, and it is cleer and evident to a believer: moreover our communion with God, the inhabitation of the spirit, and the sanctification of us by the Holy Ghost, a believer sees his name written in the Book of life, he sees the book of God wherein his sinnes were written, all crossed with the blood of the Lamb of God, all these are truly done and present, but nought but an eye of Faith can see that they are done, sense nor reason cannot, cannot understand these waies of God, which I have spoken of, it is life eternall to know this after a true Gospell-administration, Flesh and blood hath not revealed this unto thee (saith the Lord to Peter) but my father which is in heaven. again for things to come see how Faith acts upon them, That Christ shall come in judgement, that we shall have a resurrection to eternall life, that we shall be kept in perseverance unto the end, that we shall have grace to help us in time of need, that God will clear up our innocency as the noon day, thus Faith looks forth at that which is a great way off: So Noah believed that God would destroy the world, and therefore prepared an Arke for the saving of his family: So Abraham believed in the promised seed, and had a sight of Christs day almost two thousand years before the sonne of God took our flesh: So Jo∣seph also believed that Israel should goe up out of Aegypt, and gave commandement concerning his bones. Thus you have seen what Faith is as considered in its na∣ture and its object. In the second place therefore we come to declare, that the workings of Faith are mysterious and mighty, of which you hear such great things in this Chapter, Faith is a grace mysterious, and mighty in working, see now in what a mystery and wonderfull power it workes, we shall set it forth in few particulars. First, the workings of Faith are mysterious and mighty upon this account, because they can be then at highest, when the workings of Reason and Sense are at lowest, when reason falls flat upon its face, and can hold no longer, then Faith acts in a high manner, this shewes the workings of Faith to be very mysterious and powerfull, in that they can beare up the soule against the most
potent opposition that can be brought against it. Abraham be∣lieved when in all reason there was no hope left: Isaac com∣manded to be offered up in Sacrifice, the day came, the lad led up to the Mountaine with the wood in his armes, bound to the wood, the knife drawn, the hand lifted up, yet Abra∣ham believed all this while: what reason was there for this, what hope could there be of Isaacs redemption? yet he trusted God with his sonne, seeing the promise was in that same I∣saac, he believed that the promise should stand, and that God would give him Isaac again, though he raised him from the dead, from whence he had received him in a figure, though all things in providence wrought against it yet he believed. Mor∣decai believed and was bore up by his faith, when all other things sunk: The Kings decree was signed, and sent into all the provinces of the Empire, and what should we now expect to heare from Mordecai, but bitter outcries for himselfe and the whole Nation; yet nothing lesse, he is confident, his faith keeps up his spirit, either God will make thee instrumentall, (saith he to Hester) for our safety, or else deliverance shall come in some other way, I know God has promised after 70 years to bring his people back from Babylon, and therefore he will not suffer them utterly to be destroyed after this man∣ner: how high did his faith worke when reason was at lowest: carnall reason is the highest principle of nature, and when this failes and is too weak, if Faith has power to support the soule, certain its power is excellent and great, now it is usuall with Faith to worke at such a time as this, because it knowes that this is the very way of God, when Reason which is the most exalted principle in man is cast downe, then God takes this opportunity to step in, and exalt his own glory, who would have no flesh to glory, but that he that gloryeth should glory in the Lord, and therefore a believer harkens, not unto the dispute of carnall reason, but moves above it, Faith and Reason move excentrically, as two orbes that have not the same center, if reason will move the same way with Faith, well and good, but if not, Faith keeps on its course, Faith moves upon the promises, but Reason upon this outward world acts sutably to the posture of the creatures herein, now
if these concurre with the promises of God a believer takes notice of them, but if they move irregularly, and against the bent and scope of the promises, then Faith leaves them and moves higher then before it did: take heed therefore of advi∣sing with carnal reason, which is oft times the greatest enemy that Faith has: Thomas would not believe that the Lord Christ was risen from the dead, unlesse he saw with his eyes, and toucht with his hand, and be led by sense to Christ, but see how the Lord checks him, (Thomas) because thou hast seen thou hast believed, Iohn 10. 29. blessed are those that have not seen, and yet have believed, it is often in the mouths of mn that consult only with flesh and blood, ah now say they is the time of my ruine, I see all things work against me I shall at once be destroyed by the hands of Saul, I cannot beare up against those difficulties any longer, ô my Lord Christ help me for my strength is small, I am afraid I shall not out∣live this temptation. but why saist thou so? dost thou measure the strength of God by the weak modell of thy reason? see here what the Text holds forth of the ancient experienced Saints, out of weak they were made strong, first they were weake but they did not distrust, and disbelieve God, as thou dost, and therefore they were at last made strong; some were cast in be∣fore the hungry Lyons, and the Lyons mouthes were wide o∣pened, and was it not now a time for them to think they should be devoured, when the Lyon came running with a wide mouth to them, yet behold a marveilous thing, Faith stopped the mouths of Lyons. So Euseb. re∣ports of many of the Primi∣tive Christi∣ans, that be∣ing cast in be∣fore the Ly∣ons to be de∣voured, the Lyons roated and turned a∣side, & would not devoure them till they were wrapt up in Beasts-skins, and so cast in before them. againe they had multitudes of ene∣mies come up to encamp against them, thick as the grasse of the field, more enemies then thou hast, and they were but a handfull, a little flock of Kids against a numberlesse Army, yet harken how they overcame, by Faith they put to flight the Ar∣mies of the Aliens. Againe the So its repor∣ted of Poly∣carpus at the stake, that the fire mounted over him like a vault, and bore off from him, and his body shined▪ like gold. fire has been kindled and has been about some of their bodies, and what would reason have said at such a time as this, doubtlesse it would have yeelded up all, I cannot be preserved: but the Text saith they quenched the violence of fire, even then they believed and this was the effi∣cacy of Faith even to put out the fire. And now let me call forth the experience of you Most No∣ble Captaines and valiant Souldiers unto the witnesse of this
truth, say, has not God done his greatest workes for you, and got you the highest victories even when you were at lowest, most contemned, most opposed: have not you found God a∣ble and ready to save, when you were at the poynt of distresse, and greatest danger, because you trusted in him, O that you were all of you strong in Faith, let your Officers say in Battle, on, on, fight, fight, but the word which I have to say unto you from the Lord is, be strong in the Faith, believe, believe, be∣lieve, all things are possible to him that believeth. 2ly The mysterious workings of Faith consist in this, That Faith makes those things which are absent or future to be present, this is a strange and mighty working of Faith upon its object, be it never so farre off, it brings it nigh home: past or to come, yet Faith makes it present: in the vision of God things have not their priùs & posteriùs, they are altogether before him really in his presence, and so it is in some manner like to this with believers, they have future things made present with them by Faith, Faith gives them a subsistence in the heart before they come to passe in their fulnesse of glory and blessednesse, can you call back time that is past, or make the things that are or∣dained and hundred years hence to stand before you, it is im∣possible, but now Faith that has a wonderfull way of work∣ing, it can doe it, so its said here in the Text, They hereby en∣joyed the promise, that held forth things a farre off, they enjoyed them long before they were fulfilled. The Polar star is many thou∣sand miles from the needle of the compasse, and yet see how vertually they touch one another, let the needle recover it selfe after your shaking, it will reach the north Pole straight waies: so does Faith, let it act and it shall reach the promise straight way, though never so farre off, here's a mighty secret working. It is impossible to call back time that is past, so said a certain Woman upon her death-bed, and would not enter∣taine any comfort that was administred unto her, by ministers of the Gospell, that came unto her, but put them alwaies off, saying unto them can you call back time to me againe, if you can call back the time to me, wherein God called me and I refu∣sed, then I may be saved, I had a day of grace but it is over, it is over, alas what a sad temptation was this, but sure Faith
could help this distressed soule, Faith is able to bring back the call of God that is past, and convert the soule by a call that was given him in a Sermon long agoe, so was it with the Jewes, John Baptist called them, yet they believed not, but when Christ came unto them they remembred what John had spo∣ken, Faith brought it back againe unto them and then they believed it, This also is the reason why the Prophet speaking of the future glory, which should come upon the Church, speaks in the present tense, Arise, shine, for thy light is come, the glory Isai. 60, 1. of the Lord is risen upon thee, is come, 'tis not said thy light and thy glory is a coming, but it is come, such evidence the Prophet had of it, that he even saw it already, would believers skill the power of Faith, they should surely finde, Faith would give them much of heaven upon earth, there is nothing without the reach of Faith, too farre for it, but now when we say that Faith gives in by the promise those things that are absent, I meane only thus. 1. That Faith gives us a true title to them, 2ly Faith give us a reall possession of them, we are risen with Christ, we are set downe in heavenly places with him. 3ly Faith gives us an actuall enjoyment of so much of the sweetnesse of the mercy promised, as is competent to our con∣dition, 1 Cor. 12. 11 the spirit measureth out to every one as he will, and here is the difference between our present and future estate, that in our future estate, our title shall be more cleer unto us, our possession more full, our enjoyment more constant, and perpetuall, so that they differ in degrees only, but to con∣clude this particular, in short let us adde only this also, for the evidencing of the mighty power of Faith, to that which hath been said, that as Faith has a power to make things absent to be present, so also it makes those things feasable, which cannot by any created power in the World be brought about, can you wash a Leopards spots off from him? or change a Blacka∣mores skin? no, saith the Lord, no more can you cause him to doe good that is accustomed to doe evill, a sinner is more un∣changeable then a Leopard, hadst thou a thousand spots up∣on thy soule to deforme it, yet verily I can assure thee that thou shalt find a power in Faith to doe them all out, here's the only way for a poor sinner to help himselfe, Faith purifies, and
here it is said to raise the dead, the Philosopher will tell you there's no returne from death to life, yet here v. 35. it is said women received their dead raised to life again, by Faith the dead were raised to life again, such is its power. 3ly. The workings of Faith are hereby evidenced to be mighty and mysterious, in that it can compasse great designes with most unsuitable means, if you had a little Engin in your hand that could pull up vast mountaines and rocks by the roots, who would not admire the efficacy hereof, so it is with Faith, it brings about mighty designes with most unlikely meanes. First Faith brings about her works by meanes of another kind, then the works are that are wrought, Faith is spirituall And so some∣times also by outward meanes, Faith brings spiritu∣all effects a∣bout, as by water in Bap∣tisme, it brings us home the Holy Ghost, and by Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper brings Christ into the Soule. Now in these the meanes and the effect are of diffe∣rent kinds. and its actings are spirituall, and the promises which are the meanes in whose strength it acts all, they are all spirituall, now for those to have an influence upon corporeall things, is strange and unsuitable, yet so it is, Faith removes mountaines, when Christ sent away the Ruler with this word, goe thy way, thy Sonne liveth, it is said he beleeved the word that Jesus spake, and his Sonne recovered, now see the unsuitablenesse in this worke, the father of the child beleived, he acted faith upon Christ's promise, and see what an effect came of it, it brought health to the child, what an unsuitablenesse is between faith & health, the one is spirituall, the other corporeall, yet this pro∣ceeds from the other. Againe if it so fall out, as that the means, and the effect are both of the same kind, yet there is unsuitablenesse between them, because as to the effect, the means that is used hath no influence in it selfe conformable unto it. In the the working of naturall agents, there is in the means something like unto the effect that is wrought by them, and therefore they say, like is begotten of like, but now it is otherwise in this working of faith, the effect and the means are not alike. Moses by Faith strikes a streame out of the Rock, now what likenesse is between the water and the rod of Moses, whereby it is produced? none at all; So again the Priests Feet stepping into the waters of Jordan, caused them to part hither and thither, and to give way for the Army to goe over, now what likenesse at all between the cause and the effect here, what is there in the dipping of the Priests Feet in the water, that should cause
this suddain parting of the waters, nihil consimile, yet by faith they stept down into the waters, and forthwith divided them. Again Faith sometimes goes farther, and takes up more like means to bring its designe to passe, but yet marke it well, and you shall finde a vast unsuitablenesse between the Meanes which Faith useth, and the work that is wrought by them, which makes the workings of faith wonderfull; The disproportion carries a mystery in it, exalting weake and contemptible meanes, to high and mighty works, if Goliah had met with his equall in the Camp of Israel, and falne by such a one, there had been no wonder, the means had been proportionable to the effect, but now for David a little stripling, who was scarce able to goe in Sauls Armour, and much lesse able to beare upon his shoul∣der You would have asked Christ as his Disciples did, Lord where shall we get enough for this multi∣tude, how can 5 Barly loaves and 2 fishes feed 5000, but Christ beleeved, and the food so multiplied in dividing, as that there were more fragments gathered up after din∣ner, them there was ment upon the table at the begin∣ning. Goliahs weighty Spear, for him to destroy this mighty War∣riour, Davids strength was not in proportion to this great work, yet by Faith he overcame; Elisha and the Widdow of Sa∣repta had but a handfull of Meale in the Barrell to live upon, now that this should be able constantly to feed them for the space of some months, how could this be, but Faith increased it in the spending. So it is with Faith in other particulars also, weak Christians may be afraid to contend with witty adversaries, but see, oftimes by faith the foolish things of the world attaine to this, even to confound the wise, and things that are not, to bring to to nought things that are, faith exalts weak means to most high attempts, and therefore I must beseech you by the way to doe more in faith, and you shall be able to doe greater things then yet you have attained to, never be afraid when there are crosse workings of providence, its not to discourage thee, it is but to try your faith, believe at such a time, say, Lord the weak∣est means I can use, can bring thy good purposes to passe, if thou grant forth thy blessing, perhaps you are on a suddain cast much into debt, you have lost much by Sea or Land, and you have but a little left to relieve you, your Creditors are clamorous, and they seek out an Extent upon your Lands, why now what should you doe if your Treasure be exhausted of monies, let not your heart be exhausted of Faith, now believe and depend up∣on God, and see how he will help you, see if you shall lack a∣ny thing, or if it shall be done unto you from cruell men ac∣cording
to your feare, I trust not; You doe not know the power of faith in your dayly commerce, glorifie God dayly by believing on his promise, and the promise shall provide for you what you want; You have but a little stock of grace, but improve it, and believe the promise, to him that hath shall be given, and he shall have more abundance, be not discouraged from Prayer nor Preaching, nor any good duty, because you are prepared with very little grace to the work, but if Christ send you goe out in his name, and see if it shall not be given you in the very houre, what you shall speak, and what you shall doe. 4ly. The mysterious working of Faith consists in this That Faith doth take a believer off from all the strength he hath in himselfe, & thereby makes him the more strong, empties out all To this pur∣pose saith the Apostle, 1. Cor. 3. 18. if any man a∣mong you seemeth to be wise in this world, let him become a foole that he may be wile, that is, let him deny his own carnall wis∣dome, and yeeld up him∣selfe to the mystery of wisdome that God hath re∣voaled in the Gospell, and surely that Creature that is wrought o∣ver to such a gracious frāe as to beleeve God rather then the car∣nall vain rea∣soning of his, own deceit∣full heart, shall be en∣lightned from God to the acknowledg∣ment of the mystery of God, and of the Father, & of Christ. carnall con∣fidences, and all a mans strong holds, and thereby makes him the more strong in God: the more our confidence is carnall, or in self-sufficiency, or creature-supports, the lesse is alwayes our faith in God, and so necessarily it follows, the lesse strong we are: for deliverance and help, is then farthest off, Christ with-drawes when you leane upon any ones shoulder but his, if a Woman should leane upon the shoulder of a stranger, would it not cause her Husband to depart from her: when the soule leanes upon carnall props or pillers, God forsakes us, therefore we finde the chast Spouse in no otherposture, but this, leaning upon the shoulder of her beloved, Cant. 8. 5. who is this that commeth up from the Wildernesse, leaning upon her beloved, the Church was in the Wildernesse in a sad and lost condition, how came shoe up out of this Wildernesse, shee lea∣ned fast upon the shoulder of her beloved, & he was her guide. Faith laies aside creature helpes, and thereby gaines more strength from God. The people are too many, saith the Lord to Gideon; for me to give you the victory, and so Gideon empties out of his Armie two and twenty thousands, and there remai∣ned with him but ten thousand, then God puts him to it again for yet they were too many, and he empties out the second time nine thousand and seaven hundred, and what was left to Gideon? But three hundred men, what a small number is left of this goodly Armie, would any man judge but that now
Gideon was weaker then before? No by this very work he had greater Faith in God (for there was scarce ought else to helpe him) and so was more likely to prevaile and did prevaile. If You (Right Noble Sir) who are the Generall of our Armies, and no lesse then a Gideon, put forth by the spirit of God in those troublesome daies for the help and protection of the Church, if you should fall a emptying, and empty out all those un∣willing troopes of Corah, who are unwilling to goe abroad because they would be busied at home in levelling the powers and ordinances which Christ hath constituted in the king∣domes of this world, if you should cast out those prophane ones, and those infectious deceavers, who have (wee here) got some shelter under your Tents, what shall I say of them, verily if You would purge out such dangerous humors (as we heare you are about such a good work) be not afraid, You shall gaine by such a losse, were you but a little flock of kids, some of those thousands abated which perhaps are a burthen to our Land, yet the Lord your God would keep You in safty, if You trust in him. Could you spare but a few to help distressed Ireland after eight yeares terrible warres there, and the many prayers that are sent thither before them. I say could you dis∣patch over but a few thither of those men whose spirits the Lord should make willing to the service (remember Gideons small armie) even by those few, I trust Ireland might be relie∣ved, and God would reap the greater glory, because the would not be any arme of flesh to glory in, Onely let them goe in Faith, and the more they denie themselves, the greater service would God doe by them, and let this strengthen their faith that God is doing his greatest Work, when he takes to him the weakest meanes, this was Pauls experience, When I am weake then I am strong, what a paradox is here? yet he witnesses this truth, that when he had most emptied out him selfe by Faith, he brourht the more strength in, God came in and Christ shewed his strength, according as he had promised Paul, My strength is made perfect in weaknesse. Oh how a naturall man boggles at this, this cannot goe downe with flesh and blood what for a man to lay aside all his strength, and to be the more strong by it, how can these things be?
5ly The mysterious workings of faith are proved by its most secret and hidden influence. . Greg. Nazianz. Apologet. Orat. 1a. The actings of Faith in their lustre and power cannot be discerned by the sharpest eye of the men of this world, they skill not the manner of faiths workings, they are a mysterie to them, they see no lustre nor excellency in them, 'tis like a jewell which they have heard much of, but they never saw it, it is laid up in a cabinet from them, this is plaine, for first they account a believers confidence in the Lord to be a very vaine thing that can no wise profit them, They mock at the counsell of the poor (saith the Psalmist) because he putteth his trust in the Lord. What doe this poor people meane, what are they able to doe, they will not yeeld up their citty though they have no reason for it, there are none that can come for their rescue, yet they believe great things, they pray and think to es∣cape us that way, but poor fooles as they are wee have them fast enough in the pit. Thus they mocked at the Lord Christ at his passion, here's one that trusted in God but God will have none of him, He trusted in God (say they) that he will deliver him, let him deliver him, if he will have him, Christ believed all the while in God, but they saw no such excellency in his faith nor benefit by it, all was in vaine, for they had nailed him to the Crosse, and now who should take him downe from them: they thinke they doe but deceive themselves with a vaine hope, when they trust in God, and Zenacharib told Hezekiah so much, what doe you feeble Jewes meane, will you bee starved in the Siege, and be all put to the sword? Who shall be able to deli∣ver you? In the Letters that Zenacharib sent into Jerusalem to cause the people to deliver up the Citty to him, mark what he saies to this purpose, let not Hezekiah, (saith he) deceive you, what doe you trust in, have any of the Gods delivered the na∣tions out of my hand, that you now should trust to be delive∣red? 2. Chron, 32. 15. Againe, 2ly they judge a believer far off from God and forsaken of him, whereas if they had a discovery of his faith in God they would finde God to be nigh unto him still. Persecute him, take him (say they to David) for God hath forsaken him. 3ly They oftentimes judge the Faith of Believers to be but
Hypocrisie. So did Bildad censure Job, accounting that his hope and trust to be but hypocrisie and which should surely perish and come to nought, Job. 8. 13. 4ly They deeme a believer sometimes to be but a peevish carelesse man, he is nothing stirring in his businesse, sometimes God calleth a believer to sit still, and to do nought but believe, what saith a worldling at this, is this the way to be rich? Is this the way to prevaile? To lye in the ditch and cry God help? Youl'e nere be worth any thing. Yea what speak I of the judgement of this world concer∣ning a believer? Faith is so secret as that it is oftimes hid from his eye, in whose heart it workes, it is like the way of a Serpent upon a rock, and of a ship in the sea, no man can tell where that path is they moved in, so it is with faith, the way and working of Faith is most secret and hidden. I finde it to be even so in the Lord Jesus Christ himselfe, when he was under a cloud, my God, my God (saith he) why hast thou forsaken me? He believed and therefore he saies My God, my God, but now hee knew not that he believed, for he saies presently, God had forsaken him, when as faith knowes that God cannot forsake him, if the worke of faith had been knowne, and this is often in the experience of believers, at this they are troubled and continually sad be∣cause they cannot discerne that they doe at all believe, so I say it may be with a believer a long time, but if at last they come to any discovery of the workings of faith in themselves, it is by the light of Gods holy spirit, and no otherwise. 6ly In the sixth place. The mysterious workings of faith con∣sist in this. That Faith can see to worke in the darkest midnight, not∣withstanding all discouragement, it goes on its way, here's a mysterious working indeed, if all carnall helps faile outward sense and experience are withdrawne, yet if God appear'd within, there were sufficient light to worke by, but now when a poore distressed soule findes that God is withdrawne, when neither Sunne light, nor Star light any longer, no consolations, no knowledge, and discoveries as formerly, all withdrawne and the soule left as David; in the valley and shadow of death, what then? is there a time for faith to worke, yea, then in this darke mid∣night: and God calls out upon you (Beloved) to trust in him,
even at such a time, Isa. 50. 10. what when in the dark, and sees no light at all? yea, saith the Lord, Yee that walk in darknesse, and see no light, let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. Brethren you must not look to be alway in the holy moun∣taine to see fully Christs glory, and to have God the Father, and Christ sup, and lie downe with you alwaies in this world, what will you doe when God withdrawes upon your breach of covenant? Yet trust in him, and how admirable are the workings of Faith at such a time as this in the blackest and saddest houres, God will provide, God will provide himselfe a Lambe, hark what Abraham saies the father of the faithful, what is this likely, when he bids him kill his sonne and offer him up in sacrifice, and yet does he believe God will provide himself a Lamb for the sacrifice: and yet loe how the faith of Abraham workes constantly to his principalls, and God accordingly sendes a Lambe, behold a Ram in the bush caught by the hornes to be a spele for Isaac. So Jobs faith wrought, when? at midnight, I will trust in thee though thou shouldst kill me, what a strange wor∣king of spirit is this towards God, believe in a killing God. A∣gaine so it will be with believers when Christ comes in glorie, Hee comes in the cloudes, and he shall come in such clouds as that hardly he shall finde faith on the earth, men shall not believe he is a comming, what, shall men say, is Christ coming in such daies as these? wherein the kingdomes of the world are ruined, and the Churches scattered, and the starres fall from heaven, and the powers in heaven shaken? when his ordinances are slighted, and his Ministers abused, and Christ most persecuted and blaspheamed and seemes to depart? yea, yet for all that expect the promise of his comming, I am assured that the designes of Christ in those darke daies are now higher then they have beene these thousand of yeares. let not your faith fayle, wait, for the day of the Lord draweth very neere. 7th place, Faith acts with a mighty and mysterious power in changing the person wholly where it is, out of weake it makes him strong, out of sinfull it purifies him, and makes him cleane out of one who was sold under sin, it makes him work righteous∣nesse, this is one great act of faith spoken of here in the Text, it hath
has a mighty power over the whole conversation, by it the Elders the people of God wrought righteousnesse, and verily it is impossible for an unbeliever to worke righteousnesse, to act one righteous act. Againe, Faith hath a mighty power to alter a mans whole condi∣tion, it can turne a miserable condition into a comfortable condition, so it appeares here in the Text of the ancient Mar∣tyrs, though the world thought them miserable, they cared not to change their condition, They accepted not of deliverance, others V. 35. were tortured not accepting deliverance, that they might obtaine a better resurrection, they were willing to goe home unto the kingdome of their father, they were angry with those that car∣ried them, and tempted them with the glorious baubells of this world. When Polycarpus was to be bound to the stake and burnt for the testimonie of Jesus Christ, the Proconsul of Asia who was to judge him, seeing him to be a reverend gracious old man, desi∣red him to spare himselfe, and favour his yeares, and promised him largely if he would change his profession, but hee would accept of no deliverance upon such tearmes, & told them when he was brought to the stake (as I remember it recorded of him) they needed not to take such paines inbinding him fast for he would not moue: and so godly Mr Hooper a Martyr in Q. Maries daies, when they were fastning him with iron hoopes to the stake, You need not thus trouble your selues (saith he) yet doe what you list, I sub¦mit, shewing how contented and how willing they were to im∣brace that condition. And Mr Rogers who was the Proto-martyr in those Marian daies, to shew his comfort in the midst of the flames, washed his hands in the flames. Another also (like that Roman Sèaevola) whose hand Bonner held in the flame of a candle that was up∣on his table till the veines shrunk, and sinewes brake, & blood sparted out in the face of the beholders yet he testified he felt no paine, have not some of us knowne our prisons more com∣fortable then our dwelling houses? tis faith that changes our condition, and brings in unspeakable comfort; are there not many of you, my Brethren, that have suffered by false reproa∣ches God hath done it least the mighty workes which he hath wrought by you in the Army should puffe you up with pride
and selfe conceit; therefore hath he suffered you to misearry, and to beare much reproach, but I shew you the excellent way whereby you may change all your discomforts into a comfortable condition. Some Chymists (I remember) have largely boasted of the Philosophers stone, that with a touch of it can turne all mettalls into gold, though that be false, yet I have found this to be true, Faith can turne poverty into , and misery into excessive comfort and joy. 8ly The mysterious working of faith is often in this. That it is powerfull and prevalent towards its end, even by keeping off the s from working. He that believes saith the Prophet) doth not make hast, Faith bindes up the souls from acting and even by this way mightily prevailes to compasse her designes, stay where God bids you, stay and use onely that meanes unto which God calleth you, have a most observant eye upon the call of God, if some should see, as oftimes they may, a believer sitting still, they would say what are you like to prevalle by sitting still, doe this, and doe that, and turne every stone, and then perhaps you may finde what you seek. Perhaps so too (saith a believer) but I doubt whither it be the minde of God that I should use this means or no, I am contented to stay for the meanes which God pre∣scribes as well as the end, I will doe lesse, and believe more. This delights God, and it sooner prevailes then if you were al∣waies acting: saith the Lord to Moses, stand still, thou art in a hurry, and thy thoughts are busied how to make an escape,  Moses, stand still a while and let the people wait a little, and see if I can finde a way for thee and thy people to escape, so saith the Lord sometimes to us in our perplexity, when we haue tri∣ed many waies and all to no purpose, you have tired your selves in pursuing the creature that you desire, stay now a while and wait upon God you have done your duty, now fit still a while and believe, and give up this matter to God, it is a place that is much to be pondered by a believer. Your strength 30. Isa. 7. is to sit still. Why doe you thus weary your selves, and you want sleep, nor give your thoughts rest, verily you might spare all this paines, if you would give up this matter to God, la∣bour to bring your heart to this frame to be at Gods dispose in this businesse, and expect this mercy from him, your strength is
to sit still. A Believer workes powerfullly when he stands still, this resting and waiting upon God oftner prevailes then over∣busie acting and rushing into strange meanes hand overhead, that are against the minde of God for the compassing of our designes, Souldiers are apt to this because they have great power in their hand, and it is out of very tender affection to∣wards you that I warne you in the Lords name to take great heed, for this will cause God to dissert you, as soone as any thing, if you will not wait upon God in his waies, I tell you whosoever you are, you shall surely be undone in your owne waies, I am tender over you with a godly jelousie, and there∣fore give me leave to be faithfull for I desire your good and welfare in the Lord. Thus you have seene the mighty and mysterious workings of Faith: now in the third place let us come to shew The large and effectuall power that is in Faith towards the atchieuement of such mighty workes. What is there in faith whereby it can reach unto such high effects as these are declared in the Text. V. 33, 34. 35. First the strange and effectuall power of Faith whereby it a∣vailes to compasse all its designes consists much in the Principles which it acts upon, Faith acts upon the surest and most constant, and most powerfull principles in the world, and that is upon the sure promises of God, God cannot be unfaithfull, saith a Believer, He cannot denie himselfe, Ergo, this must come to passe which he hath assured me in his holy word, whatsoever your case be, if God hath given a promise concerning it, either to the point of our justification by the blood of Jesus Christ, or a∣ny temporall deliverance or mercy, or any gift of grace, if there be a promise for it, a Believer moues towards it upon ver∣tue of the promise, which can never deceive him, whatsoever strait or difficulty there may be, Faith overturnes all, the pro∣mise of God must stand whatsoever fall before it, Faith breaks through all as the Champions of David brake through the Ar∣mie of enemies, and went beyond them to the well head and fouht water for the King: So a Believer upon the strength of the pro∣mise, goes beyond all difficulties, and reaches the good that is desired: all the powers of the gates of hell cannot frustrat one promise, and therefore is Faith so strong and mighty to great
atchievements because it moues upon the promise. 2ly, The ability which is in Faith towards great designes springs from the united forces which Faith takes-in to its help, Faith hath a powerfull influence over all the other wheeles of the soule to set them on work, it calls in other graces to its help, It makes love work, and patience work, and sets the spirit of prayer on work, and though it be but one single grace, yet it does those mighty works, because it workes by other wheeles, 'tis impossible that one wheele in a Watch should tell us the houre of the day; but when the primum mobile hath set all the other wheeles a working, then the worke is brought about, and the desire is satisfied. So though Faith does not sometimes availe single as in the Disciples, when they could not cast out the un∣cleane spirit, yet when they joyned prayer and fasting, and so got in the assistance of other graces to act joyntly with it, then it did the worke. 3ly, Faith comes to be so marveilous in working by rea∣son of its Latitude, it is not limited to a few workes, it hath the largest reach of any grace of the spirit, it reaches to all things in this life, or life to come, to all conditions, and estates, to all persons, to all works, and whatsoever Faith reaches not unto is sinne, there is not any condition you can be in any of you, but Faith can reach that condition, and get supplies for it, now there is no grace so large, and universall unto all objects, and conditions as Faith is, now by reason it hath such a large extent, therefore is Faith so various and marveilous in work∣ing: gold, hath a particular excellency in it, but it is but of an narrow extent, it cannot help you in all your wants, you give it away for water when you are over thirsty, & part with your jewels to buy food, you melt them into those cōtentments that you want, but now Faith is of such an universall excellency as that you can doe nothing without it, you cannot subsist a day without Faith, it hath to doe with all the conditions God shall call you to, and comes into all your daily affaires to or∣der them aright, now that which hath so many excellencies in it, and is of so great use must needs be marveilous in wor∣king. 4th, Reason how Faith comes to be so mighty and pow∣erfull
is because God delights to bring about his greatest glo∣ry in the world by a way of believing, God hath chosen this way Iohn 6 29. Mar. 9. 23. aboue others, and therefore hath he impowred Faith to doe mighty and terrible things, that so the glory of God may bee brought out by it: when God findes a man in a good posture of believing, ah, saith God, theres a man for my purpose, I will bring about my greatest designes by that man: tis not the most honourable, the most wise, and valiant and stout that God makes use so much of, as those who are strong in Faith, it is a notable Scripture, observe it for your comfort, Jam. 2. 5. cho∣sen the poore, rich in Faith, Loe what a choise God makes the poore contemptible ones of the world that are rich in Faith, does he choose to bring his great designes about by, be not dis∣couraged by your poverty and weaknesse at any time, but Be∣lieve. 5th Reason, Whence Faith comes to be so mighty and my∣sterious in working, is because it does engage God in all his power, and wisdome, and love, to bring about the mighty works, unto which by his all guiding providence he hath cal∣led a Believer, and what is too hard for the Lord? It winnes over God, and then improves all that is in God for its succour, and this is the reason it cannot fayle, God is on our side, (saith the Psalmist:) now when a Believer hath engaged God on his side, then he re to carry it. Why but is God engaged to make good what a Believer trusts in him for, will he not deny him any thing? No verily, nothing will he deny him, if once he give thee Faith in the promise; Hee is oblieged to make the promise good unto thee, he will never draw back, thou maiest be sure on't, he will some way or other make good every pro∣mise that is relied on. Now for application. First use of instruction. We must needs be convinced of this from which hath beene said, That Faith alwaies gets the best of it. Be a mans condition what it will be, yet Faith makes it very good. You have heard already, that some by Faith have tur∣ned their persecution and afflictions into such a happy condi∣tion, as that they cared not to accept of deliverance, Heb. 11. 35. Ignatius in his Epistle to the Church of the Romans declares
himselfe so far from being frighted with persecution, as  he was afraid to be delivered, he desired the Church that they would not pray that he might be delivered from death, but that they would offer him up a sacrifice upon the Altar, which was prepared for him, Pray rather that I may triumph in Martyrdome for the name of the Lord Jesus. 2d Vse of instruction is Faith so active and mighty in wor∣king, then certainly The way to get strength to perform any g is first of all to set Faith on working, there are that seek by all other meanes to bring their designes about rather then by Faith, but you see the way of the Worthies of old, they brought all about by Faith, why but would you not haue us to use the meane answer, you are not forbidden to use the meanes, but in the first place and chiefly, and constantly, unto the end in all transacti∣ons to work by Faith, God goes not along with an unbelieved▪ therefore as the wise marriner holds the rudder with his hand, so guids the ship, yet he keeps his eye upon the Card, so goe on in your work, and using the meanes which the Lord makes rea∣dy for you, but still keep your eye of Faith upon God in his promise, I trust the Lord will blesse this meanes, though it  but weak, to the compassing of this work, remember it cost the King of Israel his life, for trusting upon the Physitians more then upon the Lord. 3d Use of Instruction, is Faith so mighty a grace of the spi∣rit, so marveilous in working, Then it concernes a Christian to have a speciall care that he suffer not his Faith to be weakned? If your Faith be weakned, all the rest of the man will become weak if once you know a sinnew be hurt, a man is lame all daies of  life: because God touched Jacobs sinnew and weakned it, he went halting all his life, verily so you shall finde it with your soule, if you suffer your Faith to be weakned, your spirit will halt, oh that you knew how much it concernes you daily to be acting and strengthning your Faith. Sampson was carefull to preserve his haire, how often did he conceale it from Dalilah least it should be wronged, for therein lay his strength, So I be∣seech you most earnestly look to your Faith, look to your Faith, there, there lies your strength, oh! see to that. 4th Use of Instruction Learne also hence, That a Believer is a
strong man, a mighty wonder-working man, nothing can stand before him; he hath power upon the heart of God, the Lord yeelds to this mighty wrestler, he was so much taken with Jacbs Faith, and importunity, who held him fast with his armes, and with weeping and supplications, as that God put an honourable title upon him, what is thy name, saith the Lord unto him, (thou mighty Wrestler) let me know who thou art that thus wre∣stles with me? Say what is thy name? And he said unto him Judah then said the Lord, thy name shall be called no more Jacob but Israel: for as a Prince hast thou power with God and with men, and hast prevailed, goe to then, learne of God to put a price upon him that is strong in Faith, put the mightiest men in Faith, into places of trust, such a one seldome miscarries, God is on his side, and works all his works for him, not the tal∣lest not the stoutest and strongest Souldier, is first to be chosen, behold a mighty Goliah falls before a litle David, who was a Believer. Second use of Reproof to unbelievers, O sirs what doe you trust to? how displeasing to God is all that you doe in unbe∣liefe, if by Faith the Elders obtain'd a good report from God, how will God report of you who lie under the sinne of unbe∣leif? have you a desire to please God, verily I must professe un∣to you, there is nothing in the world doth more discontent him, then your unbeleife, it fetcht a groan off Christ's heart to see the unbeleife of some sinners to whom he Preached the Gospell, and made him burst out a weeping over them, to see their hardnesse of heart, and to denounce a sad woe upon all those Citties, where he had lived a while, and Preached unto them, and done many mighty works amid'st them, yet they be∣leeved not; who would deale so with his Friend as you deale with God an unbeliever cals Gods power, and love, and faith∣fulnesse, and truth in question, you will take a Friends word if he promise, otherwise it will trouble your Friend that he hath so little credit with you, what saith he will you not trust me? have you knowne me so long and will you not trust me for this? what a disgrace doe you put upon me? So saith Christ to his Disciples, even just in this very same manner, though implicitely when the Father of the possessed came to him, and
told him, sir saies he, I have brought my Sonne to thy Disci∣ples, and they cannot cast him out, but if thou can'st doe any thing, come and heale me, what a disgrace was put upon Christ at this time, and therefore our Saviour breaks out in a passion upon this. O Faithlesse generation how long shall I be with you, how long shall I suffer you? Saint John tels you plainly whoever you are that are un∣believers, (looke how you will answer it) you make God a lyer, who ever will not believe him when he hath promised, and indeed what doe you doe lesse, God saies, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, and you say nay, but God hath forsaken me, my God hath forgotten me, God saith He hath made an everla∣sting Covenant with you, and you say, it is but for a time at our list, and when we break Covenant, God falls off and breaks Covenant too, God saith, I will deliver thee in six troubles and in seaven, my grace shall be sufficient in temptation, and call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shalt gloryfie me, now all this thou flatly deniest, deniest Gods powers (O the unbelief!) as if he could not save, deniest his knowledge and care of thee, as if he knew not thy trouble of heart, & were not a compas∣sionate father over thee, and what doest thou trust to? what to this friend and that friend, to this bag of gold, and Councell, and this Army, this Reserve of Horse, and those fresh Supplies that are come into the Battaile, and that Office and Prefer∣ment, what wilt thou place them upon Gods throne and abase the Lord, wilt thou cast off the rock of ages, and leane upon a reed, that will surely bow under thee, and give thee the fall? O what folly is there in unbeliefe, why should'st thou not be∣lieve? God saith thou givest him glory by believing, and this is the great work to which thy heavenly Father cals thee, and yet thou drawest back, and sai'st I am afraid, and know not how to believe, I cannot bring my heart to it. I beseech you in the Lord, if ever you hope to finde accep∣tance with God, or compasse any great work, labour for more Faith, I cannot desire you to ought, that will truely amount to your good more then this. Third use is for Discovery, As there is an absolute necessity that in all our works we should act in faith, so it is our greatest
Soule-contentment to know that we doe act in Faith, take therefore a view of your actions, scan them, see what Faith you finde there, here are three helps of discovery which I com∣mend unto you this day, that by them you may come to know the workings of the spirit of grace in your hearts. First, if your greatest atchivements have been wrought in Faith, you will attribute the successe unto the right meanes, you will give Faith the honour of all. God hath put the sword into your hands, and led you forth unto many worthy atchivements, and your renowne hath mightily spread it self from North to South, and gone out unto all parts, and the Peace and Liberty which the Lord hath brought about for his Church in these dayes by your meanes, (we blesse his name for it,) and desire to keep in thankfull remembrance what he hath done for us, but now I beseech you (beloved Brethren,) say, how have you attained unto all this, you that are expert Commanders, and Valiant Souldiers, tell us before the Lord this day wherein your strength lay, we put this question unto you for a better reason, then Dalilah did to sampson, how say you, whereby have you o∣vercome so many Armies, Cities, Castles, impregnable Garri∣sons, was it your bow, and your shield, and your Horses, and Ammunition, and tried Souldiers that got you this Victory, and that Victory; I cannot see for my part, but that in all your Victories, there hath been as little of man shewed, as in other Armies, you have done little or nought towards the attain∣ment of many great Victories, and whence had you them? have you written down upon all your Victories, Haec FIDEI SPOLIA, this Faith hath wonne, (I know what many Dam∣mees have lost) but have you given glory to God, and say by Faith we overcame in such a place, and by Faith we overcame in another place, O sweet, and most comfortable Victories, we stood still, and lay like a flock of sheep about such and such a place, and the Lord God on whom we trusted, delivered up all that we have into our hands, and if at any time he called us to the battaile, he taught our hands to warre and our fingers to fight, he put of his spirit upon us, and brought down the strength of the mighty ones before us. I am confident it hath been the Faith of many a∣mongst you, and the Faith of Gods children in the Churhes
of this Kingdome, making prayers for you, that have gott these Victories, many a Moses hath been lifting up his hands, many Churches have been weeping before the Lord, and be∣lieving whiles you have been fighting, this hath done all, and if you have overcome in Faith, certain I am you will attribute the successe to Faith, and not to fellow Souldiers, such Re∣serves, and such fresh Supplies came in, and gave us the day, no 'twas Faith procured them, and strengthened them to our de∣liverance. 2ly. It may be discovered whether or no in the managing of great affaires, you carry on your work in Faith, by your ac∣quiescency of spirit in God, when Faith hath done its work in the heart, and given in its Evidence concerning the promise, and told a man surely God will deliver thee, He will blott out that large Record of thy sinnes, and naile all thy strong cor∣ruptions to the Crosse of Christ, and there they shall die, He will doe this work which thou desirest, waite upon the Lord, and he will bring it to passe, in his own good time, then fol∣lowes a peace and a calme, well then, fit down O my soule, saith a believer, and waite untill Gods time come, be not thoughtfull, leave matters in the hands of God, He hath taken them up: He saies not what if this should fall out, and that should happen, be not so thoughtfull, but rest upon a Faithfull God, who will keep his word, never could any man yet, or any age charg him with breach of promise. The third Note of discovery: you may know whether or no you act in true Faith, by the ground or bottome upon which your Faith is pitcht, true Faith is alwaies bottomed upon the promise, either upon the maine stock of the covenant of grace in Christ, or else upon some branches sprouting out thence, if you are confident and cannot tell me why you are so confi∣dent, then I must tell you verily thou hast no Faith at all, tis but a deceit of thine own heart, and it will not be found to be Faith in the day when Christ shall try the secret of all hearts, but some are confident, and they knowe well upon what ground: they have good cause to be confident they trowgh, we have gallant Souldiers, good armes, and provision, an in∣vincible armie, and therefore we feare nothing, is not this good
reason to be confident? O! but all this while thy heart is not well grounded, If Faith had the grounding of it, it would ground it much better, alas vaine man wilt thou put all thy treasure in a vessell that is as leaking as thy selfe, hast thou nought but the creature to fix upon? Ah thou art a most mi∣serable creature! thou shalt goe away with the curse of God, and this is a most terrible estate, that even that should bring a curse upon a man which he takes to be his comfort, and yet e∣ven so it is, the Lord pronounces a curse upon every such man, Thus saith the Lord, Cursed be the man that trusteth in man, and ma∣keth flesh his arme, & whose heart departeth from the Lord. For he shall Jer. 17. 5. 6. be like the heath in the desart, and shall not see when good commeth but shall inhabit the parched places in the wilder∣nesse, in a salt land, and not inhabited, but now is it otherwise with you, can you say oh blessed be God that I have a promise from God! I am confident because I have a promise to rest upon, and comfort my soul in, doubtlesse such a one believeth. This was Sampsons mistake, and it is a very notable case, you shall finde in the book of Judges, 16. 20. that God gave Sampson a promise of matchlesse strength, upon condition that he should keep his Nazarits vow, and his locks were not cut, so long his strength should remaine. Now mark what Sampson saies in that place fore-quoted, saies he, I will goe out and shake my selfe, as at other times before, and he wist not that the Lord was departed from him, Sampson was confident, but his confidence was no other then presumption, when his vow was broke, for this confidence was not grounded upon a pro∣mise, but it is far otherwise with a gracious Believer, he builds his comfort upon some of the promises that are most suitable to his condition. He saies with David, God is a refuge for us, Psalm. 62. 8. Heres a promise shelter here, its good sheltring un∣de the promise. & Psalm. 46. v. 7. Wherefore let me again renew my exhortation unto you, seek Faith, grow in Faith, I renew my exhortation and reinforce it with all the grace that God gives me, because I knowe what great need you have in your spirituall warfare of this gift of the Spirit. O my brethren! Let not these be times wherein Faith shall scarce be found, when more need of Faith then in
troublesome daies, verily all your shifts and turnings of things upide downe, will doe nothing towards your safety without Faith, you cannot live the life of Christians without Faith, tis as possible for a tree to live without roots, as for you to live without Faith. Oh! I would have you men mighty in faith, how beautifull, how excellent is the glorious lustre of Faith in the heart of any, what mighty works might you attaine to had you Faith? Christ cannot doe mighty works for you be∣cause of your unbeliefe, you shall never see good daies if you have not more Faith among you, you may think tis along with this and that other thing that your peace is not establi∣shed, that you are not brought into Canaan, but I tell you tis long of your unbeliefe that you are shut out, you blame Israel, because they would not belieue God, and you are as very un∣believers as they: I speak as to the multitude of this kingdome, though God hath a precious people in this land, yet the multi∣tude, the multitude God abhorres and so much sweares a∣gainst. But that I may conclude and speake one word in the close unto those who are faithfull, and have trusted God with all they have, in a use of direction. Let nothing discourage your Faith, you may have many trialls, but take no discouragements, in times of greatest danger and difficulty, there is a time to act Faith, Faith is ordained for such times, nothing can help us unlesse it be Faith, Faith is able to remove the greatest difficulties, it is able to compasse the highest atchievements: O that Christians were more skilled in this mystery of Faith, Faith is the meee test engine for greatest designes, Faith is the Souldiers best shield, will you goe into the battle at any time without your shield, will you not raise brest works before you for your defence, no such safe guard as Faith, Faith brings supplies in a seasonable time, O for a reserve and supplies say you to help, when all are cut off round about us, why Faith keeps reserves for you, let Faith call, and theyle come in for your rescue. You are in places of eminency, who are Generalls and Cap∣taines of the armie, unbeliefe in you is more dangerous then in others, God will not spare you, if you give him not glory be∣fore
the people, remember how God dealt with Moses at the Rock, when his Faith somewhat fayled, because hee gave not glory to God by believing, at that time therefore the Lord cut him short of Canaan, this was the reason why Moses was not permitted to more then a sight of that goodly land, neither shall you live to see the peace of Sion, and the fulfilling of the promise made to the Church, in these later daies if you will not believe. I have done, goe forth in the strength of God, and the Lord God from heaven blesse you. Let mee beseech you to lay up those special places of Scripture in your hearts, which are suit∣able to your condition, who are Souldiers, exercise your Faith upon these promises, when you goe out to battle, when you gird on your sword, then fortifie your hearts with such like promises as these. Remember in Isa, 43. 11. The Lord hath pro∣mised to be your Saviour, and you shall have no other, he will not permit it, I even I am the Lord, and besides me there is no Saviour, therefore God would have you trust in him, again it is a sweet excellent Scripture, Hosea, 1. 7. God will save you without sword or bow, or battle, if you want these, God will save you without them, you think you are in a miserable condition, if your swords were broken, and your ammunition seized upon, yet can God save you without all these. Moreover in the 2. Chron. 32. 8. See how Hezekiah encouraged the small troopes that were with him, with Senacharib, saith he, is an arme of flesh, 2. Chro. 20. 15. 1. Sam. 17. 47. But with us is the Lord our God to help us, and fight our battles, remem∣ber this, God will fight your battles while you fight the Lords Battles. FINIS.
