N476 E659_3 R206698 99865811 166107
A DECLARATION OF The High and Mighty LORDS, THE STATES of HOLLAND, CONCERNING The Parliament and Common-wealth of England; With their Instructions and Decree given to the Lord High-Admiral Vaentrump, for the taking of all English and Scottish ships: And his Resolution to fight it out to the last man, against all those who shall engage against Them: To∣gether with the advancing of the King of Scots Standard; his Royal Message to 7 Christi∣an Kings and Princes: And L. Col. Lilburns Letter to the Lord Gen. Cromwel. London, Printed for G. HORTON. 1652.
THE DECLARATION Of the States of HOLLAND, Concerning the proclaiming of open Wars with the Parliament of England. SIR, IN my last of the 25 of March, I acquainted you with the Warlike preparations of the States Gene∣ral: since which time they are plea∣sed to set forth a new Edict, prohibiting the transportation of any English Goods what∣soever,
and have declared their disaffection to the proceedings of the English, accasioned by their seizing upon the Flemish Vessels; in retaliation whereof, they have given strict charge and command, that all ships & goods whatsoever belonging to the English Nati∣on, be forthwith seized upon; as also also the Scottish ships are detained by the Lord High-Admiral Vantrump, who hath decla∣red, that according to his Commission re∣ceived from the high and mighty Lords, the States of Holland, he is resolved to fight all those who shall dare to prefume, or attempt the disturbance of the peace and welfare of the freeborn People of the United Provin∣ces, &c. As for other matter of intelligence, I shall refer you to the inclosed, wherein is comprised several remarkable passages of great concernment, which I conceived re∣quisite to present to publike view, viz.
The Hollander hath set forth a Declaration to raise 60000 Horse and Foot; and 300 Sayl of ships; but their design is variously spoken of. Yet great are the Contests between the Burgo∣masters and the Bores; for the latter doth threaten to sequester their Estates, and bring them to a Tryall for their lives, if they will not take a course to defend and assist them at Sea. And some Tumults and Ri∣sings have already been in Zealand, Rotterdam, Dort, Delf, and at the Hague, where many were both slain and wounded, and amongst the rest some English, which the Mutiniers chiefly aymed at, who brand them with the most infamous Badge of Tray∣tors and Conspirators to their Religion and Liber∣ties; &c. The Duke of Malta hath declared, that he will give his Royal Assent to the Union, and that he will raise forty thousand Horse and Foot, to joyn with the Christians against the Turks; and in pursuance thereof hath granted a Commission to Prince Fre∣derick, Landgrave of Hesse, to command in chief un∣der his Highness Prince Philips. It is reported, that Lieu. Col. Lilburn is made Captain of a Man of War for the States of Holland; and that he hath received Power and Instructions, to fire, sink, or take, any ships whatsoever, that shall be declared Enemies to the United Provinces.
SIR, THere hath been a great and imperial Coun∣cel held at Munster in Germany, by the Am∣bassadors of 13 Christian Kings, Princes, and Dukes; At which Diet, they took into considera∣tion the present state and condition of many exiled Princes; and amongst the rest, a Conference arose touching the King of Scots; but nothing done therein (at present) by reason of other weighty and emergent businesses, which call them to a Work of far greater concernment; and may also prove fatal, if not timely prevented: For the Great Turk, and his Bashaw have taken the field with seven hundred thousand Horse and Foot, and are resolved (if possi∣ble) to make a great devastation and inroad upon Christendom this Summer: But great is the care of the Emperour of Germany, the 7 Christian Princes of Italy, the Queen of Sweden, the Prince of Tran∣silvania, and Prince Frederick of Malta, to raise a formidable Power, and to unite and joyn with the Venetians, both in an offensive and defensive War against the Turks; And in pursuance thereof, a League is concluding between the aforesaid Prin∣ces; who have had a large consultation thereupon; But that which is thought most requisite and feasi∣ble at present, is, the sending of a Summons to all Christendom, for Warlike Provisions to be made a∣gainst
the Enemies thereof; And indeed great rea∣son have they so to do; for never was a more po∣tent and irresistable Army raised these many years, as now the Turks and Janisaries have raised. Yet notwithstanding, Prince Philip (the third Son to the Queen of Bohemia, and General to the Stases of Ve∣nice) hath given them a great Overthrow neer the Isle of Candia, and kill'd, taken, and routed about threescore thousand men: This Overthrow doth exceedingly retard the Enemies Design; and as it is a great prejudice to them, so it is a great advantage to Christendom; And his Highnesse Prince Philip hath embraced this opportunity; who by the assist∣ance of the Divine Power, hath obtained another great Victory against the Janisaries: Since which Atchievements, he is called Philip the Great; a Gen∣tleman of a gallant temper, and endow'd with ex∣cellent Properties and Vertues, both for prudence, wisdom, and magnanimity of Spirit: He is even be∣come as great a Terrour to the Turks, as Alexander the Great was to the Christians. The King of Scots hath sent the Lord Wilmot with a Message to the Princes of Italy, imploring Supplies and Accommodation, suitable to his pre∣sent Necessities and Condition; but they have re∣turned Answer, That by reason of the home-bred
divisions they cannot assist him; but promise fair when a feasible opportunity shall serve: which I conjecture may come to pass about Latter-Lam∣mass. By reason that we have received some inclina∣tion that the States of Holland have declared for a Union with the Parliament of England; and have Ordered that those ships and goods formerly seized on (belonging to the English) be forthwith dis∣charged and set at liberty. Lieut. Col. Lilburn is very active in stirring up the well-affected English; And some relate, that he hath sent a Letter to the Lord General, puting his Exceliency in mind of his Protestation at Huntington; wherein he desires him to stand up against Oppression; to propogate the Gospel; to preserve the liberty of the People, and to maintain their just rights and priviledges. FINIS.
