p2212a 43077559 151645
His Royall Highness Prince GEORGE. Brother to Christian, the 5th the Present King of Denmarke Etate sue 30. 1683
THE Present State OF DENMARK, AND REFLECTIONS UPON THE Ancient State thereof. Together with a particular Account of the Birth, Education, Martial At∣chievements, and brave Performan∣ces of his Royal Highness Prince GEORGE, Only Brother to His present Majesty of Denmark. By G. Pierreville Gent. Secretary to the King's Minister at the Court of Denmark. LONDON, Printed for William Benbridg in Hug∣gins Alley in Woodstreet. 1683.
To His Grace Charles Seamour, Duke of Somerset, &c. May it please your Grace, HAving been some years Secretary to the King's Minister at the Court of Denmark, and brought some Memoirs from thence relating both to the Ancient and Mo∣dern
State of that King∣dom, I was prevailed with, through the Importunities of some Friends, to com∣mit them to the Press. For the Northern Regions not lying in the usual Road of our Travellers, and not being thought to have any thing sufficiently inviting as to engage them to undergo the inconvenien∣cies and hardships that at∣tend all Voyages into those Parts, nor to make such a stay as is requisite for the
rendring their Observations worthy of the Curiosity of the Age. We are gene∣rally very much in the Dark as to the Government and Manners of those People. This has made me liable, since my return from those Climats, to daily Que∣stions about them, especial∣ly of late, since the Discour∣ses of the Match between my Lady Ann, and Prince George; People beginning to accuse themselves for entertaining so slender an
Opinion of these Countries, that can produce a Prince every way so great, and endued with such Royal Qualities, as is His Royal Highness. Though these Considera∣tions made me give way to the instancy of my Ac∣quaintance, yet I could not resolve upon the making them publick, without im∣ploring the Patronage of your Graces Illustrious Name. And though I ought to have curb'd my
Presumption from offering you up so unpolisht, and so imperfect an Oblation, yet hoping that some things in it might merit your Graces Speculation, I flatter'd my self that your Grace a∣bounding with so much goodness, would pardon in me the Ambition I had to declare the profound Zeal, Respect and Submission wherewith I am, My Lord, Your Graces Most humble and most obedient Servant, G. PIERREVILLE.
THE Present State OF DENMARK. THE Kingdom of Denmark, con∣taining that part of the Cimbrick, Chersonese, called Juitland, Hol∣stein, a great Shoal of Islands, the Prin∣cipal whereof are Zealand, Funen, and many more, but of less Note, with the great continent of Norway, and the Isles thereof, is Bounded on the West with the Main Western Ocean, on the East with the Bal∣tick Sea, on the North-East with part of Sweedland, Full-North with the Main Frozen Ocean, and on the South with Germany, from which it is seperated on the South-west by the River Albis, and on the South-East by the Trave, a small Isthmus or Neck of Land Uniting it to that Con∣tinent. It had its Name from the People of those many Islands which lie together in the Bay
or Gulph, called Sinus Codanus, (Now the Baltick Sea,) who took upon them the Name of Danes, Extending their Name afterwards as they did their Conquest, and not from Dan a Fabulous King thereof, above a Thousand years before the Birth of our Saviour. As for its Position in regard of the Hea∣vens, part of it lieth within the Northern temperate Zone, and part within the Artict Circle; reaching from the middle Parallel of the 10th Clime, or 55 Degree of Latitude, where it Joyneth with Ger∣many as far as the 71 Degree, where the Frozen Ocean is its only Boundary, thus the longest Day in the Southern parts hereof, is 17 hours and a quarter: But in the parts farthest North, they have no Night for two whole Months, three Weeks, one day, and some Seaven hours over; as on the Contrary, no Day for the like space of time, when the Sun is farthest distant in the other Tropick. Thus the Air would be very sharp and bitter, were it not Tem∣perated by the warm Vapours of the Sun, by which means in Juitland, Zealand, and the Adjoyning Islands, it is not so Cold as in places which lie much more South. Now tho the Land be Naturally Sterile, and affording little besides Woods and
Mountains, yet the Care and Industry of the Inhabitants have made it very Fruit∣ful. Denmark abounds in Rich Pastures, which Feed such vast Numbers of Cattle, that it has been some times known, that in one Year a Hundred-Thousand Cows and Oxen, have been hence Exported in∣to Germany and the Netherlands; which brings a Vast Income to the Kingdom, nor do they want excellent Breeds of Horses, that part of it called Oldenburg especially, Furnishing the best and finest Coach-Horses of all Europe. The Sea Coasts of Juitland, Zealand, and other parts of the Danish Territories, are plied with such Vast Shoals of Herrings, Plaise, Whitings, Cod, and other Fish, that they are almost capable of Hindring the Passage of Boats and Ships. Nor are their Forrests less stocked with Venison, there being no less every Hun∣ting Season than Fifteen Hundred Bucks brought into the Kings Pallaces, besides Vast numbers of Wilde Boars, Hares, and such like sort of Gaim. Notwithstanding, the mean Opinion which the Romans had, and the Ill Charact∣er they have given us of all the Northern Nations, yet they found themselves con∣strained
to Buckle under their Vigourous Attacks, and abandon their City and Country as a Prey to the Pillage and Mercy of the Triumphing Cambrians, nor are the other Northern Nations, insensible of the Mettle and keenness of the Dan∣ish Swords; the Danes having Conquered Ireland no less than Eight several times, Beaten, the English Ten times and who for a long while were Subject to the Kings of Den∣mark; Scotland for some time Tributary to this Crown; Saxony has paid Homage to several of the Danish Kings, and Sweeden frequently own'd e'm for their Soveraigns, nor is the Kingdom of Norway a small proof of the Danish Courage, neither have their Women been Barren of Brave per∣formances, their Exploits being equally Glorious with those of the greatest Heroes of other Nations. But Valour and War∣like Conduct are not the only qualities praise worthy in the Danes, they are no less to be Commended for their. Hospita∣lity and Extraordinary Complaisance to all Strangers; and tho their Entertainments do sometimes degenerate into Luxury and excess, yet without doubt the Crime is much more Pardonable in them than those who live under a more happy Climate. The Danes indeed are Haughty and Super∣stitiously
Jealous of their Honor, revenging the least outrage and contempt, and resent∣ing to a High Degree all things which give the least apprehension of an Affront, and as they are Rigorous Prosecutors of Insults done to themselves, so are they no less severe Punishers of Criminals of State, especially Thieves and Pirates. And as they are Peremptory in their Executing of Justice upon Offenders, so are they most Religious in doing and Distributing it where due, and Inviolable observers of their Words and Contracts. The Bulck and Stature of the Bodies of the Danes, does in somewise suit with the Grandure of their minds, and tho the Luxu∣ry of the Age has so far prevailed in Den∣mark as to quash the growth of their Mo∣dern Danes in respect of their Ancestors, yet they be still more Large, Strong, Vi∣gorous, and long Liv'd than most or any of their Neighbours. They are generally fair Complexion'd, their Hair something in∣clined to Yellow. Their common Food is on Corn, Fish, and all manner of Tame and Wild Beasts that are Mans Meat, which they have in great abundance. And amongst their many kind of Fowl, they have greater store of Wood-Cocks than any other Coun∣trey
whatsoever. The Old Liquor of Den∣mark was Oel, (Ale, or Beer,) made of Malt and Water, and is still their com∣mon and most general Drink. And tho Wine has now obtain'd much among them, yet perhaps their excess therein has Cur∣tailed much of their pristine Vigour, and that had they kept constant and solely to their Oel, it might have spirited them to as great Actions as those of their Pre∣decessors. As for the Danish Language, it is only a distinct Dialogue of the Teutonick, the High-Dutch, Sweedish, Norwegion, Flan∣drian, and English being no more, and all Derived from one Mother Tongue. As for the Government of Denmark, without dwelling upon the Fabulous stories of King Dan, it is Evidently to be made out, that it was a Monarchy in the Consultship of Catulus and Marius, near a hundred years before Christ, after which we have an account of one Gothrick King of the Danes in the time of the Emperour Charles Magne, from whom the present King of Denmark is Descended in a Lineal Succession, though some Authors do affirm that the Ancient Line failed in the Death of King Christopher the 3d. The Crown of Denmark it self was
Elective untill the year 1660. Neverthe∣less the Senatours generally chose the El∣dest Son of their Soveraign, who from that time forth was Stiled the Prince, and the other of the Kings Sons, the Dukes and Heirs of Norway. Now their Electi∣on in former times was performed after a very Solemn manner, for as many of the Nobles as were Senatours, and had Power of Voting and giving their suffrages, hav∣ing pitcht upon some Commodious place in the Fields, where having placed them∣selves in a Circle, upon so many great Stones they past their Votes, and having Seated their new Elected Soveraign in the middle, upon a Stone Higher than the Rest, they Saluted Him King. There being to this Day in Zealand such a company of Stones which bear the Name of King-Seat. But after the Crown of Denmark had been thus Elective for above Two Hundred years in the present Oldenburg Family, the chief Power of Election, as I said being, in the Nobility, those Nobles took this means and occasion to Capitulate advantages to themselves, as Previous and Preliminary Conditions to the Election, which every succeeding King was forced to comply with, to the Curtailing, Dispoiling, and Weakning of the Crown, and to the pre∣judice
and disadvantage of the other Or∣ders of the Kingdom, insomuch that none but a Noble Man could Buy, Purchase, or possess in his own Right any Seigniory or Mannour. A Cittizen or Burgher was not capable of purchasing more than a House, and perhaps a Guarden and an Or∣chard, or some such slender business. The Lands and Revenues of the Crown were let our to Noble Men, it may be not to the Third, often not to the Fourth part of what they were really worth, and yet the King could not raise the Old Rents, tho the Nobles in the mean while kept the under-tennents Chewing upon a rack Rent. The Pesants in the Danish Island were Villains Reguardant to the Mannors of Noble Men. All publick Offices and ad∣vancements were Monopolized by the Nobility. And meer merit without the Circumstances of Nobility of Extraction and Grandure of State, was excluded all Countenance, Protection and Preferment. Thus the Crown of Denmark which shown with so much Lustre, Renown and Glory in former Ages, was Dwindled almost in∣to an Aristocrasie, and hardly the shaddow of what it had been some Centuries before. But upon the Occasion of a Warr between Carolus Gustavus King of Sweeden, and
Frederick the 3d. King of Denmark in the Year 1660. Great Priviledges were pro∣posed and conferred upon the Burgers of Copenhagen, the better to Encourage them to stand the more Valiantly in Defence of their King and Countrey, least the Pros∣pect of mending their Circumstances un∣der a new Master, should prevail with them to abandon their Old. Now the Privi∣ledges Established in that juncture were an equal admission to Offices and Honours, according to the Deserts and Capacities of them and their Children, a Power of Pur∣chasing Lands and Lordships with the same Rights as the Nobles. Copenhagen to be one of the Estates of the Kingdom, and to have a Suffrage in all publick Councels and Resolves, and the Crown turn'd from Elective to Hereditary, and so freed from the Guardianship of the Nobility. Thus that juncture, how Menacing soever it seemed to the whole Realm of Denmark, yet proved of such advantage as to rein-state the King in all that Power that was necessary for the Defending of His Do∣minions against the Invasions and Insults of Forreigners, and the Oppressions and Usurpations of one fellow Subject upon an other. Thus the Complexion of that Government is much more Vigorous, and
there is a better Circulation of the Bles∣sings to be Enjoyed under a happy Sway, since this Reformation, than had been for some Ages before under several Reigns together. The account of the Kings of Denmark before the Planting of Christianity in that Country, will be found a difficult matter to be Stated, their Chronicles before that time being for the most part feign'd and fabulous, as well as that of other Nations. But according to the most careful, Judi∣cious and Modestest Relations of that matter, we shall set down the following Catalogue. 1. Harald being forced to Fly his Kingdom by the Accomplices of his Bro∣ther Reinferd, had recourse to the Empe∣rour Ludowick for Succour, who Furnished him with Forces for the Reinstating him in his Kingdom, but upon Condition he would abandon his Heathenisme, and be Converted to Christianity. Accordingly he was Baptized in the year 826, and was forthwith set again upon his Throne. But not long after he turn'd Idolater a∣gain, adn so remained till he was pre∣vailed with to Renounce it by St. Angchar. 2. Eric Succeeded his Brother Harald, and though he had been Baptized with
him at the Emperours Court, yet he per∣secuted the Christians with the same Cru∣elty as his Brother had done in the time of his Relapse. During his Reign, name∣ly, about the year 853. the Danes are said to have first Invaded France, under the Conduct of their General Rollo, though others would have Gotfrid to have made the first Eruption into that Kingdom, and that Rollo did not enter France till the year 876. and was not Established peace∣ably in Normandy, till 889. or 890. 3. Eric Barn, or the Child being the only Male left alive of the Royal Family after the Bloody Wars between Eric and Guthorn King of Norway. But he had not been long upon the Throne, before he Re∣newed the Persecution upon the Christians with more Cruelty then his Prodecessors had done, destroying more Churches, Bi∣shops, and Religious Houses, then all the other Danish Kings put together; He Pro∣secuted his Wars in Germany with great Gallantry and Conduct, Slaying with his own Hands Bruno Duke of Saxony, and Twelve Counts. He Departed this Life in the year 902. 4. Canutus Lodneknut or the Hairy Suc∣ceeded his Father Eric. In his time every Third Man in Denmark went to seek his
Fortune, and those who went away thus upon these Expeditions over-run all Prusia, Courland, Semgal, and other Countries, where they Established themselves, and where their Posterity remain unto this day, He Dyed a Pagan in the year 912. And was Succeeded by 5. Frotho his Son, though some say Sueno his Brother Reigned Nine years. He was twenty years King of England and Denmark, being Converted to Christianity in England, and Dyed a zealous Christian, his next Successors was, 6. Gormo, Gormund, or Guthram (Sur∣naned Hartesnute, and Engelander, because Born in England: He with his Attendants was Baptized at Aale in Somersetshire, our Learned and Pious King Alfred being his Godfather, and gave him the Name of Athelstanes, and the Kingdom of the East-Angles. 7. Harald Surnamed Blaat and Succeed∣ed his Father Gormo. In his days did the Danes make that Famous Trench between Gottorp and Sleswick called Dannewerk. 8. Sueno or Suenotho, Surnamed Tuis∣keg (that is Fork'd Beard,) Succeeded Harald. At his first coming to the Crown he was a Pagan, and Exercised great Cru∣elty upon the Christians, but was after∣wards
Converted to Christianity, and E∣rected three Bishopricks at Sleswick, Ri∣pen, and Arhusen. He is by some said to have Dyed in the year 1012. and was Buryed at York, Others in 1014. and In∣tombed in Denmark. 9. Canutus the Great, (Son to Sueno) He was at once King of England, Denmark, Sweeden, Norway, Slavonia, and Sambland, some say too, King or Duke of Normandy. He was Buryed at Winchester in the year 1036. after he had been Seaven and twen∣ty years King of Denmark, twenty four of England, and Seaven of Norway, and was Suoceeded in the Crown of Denmark by his Son. 10. Hardi-Cnute, who within four years obtained the Kingdom of England upon the Death of his Brother Harald. He Dyed in England in the year 1041. and was Buryed by his Father in the Cathedral of Winchester. 11. Magnus, King of Norway, possessed himself of the Crown of Denmark by main force upon the Death of Hardi-Cnute, pre∣tending a Contract that Entituled him to it, but had it not long in possession. He Dyed in the year 1048. and left the Crown to 12. Sueno Esthret, Son of one Ʋlf an
English Earl. He Departed this Life in the year 1074. and left behind him five Sons, who all of them Enjoyed Succes∣sively their Fathers Crown. 13. Harald Sueno's Eldest Son, Swayed the Scepter no longer then two years, be∣ing an easie efferninate, timerous Prince. So that the English laid hold of the Juncture, shook off the Danish Yoak without any great trouble. 14. St. Canutus, the Second Son of King Swain in the year 1088. was Inhumanly Murdered by his own Subject at St. Albans Church in Odensee (a City in the Isle of Funen) which he had made his Sanctua∣ry. Now his Brother Olaf longing for the Crown, Fomented a Rebellion against Canutus, and effected his designs, by the means of the Kings commanding his Sub∣jects to pay Tyths, according to the Cu∣stom of other Nations. And this Foment∣ed the People into such a Rage by Olafs practises, that nothing could appease but their Soveraigns Martyrdome. 15. Olaf the Third Son of Swain upon the Assassination of St. Canutus, was Unani∣mously Declared King by his Partizans. But he and the whole Kingdom were not long before they received their just Pu∣nishment for that Execrable Crime of
Murdering their Prince, for Heaven was pleas'd to send so great a Famine over all Denmark, that the Kings own Family wanted Bread. Olaf well knowing his Crimes had brought that Judgment upon the Realm, offered up his Prayers to God that he would be pleased to divert the Stream of his Vengeance from off the Peo∣ple, upon his Head that had offended; Whereupon the very same Night he Dyed Hungry and Wretched in the year 1096, and the Famine forthwith abated. 16. Eric Swains Fourth Son, Surnamed the Good, for his Religious Zeal and Piety, Dyed in his Pilgrimage towards Jerusalem, and was Buried in the Isle of Cyprus, in the year 1106. during his Reign Lunden in Schonen was made an Arch-Bishops See, all the Danish Bishops being before that time under the Jurisdiction of the Arch-Bishop of Brement. 17. Nicholas Suenos's youngest Son Suc∣ceeded his Brother, but was Slain in the year 1135. by the Jutes in Revenge of the Death of Chute Duke of Flanders, whom he had caused to be Assassinated in the Church. 18. Eric Emund a good Religious Prince, Succeeded his Uncle Nicarlus; & in the year 1130. was in his own Pallace Inhumanly
Assassinated by one Plagsorte a Nobleman of Juitland. 19. Eric Lamb Succeeded his Unckle Eric Emund. But after a while laid down his Crown, and retired into a Monastry at Odensce in Funen, where he departed this Life, in the year 1147. 20. Swain Gratenhede, Eric Emunds Son got the Crown upon the Death of his Kinsman Eric. Lamb. Three Kings of Denmark were at the same time in this Princes days. One part of the People be∣ing for Cnute, King Nicholas's Grand-Child, another for Waldemar, Son to Cnute Duke of Flanders. After some Ran∣counters and Combates wherein both Swain and Cnute were Killed, the whole Realm was Swayed by 21. Waldemar Surnamed the Great, who was Soveraign of all the Countries on the North of the Elb, and Departed this Life in the year 1182. Leaving the Crown to his Son. 22. Cnutes who shewed great Conduct and Gallantry in his Wars with the Ger∣man Emperour, who demanded Homage of the Kings of Denmark. He Dyed at Ringsted in the year 1202. 23. Waldemar the Second, Succeeded his Brother. He new Modelled the Danish
Government, Subdued Norway, overcame and put to Flight the Emperour Otto, who meant to render himself Master of Holstein; and having Sway'd the Scepter Victori∣ously for Thirty Nine Years, he Dyed Anno Dom. 1241. and was Succeeded by 24. Eric Plog-penning his Son, who was taken at Sleswick and Slain by his Brother 25. Abel, who having Reigned two years after a Wicked manner, was then Assassinated by Rebels in the year 1252. and was Succeeded by his Brother 26. Christophers, who having Lived in a continual War with his own Rebellious Subjects, is said to have been Poysoned in the year 1259. by Arnefast Bishop of Arhusen, as the Emperour Henry the Se∣venth was afterwards by Bernardine the Monk with the Eucharist. 27. Eric Glipping, (the Son of King Christopher) being possessed of his Fathers Scepter, Lived one of the most Leudest and Debauchest Lives Imaginable, com∣mitting all manner of Sacriledges, Mur∣ders, Oppressions, and Whoredoms, till he was Assassinated with Fifty six (some say Seventy,) Wounds, as he was Sleeping one Night in a Barn at Findetorp; a small Vi∣lage in the Bishoprick of Wiberg, by se∣ven
Ruffians hired to Kill him, by Andrew Soiget Marshal of Denmark, whose Wife he had Ravished, and some others of the Nobility in the year 1286. and was Suc∣ceeded by 28. Eric Menved, Glippings Son, who was as good and Pious a Prince, as his Father was Impious and Wicked, being preserved by Providence, from the Death and Murder which was Plotted by the Conspiraters against his Fathers Life. He Dyed peaceably as he had Lived, in the year 1319. was Buryed at Ringstad, and Succeeded by his Brother 29. Christopher the Second, much un∣like his Predecessor, being a Cruel, Perfi∣dious, Unfortunate, and Sloathful Prince, a Hater of all, and Hated by all. Having lingred out a Reign of Thirteen years, in 1333, he Dyed at Niccoping in the Isle of Falster, being forsaken of all, neglected and unpittyed. After this Princes Death, there was an Inter-regnum of fifteen years, but the Danes growing Sensible of the con∣fusions they lay under for want of a Head, resolved to Settle 30. Waldemar the Third King, King Chri∣stophers Son upon the Throne of his Father. He pull'd down the Usurpers, and Recollect∣ed the scatter'd Members of the Realm,
without much Molestation. He is said to have been a Prince endued with all those Great Qualities that can adorn a Throne. When Pope Gregory the 11th threatned to Excommunicate him for his saucy Behaviour, in the Stile of the See of Rome, he returned this Answer. Waldemar King of Denmark, &c. To the Bishop of Rome, Sendeth Greeting. We hold our Life from God, our Kingdom from our Subjects, our Riches from our Parents, and our Faith from thy Predecessor, which if thou wilt not Grant us any longer, We do by these Presents Resigne, Farewell. He Dyed in the year 1378. and was Buryed by his Father at Sora, and Suc∣ceeded by his Daughter 31. Margaret, who was Crowned Queen of Denmark upon the Death of her Father, and Sway'd the Scepter with more Pru∣dence and Conduct than any of her Pre∣decessors, she taking in one Campaign Albert King of Sweeden, Rodulph Arch-Bishop of Scharen, the Duke of Mecklen∣burg, and the Earl of Holstein and Reppin Prisoners. she Dyed a great Friend to Re∣ligion and Patroness to the Clergy, and was Buryed at Roschild in the year 1412. Her Father was used to say, That Nature
intended her for a Man, but Spoiled her in the making. She left the Crown to 32. Eric, the Son of Ʋratislaw the Se∣venth Duke of Pomeren, her Great Nephew who having Reigned many years like a cruel Tyrant, was at length constrained to abandon his Throne, and Fly from the Fury of his Incens'd Nobility into Gothland, taking with him a vast Treasure, and one Cicilia his Miss, who by the Influence she had over him, brought him to that wretched condition. 33. Christopher, Duke of Bavaria and Count Palatine of the Rhine, another of King Waldemars great Grand Children, succeeding Eric in the Kingdoms of Den∣mark, Norway and Sweeden, His sway was short, but Glorious and successful, more especially prosperous in his Warrs against the Rebells in Juitland, and the Hans-Towns. He died without Issue at Helsing∣burg in the year 1447. 34. Christian 1. Theodoric Count of Ol∣denburgs Son, was chosen King of Denmark upon the Death of King Christopher; he had all the Royal Quallities that can Illu∣strate a Throne; He reduced the Sweeds to their Allegiance, who had Revolted from the Crown of Denmark in the begin∣ing of His Reign, added Holstein to His
Dominions, made Himself Duke of Dith∣mars and Stormar, and having swayed the Scepter Three and Thirty years; He Died in Peace in the year 1481. and was Bu∣ried a in Chappel of his own Building at Roschild, leaving his Scepture to 35. John his Son, who was a Generous, Valiant and Pious Prince, and very pros∣perous in almost all His undertakings. He Died of the Plague at Olburg, in the year 1513. 36. Christian the 2d. his Son succeed∣ed Him, who was the greatest Tyrant, not only that ever swayed the Scepter of Den∣mark, but perhaps that ever any other Na∣tion did produce. He is said (to have been Born with one Hand grasp'd, which when the Midwife open'd, she▪ found full of Blood. Thus, when by the Barbarity and Cruelty of his Reign, He had been compelled to abandon the possession of Three Kingdoms, and had underwent the Miseries of Banishment and Imprisonment for six and Thirty years, He Died wretch∣edly in the Castle of Kallenburg in Zea∣land in the year 1559. and was succeeded by his Uncle 37. Federic the 1. King John's Brother, Immediately after his Coronation, He be∣gan to Introduce the Augsburg Confession
into all the Churches of Denmark, He sway∣ed the Septer almost Ten years in Peace and quietness, and Died at Sleswig in the year 1533. 38. Christian the Third Fredericks Son, Succeeded his Father. He compleated the Reformation which his Father had be∣gun in the Church, is celebrated for all the Christian and Royal Vertues that a Prince can stand possessed off; His Reign having been exceeding Happy, both to himself and his Subjects, he left the Scep∣ter to his Son. 39. Frederick the II. who was a Reli∣gious Observer of the Steps of his Father, and after a prosperous Reign of Nine and Twenty Years, Died in his Pallace at Anderscow in the year 1587. and had for his Successor 40. Christian the IV. who before his Fathers Burial was chosen, and soon after Crowned King of Denmark; During his Reign Ferdinand the II. Emperour of Ger∣many, over-run the greatest part of the Cimbrian Chersonese, and had almost Sub∣dued the whole Kingdom of Denmark; but King Christian using his last efforts, constrained the Imperalists to retire, and made an Honourable Peace, he Died in the year 1648. and was Succeeded by
41. Frederick the Third his Son; About the middle of this Princes Reign, his Crown had like to have been taken of his Head by the Victorious Charles Gustave King of Sweeden, who had reduced him to that Extremity, as that he had nothing more left then his Town of Copenhaguen, but the Emperonr, King of Poland, and o∣ther Nothern Princes, confederating toge∣ther, the King of Sweeden was compelled to the Treaty at Roschild, which neverthe∣less stripped Denmark of many of it's best holds and Provinces; Yet the Crown re∣ceived this advantage as to be made He∣riditary in the present Family, and the People, instead of many Tyrants which they had in the Nobles no more one Master. He Dyed of a Feaver the twenty fifth day of February 1669. and that Night the Nobility Swore Allegiance to the New King. 42. Chrstian Fifth now Reigning Anactive and Valiant Prince, was Born on the 18th of April 1646. Elected King of Denmark, and acknowledged Heir of that Crown on the 12 of June 1650, Married on the 10 of May 1667 Charlotta, Landgrave of Hesse Castle, the Daughter of the Landgrave William, and of Hedwige, Sophina Electoral Princess of Brandenburg, the Ceremony of
their Marriage was performed at Niccoping in the Isle of Falster, in the Month of July in the same year, with all the Splendour and magnificence Imaginable; by this Prin∣cess, the King has a numerous Issue. But before I proceed to give an Account of the Royal Family, it is convenient I first set down, some Circumstances relating to the present King of Denmarks Person, his Ti∣tle, Arms, Dominions, Patrimony, Reve∣nue, and Strength, his Power, Preroga∣tives, Supremacy, Soveraignty, and Re∣spect. And then I shall proceed to the giv∣ing an Account of the Nobility and Orders of the Knight-hood of that Kingdome, with several other particulars, ending with a Geographical, or rather Topographical, Descriptions of the several Provinces and Places belonging to that Crown. And now first, as to his Person, having alrea∣dy mentioned his Birth, Marriage, and Coronation; Than that he is possessed of all the advantages which Nature or Edu∣cation could afford, which have been so well Seconded by Fortune in several Expeditions into Schonen and Germany, and the engagements of his Fleets, that he is become the Darling of his People, and the Terror and Admiration of his Ene∣mies.
The King of Denmarks Title now is King of Denmark, Norway, of the Goths and Vandales; Duke of Sleswick, Holstein, Stormar, and Ditmarsh; Count of Olden∣burgh and Delmenhorst. It was much more pompous formerly, when he Swel∣led out the Catalogue of his Dominions, with England, Sweeden, and other Provin∣ces. The Ancient Cimbrians are said to have had their Shields and Helmets Painted with the Shapes of several sorts of Wild Beasts, and sometimes used to set a Bra∣zen-Bull upon the top of their Standard, as a token of Strength and Valour. But at this time the King of Denmark's Coat is a Complication of Fourteen several Coats, thus ordered. In a Field Gules, He bears a Cross Ar∣gent (the Arms of the House of Oldenburgh) which quarters the upper part of the Coat into four Cantons; The First of these gives (the Arms of Denmark,) Or, Six half Hearts Gules, three Lyons Passant, Guar∣dant Azure, with Crowns of the First. This Coat is parted with (the Arms of Norway) Gules, a Lyon Crowned Or, holding in his paws an Hatchet Argent, with an haft of the Second. The Second Canton carries Gules, a Leopard in Chief
Or, the Field Sown with nine Hearts of the Second, which are the Arms of Gothland; these are parted with Gules, a Dragon Crowned Or, the Ancient Coat of the Vandals or Slavonians; the Third Canton gives Azure, Three Crowns Or, to De∣note the Union of the Three Kingdoms of Denmark, Norway, and Sweeden. This Coat is parted with Gules, a Paschal-Lamb Argent, holding a Cross Or, at which hangs a Streamer of the Second, charged with a small Cross of the First. The first Original of this Coat, is said to have been this, In the Year 1218. when King Waldemar the Second Engaged in a Sharp and Bloody War with the Lifelan∣ders, the Danish Troops having lost their Standard, began to be disheartned to that Degree, that they gave Ground, and were ready to fling down their Arms, out of dispair, and yield the Victory to the Hea∣thens. When a new Standard of a sud∣dain fell from Heaven, Displaying a White Cross in a Bloody-Flag; At the sight whereof the Danes forthwith Ral∣lyed their Forces that were Dispersed, with that Vigour and Courage, as ren∣dered them in a short time Masters of the Field. The Kings of Denmark kept the Holy Flag in Remembrance of so Mira∣culous
a Deliverance, with all the care and Veneration imaginable; Believing their Future Success did in a high Degree depend upon the Safety of so Sacred a Banner. But though the Danish Historians do Assert this to be the source of this part of the Arms of their Kings, yet it is much more reasonable to believe that this Banner was bestowed by the Pope upon their King, when he undertook that ex∣pedition into Lifeland, since the main De∣sign of that War was the Conversion of those Infidels. But to proceed, the Fourth Canton, bears Or, two Lyons Passant A∣zure, which are the Arms of Sleswic, these are parted with Gules, an headless Fish, stuck on a Stake, and Crown'd Argent: which is the Coat of Iseland. In the Center of these four Cantons, and the middle of the great Cross hangs a Scutcheon bearing Azure, a Horse-Man in compleat Armour Argent, holding a Sword in his Right-Hand of the same, with the Hilt Or, his Horse co∣vered with a Cloath of the Second; which are the Arms of Dithmarse: The lower part of the Arms contains four Coats more; Whereof the First is Gules, three Pinks, (some call them Nails of our Saviours Passion) and three Leaves of Nettles, which are intermixed, and meet in Angles
at the Heart of the Coat; which is charg∣ed with a small Scutcheon Argent, for Hol∣stein. The Second (which is the Coat of Stormaria) is Axure, a Swan Argent, with a Coronet round her Neck Or. The Third (belonging to the County of Del∣menhorst) is Or, two Bars Gules. The Fourth and last Coat (which belongs to Jutland) is Azure, a Cross Patty, at the bottom of it Achet Or, below the Arms is usually hung in a Chain Or, the Scutche∣on of the Order of the Elephant. The Helmet Or, Embroidered and Da∣masked, the sights covered and wanting Bars; above with a Crown Or, encircled with four Circles, and Adorned with pre∣cious Stones: On the top of this a Globe Or, and above all a Cross Patty Argent. The Crest is a Leopard, Passant over the Crown Or, eight Streamers Azure, a plain Cross Argent; four Spears bending to the Dexter side, and as many to the Sinister Or. Supported by two Savages, Crowned and girt with Ivy Proper, Armed with two pointed Clubs. The Mantle Or, Sown, with Hearts Gules and Lions Azure, doubled Er∣mine. The Ancient Dominions of the King of
Denmark, were of a much Vaster extent than they are at this day, that Crown possessing in the time of Canutus the Great, England, Denmark, Sweeden, Norway, Slavonia, Sambland, and Normandy, with several Islands: Whereas now his swayreach∣es only over Juitland, Holstein Zealand, Nor∣way, Iseland, Freezland, Greenland, the Feroe and some other Islands of small Note, with the Counties of Oldenburg, Stormaria, and Dithmarsh, and alterna∣tively Slezwick, as shall be shown more at large hereafter, besides some Fortresses and Colonies, in the East and West-Indies, and upon the Coast of Africa. The Kings of Denmark have certain Lands Annexed to the Crown, which are inalienable, and in case upon the Neces∣sities of some Junctures, any of them be alienated for the Publick Weale, yet the same Prince, or any of his successours may reunite them again let the consideration be what it will of their Alienation. But it is no easie matter to State the ac∣count of the yearly Revenue of the King of Denmark, which arises from the Rents of Crown Lands, Customes, and Custome Money, Tiths, and other Contingencies some guesse may be made of it from the Customes which are paid by the Mer∣chant-Ships
which pass the Sound every day. Every Ship that passes by Elseneur must pay a Rose-Noble or Four Rix-Dollars for every Mast. And it has been observed, that commonly Two hundred Ships, often Four hundred, nay Six hundred pass in one day. Now allowing only 200 to pass dai∣ly, and each pay two Rose Nobles or eight Rix-Dollars for two Masts, the Sum will Amount to about Four hundred Pounds of our Money, for every day in the year round, and for the whole year to about 134400 Pounds. And the Tax which is paid for such Cattel as are Exported, does not fall much short of this; the Customers Exacting a Rix-Dollar for every Beast that goes out of their Kings Dominions. The chief strength of the King of Den∣mark, consists in the Number and goodness of his Ships and Seamen. And indeed the Danish Mariners may vye with the best of Europe, which formerly Rendred them not only particularly succesful by Sea, but also in their Engagements with the Sweeds in the last Wars. The Naval Forces of the Crown of Denmark, were even for∣merly so considerable; as that Christian the Second fitted out a hundred good Men of War for the Succour of Henry the Second, the French King against the English:
Nevertheless this present King has a much larger Fleet of his own alwaies ready for Action. And here I cannot forbear taking Notice of the Bravery and Vigour of our Nation, that was able to carry on a War with Glory, and Fight with success three such Powers confederated together as his most Christian Majesty, the King of Den∣mark, and the States General of the Uni∣ted Provinces, nay in so Mortifying a Conjuncture, as when the Burning of Lon∣don and the Desolation of the Plague would have enervated any other than English Courages, disconcerted their measures, and constrain'd 'em to have complyed with dishonourable Terms. But to return; I will here insert a List of such Men of War of the King of Denmark, as I could get the List off.   Guns. Men. Sophia Amalia. 106. 650. Prince Christian. 80. 600. Droning Charlotte. 60. 500. Prince Charlotte. 60. 500. Prince George. 80. 550. Fur. Prince. 80. 500. Princess Amalies. 60. 500. Three Crowns. 80. 500. Northern Lion. 60. 400.
Three Foldigherds. 60. 450. Swan. 60. 450. Three Lions. 70. 400. Victory. 54. 350. Lindworm. 48. 300. Nettle Leave. 54. 300. Oldenburg. 48. 250. Spen. 50. 300. Black Horseman. 50. 300. Guldenlieu. 54. 300. Hope. 48. 250. Delmenhorst. 44. 250. Copenhagen. 40. 250. Black Bear. 36. 200. Feroe. 40. 200. Christianus Quartus. 54. 300. Frederick. 3 d. 54. 300. Venus. 36. 200. Lobster. 36. 200. Goldenfish. 20. 100. The Virgin. 28. 100. Wildman. 18. 20. Flyin Hart. 20. 100. Lubeck.     The Hunter. 20. 100. With many others, whereof I cannot at present call to mind the Names. The Danish Men of War now are Built much fitter for Service than they were formerly, being neither so Large, so Bulky, nor so
unweildy as they were in the foregoing Ages, but readier either to Attack, Fly, or Pursue. No Prince in Christendom is bet∣ter Furnished with all things necessary for the fitting out a Fleet, Norway and his other Territories; affording him all the Equipage requisite for that purpose. He is also pretty well stored with Sea-men, and indeed all his Dominions being Islands, or Maritime Provinces, the Inhabitants are almost Naturally Mariners. Never∣theless this Monarch is sometimes forced to have recourse to strangers for Recruits of Men; the Northern Countreys not a∣bounding so in People as they did in for∣mer times, when they Spawn'd and pour∣ed forth such shoales as over ran not only most parts of Europe, but continued their Incursions into Asia; But whether this be imputed to the Abolishing of Poligamy, which the Introducing Christianity did re∣form, or that the prevailing of Luxury has debilitated their pristine Vigour, and ren∣dred them the less fit for generation, cer∣tain it is, that no parts of Europe are now so thin of Inhabitants, as these Northern Regions, and that the King of Denmark has not People enough to Man out so many Ships He would be otherwise ca∣pable to fit out: For without Exhausting
or Impoverishing his Coffers, He is able to Build Twelve Men of War every year. And considering the Scarcity of Men, His Land Forces are much more considerable and better Martialized than they have been under some of His latest Predeces∣sors. But before I proceed to particula∣rize them, it will be convenient to set down the Names of the Principal Officers of the Fleet. Henery Bielek, Lord High Admiral. Niels Juel, General Admiral. Monsieur Ʋlgerwindt, Vice Admiral. Monsieur Rodenstein Rere-Admiral. Mr. Seastidt, also Rere-Admiral, and Commissioner General of the Holm. The standing Army of the King of Den∣mark, consists of the Guards du Corps of the Kings, Queens, and Queen Mother, and of a Company of reformed Officers, all Gentlemen, who in Buff-Coats, with Embroidered Sleeves, attend upon the King at Court, and upon all great Solemnities with gilt Partizans, Feathers in their Hats, resembling much the Band of our Gen∣tlemen Pensioners. Of the following Regi∣ments, with the Officers and Major-Ge∣nerals, having their Quarters as is here set down.
Zealand. Schack Governour of Copenhagen, Col∣lonel of a Regiment of Foot. Marsaack of Horse. Van Osten Collonel of a Regiment of Foot. Funen. Van Asken Infantry. Juitland. Leventzo Cavalry. Laland. Merherin. Cavalry. Norway. Duncam Cavalry. Degenfelt Infantry. Leyenhielm. Infantry. Baron Wallis, Collonel of the Kings Regiment. Schonburg of the Queens. Meldrum Prince Fredericks. Fox Prince Christians. Major Genereral Schack. Prince Georges. General Weddell. Jutland. Petto Zealand. Rissel Funen. Frizen. Holstein. With some others, whereof we have not the Names, there being daily Changes made in reforming some, and raising others, making up in all a Body of about 30000 Men.
The Kingdom of Denmark, since the Reformation made in that State, in the year 1660 hath a Perogative of as large extent as any Monarch in Christendom, having Power without consulting the States, or his Senate to Declare War, make Peace, send and receive Ambassadors, make Leagues and Treaties with any Foreign States, Issue out Commissions for the Raising of Men both by Sea and Land, dispose of all Castles, Fortresses, Ports, Havens, Ships of War, Ma∣gazines, Ammunition, and publick Moneys; appoint the Mettal, Weight, Purity and Value thereof, and by His Order can make any Foreign Coyn, to be the cur∣rant Money of Denmark. He can by his Letters Patent, Erect New Districts, Bishopricks, Ʋniversities, Cities, Burroughs, Colledges, Hospitals, Schools, Fairs, Markets, Courts of Justice, Forrests, Chases, Free-Warrens, He can Enfranchise an Alien, and render him a Denison, Enabling him to purchase Houses and Lands, and bear Offices. He can al∣so lay what Taxes he thinks fitting, upon ihs Subjects without the previous consent of the States or Senate, Rating it District Town or Person at his Pleasure. He can at his Will and Pleasure, Convene, Ad∣journ, Prorogue, Remove the States and
the Senate; Grant safe Conduct, Letters of Mart and Reprizal with all the other Perogatives of an Independent Prince, nay, of one whose Will is a Law. The King of Denmark has all such things as are proper To a Monarch, as Crowns, Scepters, Purple Robe, and Holy Ʋnction, and acknowledgeth no Superiour but God, nor holdeth his Kingdom in Vassa∣lage, nor receiveth his Investiture or In∣stalment from another. Thus at the con∣gress of Nimeguen, there being a dispute between the French and Danish Ambassa∣dors, about the Language they were to Treat in, the French Insisting to Love both Parties, use French, the Danes Re∣plyed, that if the French used the French, they would use Danish; Being well assu∣red that their Master yielded in nothing to the French King, either as to the ex∣tent of his Perogative or of his Dominions. And since the Introduction and Establish∣ment in Denmark of the Augsbourg Con∣fession, there lyes no Appeal from the King to the Pope, as there does in the Catholick Princes Dominions, but He is Supream Head and Governour, in all mat∣ters as well Ecclesiastical as Civil; so that none of his Subjects whatsoever are ex∣empt from his Jurisdiction and Justice.
Hardly any Prince in Europe is looked upon with more Veneration and Respect than this Monarch is by his Subjects, they paying him all those Respectuous Duties, Devoirs and Reverence that a Sovereign can Receive. But before I proceed any further, I shall give an account of the Royal Family as it Standeth at this day, as also of the Nobi∣lity and other Orders of the Kingdom. And having already said that the King Married Charlotra Amalia, the Daughter of William the Sixth Landgrave of Hesse Cassel, in the year 1669, He hath had by that Princess, the following Issue. Frederick the Heir apparent Born on the 21st. of October, 1671. Christianus Wilhelmus, Born on the 21st. of November 1672. Dyed on the 25 of January 1673. Christian Born on the 25th. of March, 1678. Sophia Hedwig Bom on the 28. of Au∣gust, 1677. Since that Princess a younger Daughter. Carolus, Born in the Year 1682. or the Queen Mother, Sophia Amalia. Prince George the present Kings Brother, was Born in the year 1653. a Prince of extraordinary Vertues and Qualifications, and all the Actions of whose Life, both in
Peace and War, have shown Wisdom, Valour, and Conduct, and more particu∣larly he gave extraordinary Testimonies of his Gallantry and Courage, in the Bat∣tel of Lunden, when that the King his Brother being taken Prisoner by the Sweeds, notwithstanding that the Enemies far Sur∣passed 'em in number, that his Men were disheartned and over-powered; Never∣theless he rush'd in amongst them, cut his way through all Opposition, and Slew those Persons with his own Hand, who had dared to lay hold on his Royal Bro∣ther; And thus delivered the King from his Enemies. Anna Sophia the King of Denmark's El∣dest Sister, was born on the first of Septem∣ber, in the year 1647. and was Married in September 1663. to John George the Third of the Name, Prince Electoral of Saxony, the Son of the Elector John George, and of Magdelena Sibyla Marchio∣ness of Brandenbourg. And their Marri∣age was consummated at Copenhagen, on the 16 of October, 1666. Frederica Amalia, Born 1648. was Mar∣ried at Gluckstadt on the 3d. of November 1667. to Christian Adolph, the Duke of Holstein Sunderbourg, the Son of the Duke John Christian, and of Dorothea Johanna Countess of Swarthenbourg.
Wilhelmina Ernestina, Born on the 20 of June 1650. and Married to the present Elector Palatine in the year 1671. Ʋlrica Eleonora Sabina the Third Daugh∣ter, Born in the year — and Married to the present King of Sweeden in 1680. of the Ceremonies and Solemnization of whose Marriage more hereafter. Frederick Guldenlieu, Vice Roy of Nor∣way the late Kings Natural Son. Having thus spoken of the Kings Chil∣dren and Brothers. I shall now proceed to set down the Princes of the Blood, and other Branches of the Royal Family, which form Sire Branches. All these Princes are Issued from Chri∣stian the 3d. King of Denmark, except the Branches of Oytin and of Golterp, which come from Adolph Duke of Heswick, that same Kings Brother. Sunderbourg. Christian Adilphe of Denmark, Heir of Norway. Duke of Heswick, of Hostein Sunderbourg, of Stormaria and Dithmarsh, was Born the 3d. of June 1641. of Duke John Christian, (who Died the 20th. of Au∣gust 1659.) Married at Geluckstadt the 3d. of November in the year 1667. Frederices Emilia Princess of Denmark, the 2d. Daugh∣ter
of King Frederick the 3d. and of So∣phia Amalia, Dutchess of Lunenburg his Wife. He has two Sisters. Dorothea Augusta Born on the 12th. of September 1636. and Christina Elizabetha Born on the 9th. of June, 1638. Married in the year 1656. with John Ernest, Duke of Sax-Weymar. Alexander Henry, the Uncle of Duke Chri∣stian Adolphus Born 1608. Ernest Gunther, Alexanders Brother, Born 1609. Married Augusta of Holstein Glucks∣bourg, the Daughter of Duke Philip, and of Sophia Hedwig of Sax-Sawenbourg with∣out Children. George Frederick, Born in the year, 1611. Augustus Philip likewise, Brother of Alexander, Born in the year 1612. Mar∣ried in 1645. Calrai Countess of Olden∣bourg, the Daughter of Count Anthony, who Died 1647. and in Second Nuptials, Sidonia her Sister, (who Died 1650) and in the Third Maria Sibylla, Countess of Nassaw; the Daughter of Count William Lewis: Of which Marriages, He has not hitherto had any Children. Philip Lewis, Duke of Holstein Sunder∣bourg, the Brother of those Princes, Colo∣nel of a Regiment of Foot against the Turk in the year 1662. was Born on the 27 of
October 1620. and had for his first Wife on the 15th of November 1643. Catharina Countess of Waldeck the Widow of Si∣mon Lewis Count de Lippe, the Daughter of Count Christian, who departed this Life 1649. and was a Second time Married in the year 1650. to Anna Margarita, Lan∣gravinne of Hess-Hombourg, and of Mar∣garita Elizabetha Countess of Leiningen from whom Issued two Sons and three Daughters. Sophia Catharina their Sister born in the year 1617. Married in the year 1635. to Anthony Gunther, Died with∣out Children. Norbourg. Frederick Duke of Holstein Norbourg, the Uncle of the Duke of Sunderbourg, was Born on the 26th of November 1581. of Duke John, and of his first Wife, Eli∣zabeth Dutchess of Brunswick: the first Wife he Married in the year 1627. was Juliana Dutchess of Saxe-Lawenbourg, the Daughter of Duke Francis; and of Mary Dutchess of Brunswick, his Second Wife, who Died 1630. and he again Married in 1632. Eleonora, Princess of Anhalt, the Daughter of Prince Rodolph Zerbst, and of Dorothy Hedwige Dutchess of Brunswick his first Wife. He died 1658. First Bed. John Bugislas, Duke of Holspein Nor∣bourg
Born 1629. on the 30th. of Septemb. Second Bed. Elizabeth Juliana, Born 1634. Married 1656. Anthony Ʋlrick Duke of Brunswick, the Son of Augustus Duke of Brunswick, Wolphembuttel, and of Dorothy Princess of Anhalt his Second Wife. Dorothea Hedwig, Born 1636. Doyene of Gandersheim. Christian Augustus, Born 1639. Ludorica Amalia, Born 1642. Rodolphus Frederick, Born 1645. Gluckbourg. Philip Duke of Holstein Gluckbourg, the Grand Uncle of Duke Christian Augustus, was Born 1584. and died 1663. being the Brother of Duke Frederick above mention∣ed, Born of the first Bed. Married in the year 1624. Sophia Hedwig, Dutches of Saxe-La∣wenbourg, the Daughter of Duke Frareis, and of Mary Dutchess of Brunswick his Se∣cond Wife, of which Marriage are Born. Christian Born in 1627. and dyed 1671. Mary-Elizabeth, Born in the year 1628. Married 1651. to George Albert Marquess of Brandenbourg, and dyed 1664. Adolphe, Born 1631. Augusta, Born 1633. Married in 1651. to Ernest Gunther Duke of Holstein Sunder∣bourg her Cousin, the Son of Duke Alex∣ander
and of the Dutchess Dorothey Coun∣tess of Schwartrenbourg. Christina Born 1634. Married 1650. Christian Duke of Saxony. Dorothy, Born 1636. Married for the first time in the year 1653. Christian Lew∣is Duke of Lunenbourg, and the Second on the 25th. of June 1668. Frederick Wil∣liam Marquess of Brandenbourg Elector. Hedwig, Born 1643. Eleonor Dutches of Holstein, Sister of Philip, Born 1590. Second Bed. Hedwig the Sister of Dorothy, Born 1643. Anna Sabina, the Dutchess of Holstein, Born in the year 1593. of the Second Bed of Duke John, of his Second Wise, Agnes-Hedwig, Princess of Anhalt, Married 1698. Julius Frederick, Duke of Wirtembourg the Son of Duke Frederick, Count of Mont∣beliard who left her a Widow. & died 1659. Arnsbeck. Joachim Ernest Duke of Holstein-Arns∣beck, Born in the year 1595. of John Duke of Sleswick and of Holstein Sunderbourg, and of his Second Wife Agnes Hedwig Princess of Anhalt, Born in the year 1595. Married in 1633. Dorothea Augusta Dutchess of Holstein leswick his Cousin,
the Daughter of Duke John Adolphus, and of the Princess Augusta of Denmark, He Dyed 1671. but had by that Princess John Adolphus, in 1634. General Major of the Imperial Cavalry against the Turks in 1664. Augustus, Born in 1639. Ernestina in 1636. Joachim Ernest, 1637. Bernard, 1639. Agnes Hedwig, 1640. Sophia Eleonor, 1644. Eleonor Sophia, the Sister of Joachim Ernest, Born 1603. of the Second Bed: Married in the year 1625. Christian the young Prince of Anhalt, the Son of Chri∣stian, Prince of Anhalt Barnbourg, whose Widow she is. Gottorp. Frederick Duke of Sleswick, of Holstein Gottorp, of Stormaria, of Dithmars, Cou∣sin German, of Duke Joachim Ernest, Born 1697. of Duke John Adolphus, and of Augusta Princess of Denmark, Married in the year 1630. Mary-Elizabeth, Dutch∣ess of Saxony, the Daughter of the Elector, John George, and of Magdalena Sibila of Brandenbourg Prussia of which Alliance are Born the following Children. In the year 1633. this Prince sent a signal Embassy into Muscovy & into Persia for the Establish∣ment of the Commerce by Land. He Alternates with the King of Denmark, in
the Admistration of Justice, in the Session at the Dyets of the Empire, and in all the Rights of the Regale. He Died the 10 of Aug. 1659. Sophia Augusta, Born 1630. Married, 1649. with John Prince of Anhalt Zerbst, the Son of Prince Rodolphus. Magdalena Sibila, Born 1631. Married in the year 1654. to Gustavus Adolphus, Duke of Mecklembourg, the Son of Duke John Albert. Mary Elizabeth, Born 1634. Married in the year 1650, to Lewis Landgrave of Hesse Darmstadt, the Son of the Landgrave George the Second. Hedwig Eleonor, Born 1636. on the 23 of October, Married in the year 1654. on the 24 of October, Carolus Gustavus King of Sweeden, the Son of John Casimir Count Palatine of the Rhine, and of Katharina Princess of Sweeden, Sister of King Gustavus Adolphus. Anna Dorothea, Born 1640. Augustus Fre∣derick, Born 1646. Augusta Maria, 1649. Ottingen or Oyten. John Augustus Duke of Holstein Ottin∣gen, Nephew of Duke Frederick Gottorp, Born 1647. on the third of August, the Son of John Duke of Holstein Ottingen, or Oyten, and of Juliana Felecita Dutchess of Wirtembourg.
Dorothea Augusta, Sister of Duke Fre∣derick Gottorp, Born 1602. Married in 1633. Joachim Ernest Duke of Holstein Arnsbourg, Her Cousin the Son of Duke John, and of his Second Wife Agnes Hed∣wig, Princess of Anhalt. Hedwig Sister of Dorothea, Born in 1603. Married in 1620. with Augustus Count Palatine of Sultzbach, the Son of Philip Lewis, Count Palatine, Duke of Newbourg, and Ann of Cleves, and of Juliers, Died in 1656. And I shall pass on to the Nobles, who never Claim, nor pretend to the Titles of Dukes, Earls, or Barons, but are such as have had a single Coat of Arms belong∣ing to their Family for many Ages. Den∣mark is said to have at this day, some Fa∣milies of that Nobility, of that antiquity as VVren and others, as to have been pre∣sent, at the Signing of a Treaty of Peace between Charles Magne and the Danish King Hemmines on the Eider. Out of this Body of the Nobility, are drawn the Senators of the Kingdom, or the Members of the Council of State, who are Elected to the Number of 28. All a No∣blemans Goods, moveable and immove∣able are at his Death divided amongst his Children, the Son having two Moities, and
a Daughter only one. The King cannot by the Laws of Denmark, purchase any part of a Noble-Mans Estate, neither can the Nobles buy any of the Crown Lands, some Officers of the Crown, Knights of the Order of the Ele∣phant; Vice-Roys and Governours of Pro∣vinces and Places, were formerly chosen out of the Body of the Nobility, and nominated by the Election of the Senators, bating the Knights of the Order: But at present, since the Reformation of that Kingdom, half of those Officers are drawn out of the Body of the Burgery, the King being willing to consider, and Reward that part of the State, which served with so much Courage and fidelity at the Siege of Copenhagen, when that Ca∣pital of the Kingdom, was almost the on∣ly place which sustained almost all Efforts of the Sweedish Army, which had taken in all the rest of the Kingdom. But here I will Insert a Catalogue of the Principal Families of the Nobility now in Denmark, in the following Alphabetical Order.
A Achsel. Appelgard. Alefeld. Andersem. B Bielke. Banner. Brache. Bilig. Below. Bilde. Brokenhusem. Biorn. Beck. Blick. Bassi. Bax. Baselich. Bille. Bilde. Bockowlt. Budde. Baggen. Bammelbourg. Brune. Blom. Brocktorp. Breiden D Dreslelberch. Daac. Dune. Duram. Dam. F Freze. Fassi. Falster. Faleke. G Gulderstern. Grubbe. Goce. Green. Gelschut. Galle. Gram. Gris. Goss. Gadendorp. Grahow. H Hardenberg. Holke. Hoken. Hiderstorper. Hiderstorper. Hube. Hesten. Hager. Holer. Haeken. Hoier. Hacken. Harberger. I Jul. Jensen. Juenan. Juensen. Johensen. K Korwitz. Krabbe. Kaas. Krusen. Kragge. Krumpen. Kramdick. Kerckberg. Karssenbrock. Kaelet.
Kutzen. L Lange. Lindeman. Lunge. Lutkem. Laxman. Lancken. Leven. Luck. Lindow. Lutken. M Munck. Matiessen. Marizer. Must. Matre. Meinstorf. Maeten. Magnussen. N Negil. Narbu. Norman. O Ofrin. Otten. P Pasberg. Podessen. Podebussen. Papenheimb. Pogwisch. Plessen. Pesen. Paisen. Petersen. Q Qualem. Quittow. R Rantzaw. Rosentkrantz. Rastorp. Ruthede. Reuter. Ruten. Rosenpart. Rosengard. Roanow. Reventlow. Ratlow. Ritzerow. S Schram. Schefeldt. Schelen. Seestede. Stuege. Swron. Stantbeke. Split. Solle. Swaben. Santbarch. Spar. Spegel. Sturen. Suinen. Staken. Stove. Siversersen. T Trolle. Tolten.
W Wlefeld. Walkendorp. Wipfert. Witfelt. Wogersen. Wenflterman. Wolde. Worm. Walstorp. Wensin. Wiltorp. Whrup. Vonsflet. Vartinnen. Wken. Ʋoien. Ʋlstandt. Ʋren. Tho till some of late Creation, the Danish Nobles had neither the Titles of Dutchies, Marquissates, Counties, nor Barrony, as other States; nor do they Quarter their Armes, yet tis Customary for many of them to be Dub∣bed Knights, upon any Signal piece of Ser∣vice rendred to their Prince or Countrey. Two Orders of Knight-hood they have in Denmark, that of the Elephant and that of Dancbrogh. That of the Elephant was first instituted upon the occasion of King Christian the first going in a kind of Pilgrimage to Rome, when as he was invested by Pope Sixtus the Fourth with this Order, in Remembrance of our Lord and Saviour, and at the same time it was Ordain'd that the Succeeding Kings of Denmark, should have a Succes∣sive Right to be Soveraigns of this Order. Whereupon the foresaid King Christian, Built the Stately Chappel of the three
Kings, in the Cathedral at Roschildt where the solemnities of the Order were to be held, and the Knights obliged to Assemble, for the choosing a new Member upon the Death of any of their Fraternity. Into the Number whereof several Kings, Prin∣ces and Noble Men have been Admitted. The chief Ensigne of the Order, was the Figure of an Elephant, on whose side (within a Rundle) was represented a Crown of Thorns, with three Nails all Bloody; in Honour and Memory of the Passion of our Blessed Saviour. The Knights were obliged to the performance of Acts of Piety, Alms-deeds, and certain Ceremonies particularly on those days on which they wore the Ensignes of their Or∣der. Some of the Kings of Denmark have been very Zealous to raise the Honour of this Order to the Highest Esteem, and especially their King John, who wore the Ensignes of it on every Solemn Festival, and so promoted its value, that our King Henry the Eight, and King James the Fifth of Scotland, were content to be of the Fraternity. Some Danish Writers are not of Opinion, that it re eived its first Insti∣tution, when Christian the First had those many Honours conferr'd on him by Pope Sixtus the Fourth, but that the Badge
was a meer Millitary Ensigne, formerly bestowed as a Memorial and Incite∣ment to the Danish Princes, for the De∣fence and promoting of Christianity a∣gainst the Infidels. Heretofore the Knights wore a Collar of Gold, Composed of E∣lephants and Crosses, fashioned somewhat like Crosses Ancrees, at which Hung the Picture of the Virgin Mary to the middle holding Christ in Her Arms, and surround∣ed with a Glory of Sun Beams. But at this day they only wear a Blew Ribbond, at which hangs an Elephant Enamell'd white, Adorned with four large Diamonds set in the middle. Those Elephants worn by the Knights, in the days of Christian the Fourth, had in the same place within a Circle the Letter C. and in the Heart thereof the figure of 4. made to signifie Christianus Quartus. The Kings of Den∣mark have Generally conferred this Ho∣nour on the days of their Coronation, both upon the Nobles and Senatours of the Kingdome. Frederick the Third, brought into use an Embroidered Glory of Silver Purl, wrought upon the left side of their Cloak or Vest, on which was Em∣broidered two Crowns within a Rundle, bearing this Motto, Deus Providebit. But the Motto has changed with the Soveraign,
for that of the present King is Pietate  justitia; and this the Knights of his Creation now Wear in the middle of the Circle; B all the Knights of his Fathers making, a obliged to continue still the former Mott The Order of Danebroge, or the Knight of the Holy Cross, was instituted in remem∣brance of the Cross, which is said mira∣culously to have fallen into, and preserv∣ed King Waldemar the Second's Army when that having lost their Standard, his Forces were going to yield, and give themselves up a Prey to the Fury of their Pagan Enemies the Lifelanders, with vvhom they were then Combating. This Or∣der▪ was Continued till the Relique was lost it solfe in Ditmarsh, after which it was for a long while wholly laid aside, until revived again in the year 1673. by the present King Christian the Fifth. This Prince ordain'd that the Knights of this Order, of which Himself is one, should Wear an Enamell'd Cross Edg'd round with Red, hung in a string of the same Colour, reaching from the Right Shoul∣der to the Left side. Out of the Nobility, and the Knights, the Senators of the Kingdom were former∣ly chosen, who anciently seldome exceed∣ed
the Numbers of Eight, but now are a far greater Number. As long as they con∣tinued in their places, they were main∣tain'd by the Country; They had Castles allowed to dwell in (by the King) paid no Taxes, were only obliged to keep a certain number of Light Horse ready for Service upon all Occasions, and attend upon the King at his Sunimous, upon their own Charges, though not Bound so to do, if he went out of his Dominions, and if sent upon Embassy's, had an Allowance out of the Treasury. Besides these, were Pensioners, who  good Services Rendered the Crown, had certain Lands for Life or a set number of Years Assigned them by the King for their Maintenance; In consideration of which, they were to provide so many Light Horse as the King thought fitting, and pay in Annually a certain Sum of Money into the Exchequer. But since the Reformation of the Government in the year 1660. The number of them is very much Retrenched. The Principal Officers of the Crown of Denmark, are chosen from out amongst the Nobility and Senators.
The First is the Grand-Master of the Kingdom, who is as the Kings Lieutenant. The Second Holger Windt, the Lord High Treasurer, who receives in, and gives Acquittances for all Sums paid into the Kings Exchequer, and has under him two Secretaries of the Nobility, and a great Number of Inferiour Clarks. The Third the Lord High Chancellor, Henry Alefelt Count of Exingen and Lang∣land, whose Office is much the same as in other Kingdoms. The Fourth the Grand Marshal, who provides necessaries for all manner of dis∣patches, in the times of War and Peace. This Office is now enjoyed by Jan Chri∣stopher Corbitz. The Lord High Admiral Henry Bielek. Knight of the Order of the Elephant; who take; care of the Building and Reparing of all sorts of Ships belonging to the Crown. He had under him a Vice-Admiral, Niel Juel, who Acts by his Commission, with Baron Jens Juel, and Mounsieur Rodenstein Rear Admirals; And Mounsieur Seastede Commissary General of the Holm. The Grand-Master of the Artillery. The Master of the Horse, Mounsieur Ax∣huisen. The Great Cup-Bearer.
Mounsieur Knoel the First Gentleman of the Kings Bed-Chamber. Mess. Sebulter and Bierman Secretaries of State. Mess. Sehuller and Jessen. Secretaries to the King. In the year 1660. the King of Denmark Established Seven Councils: The First of State, wherein their Great-Master the King presides, and which Sits-once a Year. The Second of the Finances, wherein the Lord High Treasurer Sits as President. The Third the Chancery, wherein the Chan∣cellor Presides. The Fourth of the Militia wherein the Lord High Marshal Presides. The Fifth of Justice, wherein Presides. N. The Sixth of the Admiralty, wherein Pre∣sides the Admiral; And the Seventh of the Commerce. Under the Vice-Roy of Norway, Frede∣rick Count Guldenlew, Knight of the Or∣der of the Elephant, and Natural Son of the late King of Denmark, there be Five particular Governments. 1. That of Bahus, the most Southern Go∣vernment, but now under the Sweed
2. Of Argerhus, Seaten in the Gulph of Ansloo or Opslo, a Bishops See. 3. Of Berghen, a Bishops See. 4. Of Drunthecim or Tronthecim an Arch-Bishoprick. 5. Of Wardhus, the last place of Nor∣way and of Christendome, Lying towards the North, Scated in the Isle of Ward. The Governments of the Provinces and Places of the Kingdom of Denmark. Of Juitland, Mounsieur Lavenzo. Of Holstein N. Of Copenhaghen, Mounsieur Sehack. Of Cronenburg Mounsieur Osten. Of the County N. N. Of Pinnenburg. N. N. Of Dithmarse N. N. Of Starmaria N. N. Of Wagerland or Wagria. Of Finmark. Of the Isle of Funen, M. G. Van Asken. Of the Isle of Bornholm. Of the Isle of Island. Of the Isle of Greenland. Of Spitzbergen. There are only Seaven Bishopricks in Denmark; which are all in the Kings dis∣posal.
1. Copenhaghen, Whereof the Bishop has Arch-Piscopal Rights, but not the Title. 2. Ripen. and both in the Nor. Juitland. 3. Arhusen. both in the Nor. Juitland. 4. Odensee in the Isle of Funen. 5. Wiburg. 6. Arhusen. 7. Sleswick. The Arch Bishop of Trunthein or Dron∣thein in the North of the Kingdom of Nor∣way, where is still seen the remains of the most Magnificent Church of the North, Dedicated to S. Olaus. This Arch Bishop had the following Suffragan Bishops. 1. Bergen the Metropolis of the King∣dom upon the Sea. 2. Staffanger upon the Shoar of the Western Ocean. 3. Hammar Reunited to the Bishoprick of Ansloo. 4. Ansloo or Opsloo above Bahuys. 5. Sodre an Island. 6. Greenland an Island. 7. Schalholt an Island. 8. Hola or Kola, in the most Northern part of Norway.
But at this day the Bishopricks of Nor∣way are reduced to Four, Namely, 1. Bergen. 2. Steinamanger. 3. Dron∣thein. 4. Christiana, under whose Juris∣diction the rest are brought, unless some under Copenhaghen. Denmark has produc'd many Men Fa∣mous for their Learning, and besides the Bards or Druids, we have accounts of ma∣ny other kinds of Poets and Learned Per∣sons amongst the ancient Danes. Some Au∣thors tell us the several sorts of Verses com∣posed by the Scialdrae and Runae are innu∣merable; but may be at least the best of them, Reduced to 36 Heads. It was for∣merly the custom of all the Northern Nati∣ons, to have the Genealogies and Famous, Deeds of their Ancestors, put into Dog∣gerell, that being daily chanted over by the Parents to their Children, they might be the easier Remembred and Transmit∣ted to Posterity. The Composers of these Ballads were the Grandees of the Nation, and looked upon as the Princes Wisest Councellors. Nay, some for the Reward of a Song, or an Epitaph have been presented with the Crown of Denmark. But as it would be an endless matter to set down all the Danish Authors, we shall content our selves with Inserting the following Cata∣logue.
Saxo Grammaticus, who Writ the History of Denmark, in a most Elegant Stile, and Lived in the Twelsth Centuary. 2. Erasmus Latus, Professor of Divinity in the University of Copenhaghen. 3. Nicolaus Hemmingius noted for his Ingenious Commentaries upon the Scrip∣ture. 4. Tycho Brahe, a Danish Nobleman, Fa∣mous for his Admirable Observations in Astronomy. King Frederick the Second, gave him the Island Ween, where Tycho built his Ʋrani∣bourg, about the year 1575 being an obser∣vatory▪ in the form of a Castle, and Fenced round with regular Fortifications, and which he finding a place remote from all troubles, and a fit retirement for a Student, he Adorned it with a Collection of the most exact Mathematical Instruments that could be procured. 5. Christianus severini Longomontanus was Bred up in the Science of Astronomy, by Tycho Brahe, and has written several Inge∣nious pieces thereof. 6. Arrild Witfield, Lord of Ordersberch re∣duced, Saxo's History to a Chronological method and Composed an accurate Chro∣nicle of the Kings of Denmark and Nor∣way, in the Danish Tongue.
7. Stephanus Stephanius, Professor of Hist∣ory in the University of Sor has Illustrated Saxo Gramaticus with Ingenious Annota∣tions, and writ an Account of the State of Denmark during the Reign of Christian the Third. 8. Olaus Wormius has made a Rare Colle∣ction of Natural Curiosities, and great dis∣coveries into the Misterious Runick Learn∣ing. 9. Petrus Johannes Resenius, a great Anti∣quary, as may be seen by His Edda Islan∣dorum, and other Curious pieces. To these may be added, Petrus Severi∣nus, Borrichius, the two Bartholins, the one of whom Gasper Bartholinis supposed to have made the Dial of the Cathedral of Lunden in Schonen, which Dial shows the Year, Month, Week, Day, and Hour of the Day, all at the same time; with all Feasts both Moveable and fixed, as also the Motions of the Sun and Moon, and their Progress through every Degree of the Zodiack. This Clock is so Ordered by Artificial Engines, that when ever it strikes, two Horse-men come forth and Encoun∣ter each other, the one giving the other just so many Blows as the Hammer is to strike upon the Bell: at what time a Door opening, the Virgin Mary appears, sitting
upon a Throne with Christ in Her Arms, and the Magi doing him Reverence, and two Trumpets Sounding all the while. And this Register I suppose, is sufficient to show, how much Denmark has Contri∣buted towards the Advancement of Learn∣ing. The Cittizens and Merchants form the Third Order of the Kingdome, and the Peasants or Rustis, the Fourth, who are either Freeholders: such as have Hereditary Estates, paying only some small quit Rent to their Land-Lords or Wornede Villains, absolutely in the Power of their Lords. The Cities are Governed by their di∣stinct Corporations. And the Citizens enjoy peculiar Priviledges, and Charters, as in other States of Europe. Out of these two last Orders are Elected, the Arch-Bishops, the Bishops, the Canons, Pastours, and Senators of Citties and other: lesser Officers. Whilst the Kingdome of Denmark lay confused and broken into several parts, all the Provinces had not all the same Law, but were Governed by peculiar Statutes. Whence we read of Leges Scanicae, Leges Sialandice, and the like. But when they came to be reunited under on Head, they became all Subject to the same Law. The
Laws now in use were compiled into one Body, which they call the Iydse Lowbog, or the Book of the Laws of Juitland, and Established by King Waldemar the Second. But nevertheless sometimes changed accor∣ding to the Circumstances of the juncture. Thus Murder was formerly punished, only with a pecuniary Mulct, but now with Death. The Ancient Danes were so Zea∣lous, to have their Estates enjoyed by the right Heirs, that they punished Adultery with Death; which Law is still in force in Sweeden, Saxony, and many other Parts of Germany. The Danes used formerly, and do still, in some parts of Juitland, to Assemble eve∣ry Parish by themselves once a Year in the Fields, to Determine all Controversies by Twelve Select Men, from whom an Ap∣peal lay to the Judge of the Province, upon the inreconciliation of the Parties, and thence to the Supream Court of Justi∣ces, and this custome of a Jury of Twelve Men, was undoubtedly derived to the En∣glish from the Danes. But the Heathen Danes, did likewise de∣termine Controversies by Duels, wherein the Justice of the Cause was Demonstra∣ted by the success. But Christianity Abo∣lished this Custome, when one Loppo upon
its first Planting, for the confirming the truth of His Doctrine, took up with his bare Hands, Glowing-Hot Barrs of Iron, without the least Harm to the Admiration of all the Beholders. This Miracle wrought a change both in the Religion and Laws of the Realm, for King Sweno Ordered that thence forward, all Persons accused of any Hainous Crime, should clear themselves by carrying in their Hands a Glowing Plow∣share, or some other piece of Hot Iron. This kind of purging is called by some of the Danish Writers Jerntegn, i. e. Iron∣token; by others Ordale. Our Saxon An∣cestours borrowed from the Danes several kinds of Ordale, as by carrying a Barr of Hot Iron up to the High Alter Bare-Hand; by Treading Bare-foot and Blindfold over a certain number of Glowing Barrs, laid on the ground at unequal distance; by thrust∣ing the Naked Arm into a pot of Boyling Water; and lastly as they use to try Witch∣es, by throwing the accused Party into a River or deep Vessel of cold Water. The First that throughly Abolished all kinds of Ordale in Denmark, was King Waldemar the Second, about the year 1240. at the request of Pope Innocent the Third. The Coines in use in Denmark are Duc∣cates of Gold, of the value of two Rix∣dollers,
or Crowns of Gold, of the value either of Eighteen or Nineteen Marks, or, the double of these. The lesser Danish Coyns are 1. Huide, whereof three make one of their Shillings. 2. Soslinger, where∣of two make one Shilling. 3. Shilling whereof sixteen make a Mark. 4. A mark which is the fourth part of a Slet Dollar. 5. A Rix-Dollar, which is Six Marks, or, ninety fix Shillings. At the Solemnization of Weddings, Christnings, and Buryals in Denmark, they spare no expences to seem Noble and Magnificent, sometimes rather than want a Splendid Funeral for their Relations, they keep the  Corps for several years, and in the mean while scrape and heap up as much Money as will maintain the pomp of its Funeral. And now I shall proceed to the Topo∣graphical Description of each particular Place and Province of the King of Den∣marks Dominions. The Cimbrick Chersonese hath on the East the Baltick Sea, on the West, the main German Ocean, on the North a part of the bending into the narrow Streight, called the Delt, on the South, with the great River of Albis, on the South-East,
with the small River of Trave, it was so called from the Kempers, Men of Vast Bo∣dies and Strength, and whom the Romans called Cimbri, the Greeks Cimmeri, and their Country Chersonesus Cimbrica, which Name was given to the whole Tract of Land beyond the Elb; the latter Historians con∣fine it to that part only, which now goeth under the Name of Juitland. It is in length about 100 Italian Miles, and 80 in Breadth, and comprehendeth in that extent of Ground, 33 Walled Towns, six Episcopal Sees, (besides those of Hamburg and Lubeck) which are under the Arch Bi∣shops of Bremen, and 20 Royal Castles and Pallaces. It is at present divided into the Dukedom of Holstein and the Province of Juitland. The Dukedome of Holstein went under the General Name of Nortablingia, or, the Country beyond the Elb, Northwards, and containeth those four Provinces, 1. Wager∣land. 2. Dimarse. 3. Stormar. 4. Ho∣lest or Holstein; Specially so called from the Dutch word Holst, which signifies a Wood or Forrest, according to the Nature of the Country. Wagerland is that part of Holstein which lyes on the South-East of this Chersonesus, and so called from the Wagriane a Tribe or
Nation of the Selaves, who possessed this tract The Chief Towns are, 1. Lubeck pleasantly Seated on the Confluence of the Trave, and the Billow, the River being capable of Ships of a Thousand Tun; This is an Imperial and Hanse Town, driving a vast Trade, being Reckoned to have about 600 Ships of all sorts, some of a Thousand Tun and upwards, it is one of the best Built and most Beautiful Cities of all Germany, being in compass a∣bout six Miles, Fortified with a double Wall, deep Ditches, and unfordable Rivers. It was made so Head-strong by the Privi∣ledges conferred upon it, by the Dukes of Holstein, that it bid defiance to its Sove∣raign, and became a Dukedom of its self; Tho the Kings of Denmark have ever con∣tinued their Claim, and it's thought the present Prince has now a designe of Vigo∣rously Executing his Pretentions. 2. Sege∣burg, on the River Trave, four Dutch Miles from Lubeck, and near the Head of that River. 3. Oldeslo, on the same River in the midst betwixt both. 4. Gronneberg, and 5. Newkirk, on the Baltick-Shore: And 6. Stendorp, more within the Land, near the Edge of a Lake, out of which runs the River Suentin. 7. Ploen an Ancient City exceedingly well fortified.
In the furthest Corner of Wagerland lyes the Ancient and Famous County of Olden∣burg; divided from the rest of this Pro∣vince by the River Brochaw. It's principal City Oldenburg, was formerly the Metro∣polis of the Wagrians, and Venedi a Town of great Trade, and exceeding Populous, but since the Port was stopt up by the com∣mand of Queen Margaret, its Splendour has daily lessened, and by the late dreadful Desolation, caused by Thunder and Light∣ning, which laid wast the best and great∣est part of the City, 'tis become now much less considerable than it was before: from the Princes of this Country is derived the Present Royal Family of Denmark. The Province of Ditmarsh lyes along the German Ocean, Inhabited by People of the Saxon Race, who never could be brought under the Dukes of Holstein, until Holstein it self was annexed to the Crown of Den∣mark. The Chief Towns are Meldorp up∣on the Ocean, the chief of the Province. 2. Lunden, opposite to Tonningen near the mouth of the Eyder. 3. Heyde, a large but poor City. Stormar, so called from the Marshy Ground lying along the River Stoer. The Principal Cities are Hamburg, upon the Bille, where it falls into the Elb, an Ancient
Town Built in the time of the Saxons, being one of the largest, best Built, most Beautiful and Richest Cities of Europe. Upon the Right the Dukes of Holstein had to this City, it Swore Allegiance to Christian the First, King of Denmark, which pretentions have upon all occasions been renewed by those Princes, and more particularly after the conclusion of the late Peace with Sweeden, when the present King drew his Army about that Town, which though not sufficient to force such a City, yet coming at first as near it as he pleased, by means of the Neigh∣bourhood of Altena, raised Batteries for his Artillery and Bombes, with which he might have easily Incommoded the Town. Whereupon several Princes Vigorously In∣terposing for an accommodation, it was pro∣visionally concluded on the First of Novem∣ber 1679. The Rights of the King of Den∣mark, and of the City of Hamburg, Re∣maining as they were, until that the point of Homage, and the other differences, which depended betwixt his Danish Majesty and that Town, should in an amicable way be decided by course of Law. Now the chief condition of that accommodation, was an obligation by the Town of Hamburg to pay, at five Terms, to his Danish Majesty, the Sum of two hundred and twenty thousand
Crowns; In consideration whereof that King Remitted the Indignation he had con∣ceived against that Town, Renounced the Pretentions that he had to the Land Jointly possessed by Hambourg and Lubeck; and promised to restore the Ships, Goods, Com∣modities, and Inhabitants of Hambourg, which had been Seized upon the account of these pretentions. Other Towns of Note are 1. Gluckstadt, Built and well Fortified by King Christian the Fourth, and much improved by His Successors. It commands the passage of the Elb; so that it highly concerns the Ham∣burgers to be at Peace with the King of Denmark. 2: Crempe, seated on a small River of the same Name, and is one of the Keys of the Kingdom of Denmark, 3. Litzehoa. 4. Bredenbourg, one of the Neatest little Towns in all the King of Denmark's Territories. As for Holstein it self, it taketh up the Inland parts between Stormar and Juitland save that it hath an Out-let into the Bal∣tick, on the South-VVest of VVagerland, the chief Towns are Kiel, seated upon a Navigable Arm of the Baltick. 2. Rensbourg the best fortified Town in the Dukedome. 3. VVilstor, a Neat and well Built City. 4. Niew-Munster, on the North-VVest of the
Stor, and not far from the Head of it. And now for Juitland, it comprehend∣eth all that part of the Cimbrick Chersonese that is divided from the Dukedom of Hol∣stein, by the River Eyder, the Ancient boundary betwixt the Saxons and the Danes but principally by a long Trench and Wall from one Sea to the other, of such bredth, that a Chariot, or two Horsemen a Breast, might Ride upon it. Godfrey King of Den∣mark, first Building this Trench in the time of Charlemain, or Charles the Great, in Im∣mitation of the Picts Wall in England, for hindring the Incursions of the Saxons, or stopping the Carrier of the said Emperours Victories. The Tract of this Wall being still manifest to be seen, is call d Dennewark (or the Danes work) to this very day. Juitland was so called from the Juites, who, together with the Angli and Neigh∣bouring Saxons made a Conquest of the best part of Brittain. But the Ancient In∣habitants of this Province in the time of Prolomy and before, were the Cobandi, Cha∣ly, Phundusi, Charudes, and in the most Northern Tracts the Cimbri, of whom the four first were but Tribes or Nations Up∣on that great expedition against Spain made by the Vandals on the Roman Empire, the Juits and Angli though fit to Inlarge and
shift their Habitations, each taking pos∣session of such quarters as lay nearest to them; Those Juites or Getae being a Peo∣ple of Scandia or Schonen, and there placed by Ptolomy; for he went up the Northern parts of the Cimbrick Charsonese, and gave it the Name of Juitland; the o∣ther being a People of the Suevi, dwelling on the South of the Elb, possessed them∣selves of those parts which lay next their old Friends and Confederates the Saxons, their chief Town being Sleswick, where Angelen, now an obscure Village, but of great note in former times, doth preserve their memory. Upon the Angli's joyning with the Saxons in the Conquest of Brit∣tain, the Danes took that opportunity of Invading it in the absence of the Natives; and having Conquered it as far as the River Eyder, they planted it with Colonies of their own Nation, and made it a part of that Kingdom. The Air of this Country is much more mild than that of the other Provinces of these Northern Parts, being temperated by the warm vapours of the Sea. The Soyl of Juitland is extremely rich, producing and affording all things neces∣sary for the life of man. The Country being for the most part plain, little swel∣led
with Mountains, the Inhabitants reap∣ing this double advantage from their Fields, in that they yield interchangeably both Fish and Corn; for, during one three years they plough the Land, and constantly reap the Fruits of it; and for the next three, let the Pools overflow the Land, to the end the Fish may eat up the Grass (whom they catch as often as they please) and the Mud which is left behind enriches the Soyle. Juitland too aboundeth so in Cattle; that sendeth yearly into Germany 50000 Oxen, besides great store of Butter, Cheese, Tallow, Hides, Horses and Swine, having such plenty of excellent Hams, that most of those which pass here in England under the name of Westphalia's, come from thence. It hath all manner of Game Fowl, either for diversion, necessaries, or luxury. It's Pools, Lakes and Rivers are furnish'd with all sorts of fresh Fish, especially most excellent Salmons, and in great abundance. It's commodious Bays provide with plenty all sorts of Foraign Commodities, as well as the Sea doth Whitings, Soles, Herrings, Mackeril, Pilchards, Oysters, Smelts, Sprats, Shrimps, Lobsters, Crabs, Thornback, Rusfes, Muscles, Prawns, Cockles, Conge, Turbots, Mades,
Scute, Escalops, Cod, &c. Neither is it wanting of good Fruits. It has excellent Timber, both for building, for Shipping and for Firing. In short, hardly any Country furnishes more towards the neces∣sities, nay, and the amuzement, and the diversions too of life, than this does. In regard of the Climate, it cannot be expected that its Vines should come to any perfection, they being only to be ripened by the heat of the Sun; but its own Com∣modities procure it the best Wines of all Countries, which nevertheless it does not stand in need of, it producing vast plenty and most excellent Barley, whereof they make their Ale and other Liquors, which if not more toothsome, yet perhaps more natural to their bodies and constitutions. It likewise Transports into other Coun∣tries great Stores of Equipage for Shipping, Armors, Ox-hides, Buck-skins, Wainscot, Fir-wood, and the like. Juitland is divided into North and South, the latter containeth many considerable Towns; as first, Flensbourch, a deep, safe and commodious Port; Halem upon the German Ocean, near the mouth of the River Eyder; Itadersleeve, a Bishops See; Sondenberg, in the Peninsula, called Eyder∣stede, over against the Strandt, an Island
of the German Ocean; Sternberg, the or∣dinary Residence of the King of Denmark's Governour Gottorp, a strong Castle of the Duke of Slyvicks at the end of a large Inlet of the Baltick, remarkable for the Toll-Booth; at which Toll is paid one year with another for 50000 Oxen transported out of North Juitland into Germany; Ses∣wick the principal Town of this Province, an Episcopal See, and the Head of a Duke∣dom. When Christian Earl of Oldenburgh was chosen King of Denmark, the Dukedom of Holstein became part of that Kingdom. Yet so that the Kings of Denmark were reckoned Princes of the Empire, as Dukes of Holstein, tho not obliged to repair to any Dyet. Afterwards the title of Duke of Holstein, with a considerable part of the Country, was given to Adolph Christian the third brother, who Governed it inter∣changeably with his Brother by turns. Upon the decease of this Duke and his Is∣sue-Male; the title was conferred on Ʋlric King Christian the Fourth's Brother. Since his daies there have been several Houses of the Dukes of Holstein, as has been before shown; amongst whom the Duke of Holstein Gottorp is chief, and challenges the same power in governing and admini∣string
of Justice, as was at first conferred upon Duke Adolph, King Christian the 3's Brother. In the late Wars, the King of Denmark forced the present Duke of Got∣torp to quit his Dukedom, and abandon all Holstein to his Majesties possession. But at the signing of the Treaty between the Kings of France, Denmark and Sweden at Fontainbleu, Sept. 2. 1679. the Danish Mi∣nisters promised their Master should at the desire of his most Christian Majesty, restore to the said Duke all his Countrys, Towns and Places, in the same State they were at the signing of the Treaty, with all the Soveraignty that belonged to him, by ver∣tue of the Treaties of Rosehild, Copenha∣gen and Westphalia. The Duke expected, besides being restored to his Countries, some recompence for the damage his Ter∣ritories had suffered during the War, by the vast sums of Money which the King of Denmark had raised therein, as being one of the best Countries in all the North, or at least to have had back the Cannon (being 100 excellent brass pieces.) But his expe∣ctations in this point were not answered. North Juitland hath on the South the Dukedom of Sleswick but surrounded by all other parts by the Sea, is divided into 4 Diocesses or Districts: that of Rip or Ri∣pen,
containing 30 Prefectures or Here (as they use to call them) seven Cities  walled Towns, and ten Castles. 2. That of Arhusen lying on the North of Ripen, and more towards the Baltick containing 31 Herets or Prefectures, 7 Ci∣ties or walled Towns, 5 Castles, and the Islands of Sumsoe, Hiolim, Tuecen, Hiance Hilgenes and others. 3. That of Wiburg on the North of Arhusen, containing 16 Herets, the Islands of Jegen. 2. Hansholm. 3. Ostholm. 4. Cisland. 5. Egholm. 6. Bodum. Three Citys or walled Towns, and as many Castles, the princi∣pal whereof is Wiborch an Episcopal See; the ordinary seat of Judicature, for both the Juitlands. 4. That of Alburg or Vandalia, which is subdivided into four parts, as 1. Thyland, whose chief Town is Alborch the Bishop of Vandalia's usual Seat and Residence. 2. Morsce containing three Herets, the Town of Nicoping, the Castle of Lunsted, and the Isle of Ageroe. 3. Hanheret containing four Herets, the Town of Thystad, a kind of University, the Castle of Orum, and the Islands of Oland and Oxholm. In this Di∣strict standeth the Rock called Skaringclint, serving for a Sea Mark to prevent Mari∣ners running against the Quick-sands which
lye about this Coast. 4. Wensyssel, Vensi∣lia or Wenslie containeth six Herets or Pre∣fectures. The Islands of Grosholm of Herts∣horn, and Tidesholm, one Castle and three Towns; the most remarkable of which is Scagen, standing at the utmost Promon∣tory, or most Northerly Point of all this Chersonese, being notorious for the Ship∣wrack of many Ships of all Nations. Zealand the largest, fairest, and most fertil Island in the Baltick Sea, lies East of Juitland, from which separated by an arm of the Sea, called the Belt and West of Schonen, from which it is parted by a fresh River not above a Dutch Mile in breadth, commonly called by the name of the Sund or Sound. This Island being about twelve German Miles broad, and eighteen long. It was anciently called Codanonia, which signifies the same thing as the modern words Danes or Denmark. Many of the Danish Etymologists derive Seeland from Sordland or Seedland from the abundance of Corn which this Country affords. O∣thers with greater Probability make the word signifie no more than an Island or parcel of Ground encompassed with the Sea. This Island containeth 15 Cities or Wal∣led Towns, the principal whereof are Co∣penhagen
(the Metropolis of this Island and of the whole Kingdom of Denmark, which is seated on the East Part of Zealand up∣on the Sea shore. The Danes call it Kio∣benhaun, and the Germans Copenharen, both which words are corruptions of Ki∣obm inshaven, or the Kaven of Merchants. The Town is of an Orbicular form, and very well fortified since the War in 1659. with the Swedes, having an Arcenal which perhaps excels any thing of that kind in Europe; In the Arcenal is kept a Coach with springs, by which means it goes as if it were of it self, and of its own move∣ment; but the Artifice of this Work de∣pends on two men hidden under a cover∣ing in the Coach, of whom the one turn∣ed the Wheels, which pushed it on, and the other guided it by the means of a Rud∣der in the Head. Its Cathedral Church dedicated to St. Mary, is beautified with a noble Copper Spire, built at the charges of King Christian the Fourth. The Advow∣sance of this Church belongs to the Profes∣sors in the Universitie which was founded by Ericus the Ninth, but perfected by King Christian the First: by him and the succeeding Princes liberally endowed. The City is Governed by four Burgo-masters, one whereof is Regent or President for his
life. This Honour is conferred at present on that deserving and learned Person P. John Resenius Professour of Moral Phylo∣sophy in the University at Copenhagen, and Counsellour to the present King of Den∣mark. Amongst the Ornaments of the Town are the Market-place, which is ex∣ceeding spacious; the King's Palace all covered with Copper, standing in an Island, wherein is kept a Ship of Ivory, wholly fitted, whereof the Tackling, Sails and Cannons were entirely of Ivory being an extraordinary fine piece of Ma∣nufacture. The Observatory, or Runde Toorn which is very remarkable, and especially for the fashion of its Stair-case, if we may call it so, which is nothing but a Pavement which mount singeniously with∣out Steps; and it is so very broad a Coach may easily go up to the top, and there too it has room enough to turn in. This Tower was built on purpose for the use of Astronomers, and out of it you go into a fine Library which stands on the side of the Tower. There is Marks of the Siege to be seen, which the Swedes laid to this City; amongst others, a Bell made so full of holes by Cannon Bullets, that the King has thought fitting the marks thereof should remain visible by causing all the
places that were pierced to be guilt. The Exchange is richly worth the seeing, and will merit a more ample Description than this Compendium of the whole Kingdom will admit. The Citizens Houses, till within these few years were very mean and low, most of them patcht up of Wood and Mortar; indeed the first rise of this City was but very mean, for about the year 1168. Axil Wide sirnamed Snare Archbishop of Denmark, built a conside∣rable Fortification in this Island, wherein now stands the Castle. This was called after his Name Axel-huys; and was a good defence to the whole Island against the daily incursions of Pyrats. Under the protection of this Fort several Fishermen, and others that Traded this way, used to Harbour their Ships in security; this caused a continual concourse of the Natives, who resorted hither to furnish the Vessels with such Provisions as their Country afford∣ed; and in a short time laid the first rude Draughts of a City, which at this day for Strength, Trade, Beauty and Bulk is not surpassed by many in Europe; for of late the Citizens are grown more curious, and experienced in Architecture, and few of their Streets are without a considerable number of stately brick Buildings. Its Haven also being one of the best in Europe.
Amaga Amagri is Amagra or Ammak, is a small Island on the East of Copenhagen, about six English Miles in length and four in breadth; it abounds wonderfully in all manner of Fowl and Venison, has in it plenty of Corn, and furnishes the Market at Copenhagen with weekly supplies of Milk, Butter, Cheese, &c. This Isle of Ammak contains four or five Villages, and has two Parish Churches. But before we leave this Island, it will not perhaps be un∣grateful to relate an Encounter which hap∣pened in it at the Siege of Copenhagen in 1660. which was so much the more consi∣derable, because both the Northern Kings were personally engaged in the action. The Swede observing that the Dane daily fetched Provisions from the aforementi∣oned Isle, the Ammak was resolved to make a Descent in order to burn the Vil∣lages, and destroy whatever might afford sustenance or relief to the besieged; for which purpose he put aboard about 1200 Foot, and 400 Horse; and the King himself would needs be of the Party, think∣ing nothing so well done as where he was present, as well as naturally ambitious of sharing personally in the glory of every brave action. Coming to the height of the Draker, he forced his Landing upon
the Point of the Isle, and constrained them upon the Guard to abandon their Post. He marches up the Isle, and destroys all before him; and the Danes fearing he came to fortifie some Post on that side, set fire to the Village next adjacent to the Town, as the Swede had done to the rest. Having done this work, the Swede retreats to his Boats too securely: some scattered from the Body, others encumbred with Plun∣der. Mean while the Danish King Sallies out in person with three hundred Horse, and two hundred Dragoons, besides some few Commanded Foot mounted behind, falls in upon the Swedish Rear, flew seve∣ral of them, and put the rest in disorder. The Swedish King mounted upon an un∣ruly Horse, bounding and curveting with him, ran great hazard of falling that day into the Danish hands. But the Dane ei∣ther not knowing all his advantages, or not willing to be drawn too far from his Town, by an over eager pressing upon an Enemy who out numbred him, sounded a seasonable retreat. The next place of Note is Roschild, which takes its name from a River run∣ning by the Town, which drives scaven Mills; It was formerly the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom, fortified with a Wall,
Ditch and Bulwark, and contained no less than 27 fair Churches. This Town was made a Bishop's See by Suenotho King of England, Denmark, Sweden and Norway about the year 1012. who gave the Bi∣shoprick of Roschild (which is now swal∣lowed up by Copenhagen) to Gerebrand a Monk. In the Cathedral Church of this Town, are to be seen very fair and sump∣tuous Tombs of many of the Danish Kings. Elseneur, the chief Ornament and Strength of which Town lies in Cronen∣burg, is seated on that neck of the Sea cal∣led Orisundt or the Sound, which parts Sealand from Schonen. Cronenburgh is built of hewn Free-stone, brought hither out of Scotland, and this undertaken with incredible pains and charge by King Fre∣drick the Second, without a penny Subsi∣dy from the Subjects, tho he covered it with Coper; the Foundation of it being laid on huge Stone sunk into the Sea, and so fastened together, that no Storm or Tempest, how violent soever, is able to shake it; well fortified as well as founded, and mixt of a Palace and of a Fort, having for many years been the Seat of the Danish Kings, who had from hence one of the most pleasant and profitable prospects of the whole Kingdom: every Ship that
passes this Streight, being obliged to strike Sail to Croneburg; and that done, the Master is to come to a Composition in the City for Custom, upon the pain of the Confiscation and Loading. Fredericksberg seated amongst pleasant Woods of Beech, and about the middle way between Elseneur and Copenhagen; this Fabrick was first began by one Harlef a Danish Nobleman, who sold it to King Fredrick the Second, who fell upon en∣larging and beautifying it to a high de∣gree. After this King's death, his Son Christian the Fourth spared no charges in compleating what his Father left unfinish∣ed, adorning it with the richest Pictures, Statues, Hangings, the Locks and bars in the Windows being all of beaten Silver, so as it not only surpasses all that is in the North: but the World can hardly para∣lel this piece. The adjoyning Park has amongst other Foreign Beasts a Stock of Foreign Deer transported hither out of England in the 24 of Q. Eliz. Ringstede, a Town of the greatest Anti∣quity of any except Roschild in Denmark; many of the Danish Kings lying buried in the place, particularly King Waldemar the First, and Eric the Godly; its scituation being in the very Center of the Land; its
want of Trade, makes it daily decay. Sora of old being beautified with a goodly Monastery, the Revenues where∣of, at the alteration of Religion, were converted to the maintenance of a Free-School built here by Fredrick the First. But in the year 1623. Christiern the fourth adding hereunto the Revenues of two other dissolved Monasteries, the one of the Isle of Laland, and the other in Juitland, founded here a new University for the maintenance of several learned men, who were to be employed in writing and pub∣lishing the History of the Acts and Monu∣ments of the Kings, and other Heroes, of Denmark; and for the better supply of Learned Ministers for the Churches of Denmark and Norway (which before could not be provided for out of Copenhagen, and furnished it with men of eminence in all Arts and Sciences for its first Professors. Besides, he annexed an Academy with fit Masters, to teach perfectly all Gentile and Marshal Exercises, as Dancing, Vault∣ings, Riding the Great Horse, &c. Anderskaw or Andershauw, formerly a great Monastery, now a strong Castle about an English Mile from Slagen. It is is seat∣ed in a level Champaign Country, and delicately well built.
Kallenburg was formerly a small Vil∣lage inhabited by none but Fisher-men, but about the year 1158. or I as some, 117. it was turned into a City, and beautified with a Castle, Church and several other publick Buildings. 'Tis at present a Town of good Trade, having the conve∣nience of as safe an Harbour for Ships as any Haven in Denmark. Korsor, so called from the Multitude of Crosses erected formerly in the places out of the abundance of superstitious zeal in the Inhabitants. Koge, a small but very rich and popu∣lous City; about sixteen English Miles from Copenhagen. It is a place much thronged with Corn Merchants, and Fish∣mongers, driving a considerable Trade, and being in a pleasant situation. FƲNEN. FƲnen is Situated betwixt Seeland and Juitland, from which last it is parted by a Straight, called Middlefar-sundt, about one German Mile in breadth, and separa∣ted from Seeland by the Beltis sundt, or Baltick Bay, which is so narrow and small a Frith, that the Island and the Chersonese seem joyned together.
The length of this Island from East to West is Ten German Miles, and the breadth Eight: It is looked upon as the Pleasantest piece of Ground in the King of Denmark's Dominions; abounding besides with all manner of Corn, espe∣cially Wheat and Rye, which is hence Yearly Transported in great Quantities unto other Nations. Besides, the Natives have generally great Herds of Cattel, and good Breeds of Horses. The Woods, which overspread almost the whole Island, are exceeding well stored with Deer, Hares, and Foxes. This Island contains Four and Twenty Herets or Prefectures, Sixteen Towns, and Six Royal Castles, besides many goodly Villages and Gen∣tlemens Houses. The Chief City of Funen is Ottensee, seated in the very center of the Island, and therefore a fit place for the Sessions of the Nobility and Magistracy, which are Yearly held in this place; as were like∣wise the General Assemblies of the King∣dom of Denmark, before the Year 1660. The Buildings in this Town are generally well Built, and the Streets Uniform. Be∣sides other Publick Structures, there are in it two fair Churches, whereof one is Dedicated to St. Cnuts, the other to St.
Francis. Not far from the former of these stands a stately Town Hall upon a very spacious Market-place, where King Fre∣drick the Second renewed the Ancient League between the Crown of Denmark and the Dukes of Holstein and Sleswick, in the Year 1575. When the Quires of St. Cnut's Church was Repaired in the Year 1582, the Work men found in a Vaulta Copper Coffin, gilded and adorn∣ed with Precious Stones, upon which was writ the following Inscription in Old La∣tine-Gothic Characters. Jam Coelo tutus summo cum Rege Canutus Martyr in aurata Rex atque reconditur arca: Et pro justitiae factis occisus inique; Ʋt Christum vitae sic morte fatetur in ipsa. Traditur a proprio sicut Deus ipse, Ministro. A. D. MLXXXVI. Other Towns of Note in Funen, are, 1. Bowens, a Port Town of good Trade on the West side of the Island, at the North end of Medelfar sund. 2. Middlefar, seated on the Common Passage from this Island to Kolding in Juitland. On the thirteenth of January, in the Year 1658, Carolus Gustavus, King of Sweden, led his Army over the Ice to this place, and having
Routed the Danish Forces which Opposed him, made himself Master of the whole Island of Funen. 3. Ascens, not far from the Mountains of Ossenburg, memorable only for a Victory gained near it by John Rantzaw, King Christian the Third's Ge∣neral, who levelled the City to the ground. 4. Foborg, upon the Southern Coast of the Island: It was once Burnt by the unruly Souldiers of Christian the Third, whilst Odensee (adhering to the Captive Prince, Christian the Second, who at that time was kept close Prisoner at Sunderburg) Redeem'd it self from the like Fate by a large Sum of Money. 5. Swynburg, over against the Isle of Langland; from this place Carolus Gustavus led his Army over the Ice into Seeland in the Year 1658. 6. Nyburg, the usual Passage from Funen into Seeland. This City was first Forti∣fied with a Moat and Bullwarks by King Christian the Third: It is very Memorable for the Battel fought by the Confederates of the Empire, Brandenburgh, Poland, and the Low Countries, in the Year 1659. against the Swedes, who were beaten in that Rencounter, and utterly Routed out of Schonen. In Funen there are reckoned up no less than Two Hundred Sixty four Parish Churches.
ZALAND. LAland, or Lawland, so called from its low Situation, is disjoyned from Seeland by a little narrow Straight, called Gronesendt, and is about Thirty two English Miles in length, and two in breadth. This is a very Fruitful Coun∣trey, hath good store of Rich Pasturage, and affords such great Plenty of Corn and Chesnuts, that Ships full Freighted with them are sent Yearly hence. It contains four Herets or Lordships, and as many Cities. The great Towns or Cities are, 1. Naschaw, or Nashscouw; which (together with the adjoyning Mo∣nastery) was Stormed, Taken, and Burnt by the Lubeckers in the Year 1510. 2. Sas∣coping. 3. Newstadt, once Famous for a Noble Monastery Built there A. D. 1286. 4. Lavingscoping. Besides these, the Nun∣nery of Marioebo or Mariboane, was as Considerable and Remarkable a Place as any in the whole Island. The other Islands in the Baltique now belonging to the Dane, worth the taking Notice of, are,
1. Falster, a considerable Island, ad∣joyning to Laland. It is not above Six∣teen English Miles in length, but affords Plenty of Corn Yearly to some Neigh∣bouring Islands, and to the very Conti∣nent. The Principal Towns of this Isle are, 1. Nicoping, which, for the Elegancy of the Place, and the Pleasantness of the Situation, is by Dr. Heylin styled, The NAPLES of Denmark. 2. Stubcopen, or Stabcoping, has some Trade upon the Account of its being the Ordinary Passage between Seeland and Germany. 2. Langeland, a narrow Island betwixt Funen and Laland, seven Dutch Miles in length; in which, besides many Villages and Gentlemens Houses, and sixteen Pa∣rish Churches, is the Town of Rudcoping, and the Impregnable Castle of Traneker, which is admirably well provided with all manner of Military Ammunition. 3. Mona, or Meun, a Chalky Island to the North-East of Falster: It serves for a good Land-mark to the German Vessels that Trade in those Seas. The only Town of Consequence in it is Stege, which bravely withstood the Lubeckers in the Year 1510, and forced them at last to Retreat.
4. Alsen, another little Island, called in Latin, Elysia, opposite to the Gulph or Bay of Flensburg, in the Dukedom of Sleswick, of which it is a part, and therefore only Subject to the King of Den∣mark as Dukes of Sleswick. Some Danish Antiquaries do think the Elesii, Arii, and Manimi, mentioned by Tacitus, were the Ancient Inhabitants of this Island Ar and Meun; and that these three Isles have the same Names at this day (with some small alteration) which they had when Tacitus writ his Annals. It is well stored with Beasts for Profit, and Game for Pleasure; and so Populous, that several Thousands of stout Fighting Men have been Raised in a very short time out of its four Towns and Thirteen Parishes. The Principal place of the Island, is the Town and Castle of Sunderburg, was heretofore one of the Ordinary Residences of the Dukes of Sleswick, and Honoured with the Birth of many of their Princes of the Royal Family, and is at this day one of the strongest Holds which the King of Denmark stands possessed of. 5. Femeren, or Fimbriu, is a small Island on the Coast of Wagerland, from which it is separated by a very narrow Channel. This Plot of Ground has ever
been look'd upon as one of the most Con∣siderable Keys of Denmark. This Crown thinking it of that Importance; as to suf∣fer the Germans to run over all Holstein, and both Juitlands, rather than they should possess themselves of this Isle. And therefore in the Year 1628, King Christian the Fourth took care to put strong Gari∣sons into every place of Moment in it, and to Fortifie the Old Castles and Towns which his Predecessors had suffered to decay and slighted. Towns of any Note in it, are Derborch, Stabul, and Pitters∣dorp. 6. Hucen, or Wcen, commonly called by the English the Scarlet Island, as is said upon the account of a Bargain between Queen Elizabeth and the King of Den∣mark, she being to have the Island for as much Scarlet Cloth as would cover it. In this Island did Tycho Brache, a Danish Noble-Man, make most of his Admi∣rable Observations in Astronomy. King Frederick the Second giving him it as a place remote from all Troubles, and fit for a Students Retirement. Here Tycho about the Year 1575 Built his Ʋraniburg, (an Observatory Built like a Castle, and Fenced round with Regular Fortifications) which he Adorned with a Collection of
the most exact Mathematical Instruments that could possibly be made or procured. This Tycho, amongst other his Admirers, had the Honour of a Visit from King James, in his return from the Consum∣mation of his Marriage with Queen Ann. As for the other little inconsiderable Islands, they are not worth the trouble of Describing, nor of the Readers Con∣sideration. Wherefore we will pass on to the Kingdom of Norway.
NORWAY. NORWAY is bounded in the South with the Baltick Straits, which se∣parate it from Juitland; on the East with Poland and Sweden, from which it is parted by a perpetual Ridge of rough and wild Mountains, called the Dofrine Hills; in the North and West with the Northern Ocean: the whole length of it, from the Baltick Sea as far as Finmark, is reckoned to be about Eight hundred and forty English Miles. As for the Derivation of its Name Norway (or Norweg as the Germans write it; whence the Latin word Norwegia) is only Via seutractus septentrionalis; i.e. A Countrey scituated towards the North. Hence in the Danish, Swedish, and Norwe∣gian Tongues, 'tis to this day called Nor∣rike, or the Northern Kingdom; and we find that anciently all the Northern Kingdoms were called Regna Norica. As for its Position, in regard of the Heavens, it reacheth from the first Parallel, of the Twelfth Clime, where the Pole is elevated 58 Degrees, 20 Minutes, as far as to 71 of Latitude, by which ac∣count the longest day in the Southern
Point is but 10 Hours: Whereas at Ward∣buy's, being situate farthest North of all this Countrey, they have no Night for almost Three Months together. The Eastern Part of Norway is very thinly inhabited, being a Country of no∣thing but inaccessible Craggy Mountains; towards the South it is better peopled, the Inhabitants dwelling in pleasant Val∣leys incircled with delightful Hills; the rest of the Countrey is over-spread with Woods, which afford most part of Eu∣rope Deal Boards and Masts for Ships. The Dofrine Hills which divide this Realm from Sweden, are perpetually co∣vered with Snow; and send down in∣tollerable bitter Winds into the Valleys beneath, which renders 'em desolate and unfruitful. But the Air of the more Western Coasts of this Kingdom is much more milder and temperate, and would be healthful too, were not the Countrey troubled with certain little Beasts which they call Lemmers: they are about the the bigness of a Field-Mouse, and are by the Inhabitants said to drop out of the Clouds in bad Weather; they devour like the Locust every green thing on the Earth; and at a certain time die all in heaps (as it were) together, and with their stench and putrefaction so poisonthe Air, that
the poor people are long after troubled with the Jaundice, and a Giddiness in the Head, which is most especially apt to seize on Strangers unacquainted with the danger, and unprepared against the Di∣stemper: But the Lemmers do not more frequently infest the Land, than the Whales do terrifie and molest the Sho res; yet the Mariners and Inhabitants of the Sea-Coasts have found out a Remedy a∣gainst their Violence and Fury, for they mingle some Water with the Oyl of Ca∣stor, the smell whereof doth force 'em to retire immediately; had not this help and expedient been found out, there would be no Fishing upon the Coasts of Nor∣way: which with Materials for Shipping is the greatest staple Commodity of the Country. Their Valleys are well stock'd with good Breeds of Cattle, which enable the Inhabitants to Export every year great abundance of Butter, Tallow, Hides, and Cheese; Barley is their chief Grain. Their Woods furnish Timber, Pitch, Tar, Rich Furs, and vast plen∣ty of Filbirds: They also drive a great Trade with their Train-Oyl and Stock Fish, which is vended over all Europe. In the Year 1623. Christian the Fourth King of Denmark, put several Artists up∣on
the search of some Gold and Silver Mines, and they are said to have found some Lumps of the Ore of both those Metals, which they Presented to that Prince. But whether the Ores lying so deep, it would not quit Costs, or that the thinness or ignorance of the Inhabi∣tants, in refining of Minerals themselves, with their jealousie and unwillingness to admit any Forreigners skill'd in that way into their Countrey; this Diicovery ne∣ver turned to any considerable Account. The Norwegians jump much with the Danes in their Complexion and Humour, but are generally more effeminate and lazy; yet not naturally so, but thro want of Employment and Exercise. The Policy of the Crown of Denmark not thinking fit to employ this Nation in a∣ny Wars, for fear of enuring 'em, and making them expert in Arms. And thro this Umbrage, takes all the Courses im∣aginable to Cow and dispirit them. Now tho the ancient Norwegians are said to have been notorious Pyrats; yet at this day hardly any Seas are less infested with Pyracy than those of Norway. Not that the Modern Inhabitants are blest with more Honesty than their Ancestors, but the Danish sway is so rigorous, as not to allow them any Shipping, nor
any other means to pamper, grow resty, and head strong, but on the contrary fleeces, squeezes, and keeps them in the lowest servitude. Their Diet is what they Export to o∣ther Countreys, principally Stock Fish, and a course kind of Butter and Cheese, Their usual Drink Rostock Ale, their man∣ner being commonly to drink three Draughts; one in remembrance of God, the second to the Kings Health, and the third to the Queens. As the Towns in Norway are very thin, so the Buildings for the most part are very poor and miserable; generally patched up of dirt and hurdles, some∣what resembling our Cotrage Houses in the Fen Countreys. As for the Government of this Coun∣trey, it is still reckoned a distinct King∣dom from that of Denmark; and had formerly Independant Kings of its own, who sometimes domineer'd over the ve∣ry Kings of Sweden and Denmark. But the last King of the Norwegian Race, who Reigned in their Kingdom, was Haguin; who in the year 1363 Married Margaret Eldest Daughter of Waldemar the third, King of Denmark, and so united the two Crowns. Now tho this King had only one Son by Queen Margaret, who died
without Issue, yet the Danes having once got footing in, and possession of this Kingdom, were resolved not to abandon such an advantage, nor part from their Station; and to secure it, immediately clapt strong Garrisons into all the Cities and Fortresses of moment in the Nation. For the better Management of the Go∣vernment, it is divided into five Prefe∣ctures answerable to the five Castles which command them. Now 1. The Prefecture of Masterland or Maestrandt is situated most towards the South, and is commanded by the Ca∣stle of Bahuy's, now in the hands of the King of Sweden. That Castle was first Built by Haguin the IV. King of Norway, about the year 1309, upon a steep Rock on the Bank of the River Srollet, and then esteem'd the best Fort the King had in his Dominions; and a sufficient Barrier against the frequent Attacks and Inroads of the Swedes and Westro-Goths: Besides the City of Maestrandt noted for the in∣finite quantity of Herrings caught there∣about, there's two more of less note, Con∣gal and Oldawalt. The 2. Prefecture contains the Bisho∣pricks of Anslo and Staffenger, with the Province of Aggerhuys, having under its Command, first the Towns of Anslo, Op∣slo,
or Asloia, possess of most repute, as being an Episcopal See, and the place where the Courts of Judicature are kept for all Norway. All Causes and Suits at Law being heard and determined before the Governour, who acts as Vice Roy of the Kingdom. The Cathedral of this Town is dedicated to Alward, who took great pains to Convert the Norwegian Pagans. This Church has to show the Sword of Haquin, one of their most Primitive Kings, being a signal Instance and Proof of the Strength and admirable Art of some Norwegians of former Ages. The Hilt of it is made of Chrystal curiou∣sly wrought and polished; whence some have inferred that the use of Chrystal was anciently much more ordinary in Norway, than it is at this day in any part of Europe. Not far from Opslo on the opposite side of the Bay stands the Castle of Aggerhuysen; famous for the brave resistance it made the Swedish Army in the Year 1567, which laid a close and brisk Seige to it for Eigh∣teen Weeks together; but was at last beat off and forced to a shameful Retreat. Tons∣berg formerly a place of Retreat of the Kings of Norway, Hammer in former times a Bishops See, but now united to that of Op∣slo. Some Authors do affirm that near unto Hammer a huge and monstrous Serpent
doth constantly appear before any great Change in the State or Government of the Kingdom of Norway. Saltzburg, Frederik∣stadt and Scheene, driving all a considera∣ble Trade from the Copper and Iron Mines, which abound more hereabouts than in a∣ny other part of the Kingdom. In this Province were the Silver Mines above∣mentioned first discovered, and some of the adjoyning Hills, are by the Neighbour∣hood to this day called Silver Bergen, or the Mountains of Silver. Now Norway is in∣debted for the greatest part, if not all its Trade, to those Mines, and the migh∣ty Woods of Fir and Pinetrees which o∣verspread this part of the Country. The City of Staffenger lies in 59 deg. (some reckon 60, and a great many odd min.) of Latitude, being seated upon a Demy-Island upon a great Bay of the Nor∣thern Ocean, full of small Islands, and guard∣ed by the strong Castle of Doeswick, which stands about two English Miles from the Town; this City is a Bishops See, and is divided into several Districts, tho in civil Affairs it is under the Jurisdiction of the Governour of Aggerhuysen. Beyond the Bay is seen the Island Schute∣nes, Twelve English Miles in length, but scarce two in breadth: This Island con∣tains several Villages, and between it and
the Continent runs a narrow Frith to Ber∣ghen, which the Dutch Merchants call the Liedt van Berghen. The Province of Tillemarch or Thyle∣march, appertaineth to the Bishoprick of Staffenger. The Parish or Hollen, in this Parish is very remarkable for a Church-Yard or Burying Place, on the top of a Church, Dedicated to St. Michael, which is cut out of a great high Rock, called by the Neighbourhood Vear, upon the Lake Nordsce, half a Mile distant from Scheen; 'tis thought by some to have been former∣la a Heathenish Temple, but converted to Christian uses upon the first planting of the Gospel in this Kingdom. Bergenhuis is the third Castle of Com∣mand in Norway: This Prefecture and Bi∣shoprick, being the most fruitful and plea∣sant part of all Norway, lying in the mid∣dle or heart of the Kingdom, to the North of Aggerhuysen. It has its Name from the Stately and Noble Mart Town of Berghen; or else from the strong Castle of Bergenhuysen, the usual Seat of the Vice-Roy of Norway, at a small distance to the North of Berghen. Berghen is the Granary and Magazine of the whole Kingdom of Norway, for Bahuys, it is distant about Fourty hundred English Miles by Sea, and Two hundred
and forty by Land; from Trunthein as ma∣ny; from Scagen, the outmost Promon∣tory of Juis Island, almost Three hundred and twenty. Some Etymologists have de∣rived its Name from the Norwegian Verb Berghen, which signifies to hide or conceal; because the Haven being surrounded with Hills, seems to be a kind of Sculking place for Ships, where Vessels of Two hundred Tun and upwards, ride in a spacious and most secure Harbour, free from any danger of Wind and Weather. But the true deriva∣tion of the word is this, Berghen in the Nor∣wegian Tongues also signifies Mountains, and Bergenhuysen a Company of Houses among the Hills. The Buildings of this Town till of late were but very mean and despise∣ble, for the most part of Wood covered with green Turf, and so often burnt down. But the Forreigners that have traded thi∣ther, within these few years have adorn'd the Town with an Exchange, and many goodly private Houses; the principal Com∣modity which Berghen Trades in, is Stock∣fish, which they catch upon those Coasts in Winter, commonly in January, for the con∣veniency of drying it in the cold and sharp Air, besides all sorts of Furrs, and vast quantities of dried Fish, Butter, Tallow, Hides, &c. are brought hither from all parts of Norway to be Imported into For∣
The Governour of Berghen has under his Jurisdiction the Prefectures of Leehorn∣leen, Nordhornleen, Soghue, Sudfiord Nord, and Sundmerleen. The Prefecture and Bishoprick of Trun∣thein is reckoned the fourth Government in Norway, and its City anciently called Ni∣drosia, was formerly the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom, & the Seat of the King & Archbishop of Norway. It was in former times a beautiful City, but being burnt down in the year 1522, and kept in such subjection and oppression by the Danes, it has been so far from being able to receive its primitive Splendor, that it seems more like a Village than a City. Yet something of the ancient Grandeur still appears in the Cathedral de∣dicated to St. Ilaus, which (though almost consumed by Fire) by the Ruins, shews it self to have been one of the most Magnifi∣cent and largest Fabricks in the World. In this Church the Huntsmen were wont to make a yearly Offering of the Skins of the largest and stoutest White Bears which they kill'd, for the Priests to tread upon at Divine Ser∣vice. Greenland and Iseland, were formerly Districts of the Diocess of Truntheim, but this Bishoprick is now confined within nar∣rower bounds: Most part of this Country having no Wood at all growing in it, make
use of Fish bones for Fuel, for Timber to build their Houses, and for several Imple∣ments of Houshold Stuff: And with the fat of those same fish they feed their Lamps in Winter. The fifth and last Prefecture command∣ing this Countrey, is that of Wardhuyse, its Castle has its Name from the Island Warda wherein it stands, and is about Eight Eng∣lish Miles from the main Land of Finmark, and near Twelve in Compass; the Food of the Inhabitants of this and the Neighbou∣ring Island is only Stock-Fish, which they dry in the Frost. No manner of Bread nor Drink have they, but what is Imported from Forreign Countreys; some Cattle they have, yet none but such as can live on dry'd Fish their Masters Diet. The Gover∣nor retires in the Winter more Southerly within the Land, by reason of the extre∣mity of the Cold, and the long absence of the Sun for some Months together, the Town lying within the Artick Circle. It is much improved of late, since the re∣moval of the English Trading from Novo∣grod to St. Nicholas, not far from hence, and is both profitable and useful to the Crown of Denmark in regard of its strength, the Dutch and English being obliged to touch at it in their way to Moscovy. On the North of Norway lies Finmark, or
as the Natives call it, Taakemark, which is not divided as all other Countries gene∣rally are, into distinct Lordships and In∣heritances, but every Man pretends a Right and Title to every part of the Land, and the strength of the Arm is the only Judge of Controversies. when the Fish∣ing Season comes in they throng to the Sea Coasts, and when that is over retire again into the Laplands. Fixt habitations they have none, but remove their Dwel∣lings according to the Seasons for Hunt∣ing; their Houses are made only to secure them against the Injury of the Weather, and the assaults of wild Beasts; and for that purpose they first erect Four Posts in the Figure of a Square, which they bind together with cross Girders, and rear to them smaller pieces, fastning all with Wythes; these except the door places, the poorer sort wholly cover with boughs of Trees or such like stuff, the richer with a course sort of Woollen Cloth, or an ordi∣nary sort of Canvas. Two doors have they in these Houses, the fore door, which is of common use and entrance for the whole Family, and the back door, thro which the Men pass, and that only when they go a Hunting, Fishing, &c. but all Women are forbid it, either because that Sex is thought to be very inauspicious to those Exercises,
for if any (when he is a going a Hunting or the like,) do but meet a Woman, he presently returns back and leaves his de∣sign for that day; or because the Image of their God Thor was commonly placed near their back door, from whose Sacrifices and Presence all Women are wholly exclu∣ded. These Houses are distinguished into several Partitions, not by any Wall, but only by great Posts or Loggs of Wood laid upon the Ground; their Fire place is in the middle, about which the whole Fa∣mily lies, either upon the bare Earth or upon the Skins of Rein Deer, Bears, &c. When they have a mind to change their Habitation, which they do constantly twice a Year, they unty this their Tent, take it away with them, and pitch it in a more convenient place. Another Sort of Houses among them, are their Granaries and Store Houses; which that they may the better secure their Provision from wild beasts and vermin, they do not build upon the Ground, but at some distance from it, upon the bole or stump of a large Tree. The Ordinary Diet of the Laplanders, is either of Fish or the Flesh of their Rein Deer, &c. Which they eat sometimes raw, sometimes boil'd, but for the most part dried in the air. Bread and Salt are
unknown to them, instead of Bread they make use of their dry'd Fish, groun'd small like Meal: And for Salt they take the in∣ward of the Pine Trees, which they dry in the Sun, and putting it into Boxes bury it a small depth in the Ground, then after it hath lain there a competent time, they kindle a fire upon the place and so dry it; whereby it becomes of a redish co∣lour, a pleasant taste, and gives a good gust and relish to their courser Food. Their general Drink is pure Water, which in the Winter time they keep in their Houses continually hot, and so drink it. Of late they are grown ac∣quainted with Brandy and Liquors of that nature, which are in great vogue with them, and which they drink only on their Holy Days and at their Weddings. Their Dining Room is commonly in the middle of their Tent about the Fire, with∣out Tables, Dishes, Spoons or Trenchers, and such sort of Implements; each lays his Commons upon his Mittens, and when he has eat it, says Grace, shakes his Camrades by the right Hand, which is their Charity Cup; and so every one trudges about his business. Their Garments are very course and mean, made either of the Skins of Wild Beasts, (frequently in use amongst them)
or the worst of our English Cloth, which they wear only on Holy Days and at their Publick Fairs. They alter them accord∣ing to the Season of the Year; and each Sute for distinction sake, has a several Mode and Fashion: The Men use a Long Garment reaching down from their Mid∣dle to their Ankles, which serves them for Breeches and Stockings; above this they have a sort of Wollen Coat call'd Mudd, which they tye about them with a Leathern Thong. Their Shoes, as the the rest of their ordinary Garments, are made of the shins of rein Deer, Elks, &c. with the hair outward, the toe bending somewhat upward, and according to the ancient Custom, ending with a sharp point: On their Heads they have a Cap made of the Skin of some Fowl, as Geese, Ducks, or the like, but particularly make choice of the Loom for that purpose, and like the ancient Germans taking the Feathers, Head and Wings along vvith it. The Garb proper to Women is a large vvide Govvn, made either of Cloth or Skins, according to the Persons Condition and Estate: this Govvn is gathered close in the middle, and decked vvith several Figures of Birds, Beasts, and the like, vvhich they vvork very prettily and vvith great art. As for their Religion, before the plant∣ing
of Christianity in that Countrey, which nevertheless has made but little progress among 'em, and would be entirely aban∣doned, were it not for the strictness of the Government; they had their Deities pub∣lick and common to the whole Nation, and others belonging onely to a Family, a Division, a Neighbourhood; their greater Gods were the Sun and Fire, their lesser was Wira Accha, represented by an old stump of a Tree: they also pay Adoration to the Ghosts of Men depart∣ed, especially of their Relations and Friends, whom they consider as Divinities; they worship also Spectres and Demons, which they fancy wander among the Rocks, Woods, Rivers and Lakes; they do the like to their Genius's good or bad, whom they say fly in the air about Christ∣mass. Their Gods common to the whole Countrey be Thor or Thiermes, that is, Thunderer or Noise-maker, they honour him with endearing and lofty Titles, as, Great-Grand-Father and the like; they fancy his abode to be in the Clouds, and that he disposes of Wind, Rain, Thun∣der, good and bad Weather, as he thinks fitting: He it is they think gives Life or Death, Health or Sickness, Blessings or Sufferings: They make his Image of
Beech-Tree, easily turning the stoops which shoot out from the root into the likeness of a Mans Head, Arms, Feet, and the rest, laying by him a Bow, Arrows, and a Hammer to kill the mischievous Demons. They place their Images upon a Table in a piece of Ground dedicated to that Service, not far from their Habita∣tions, the Table serves them for an Al∣tar, and the Boughs of Birch and Pine for a Temple. They suffer not their Women to be present at the Sacrifices they offer to him, looking upon that as very Criminal. But they never offer Sacrifice till they have enquired of their God whether he will accept it or no: And this they do with a certain Instrument which they call Kannees, resembling much the old fashi∣oned Drums, on which they picture seve∣ral of their Gods: The whole manner of the Ceremony being as followeth, They pull off some of the hair at the bottom of the Beasts Neck which is to be sacrificed, and bind it to a Ring which is fastned to the Drum, then one of them beats the Drum, and all the rest sing these words, What sayest thou, O great and sacred god, doth thou accept this Sacrifice whic we de∣sign to offer unto thee? And while some Chant these Words, others repeat the Name of the Mountain where they are;
then if the Ring rests on that part of the Drum where the God is pictured, they take it for granted the God is pleased; and so proceed to the Ceremony; or else cary the Sacrifice to Storejunkar or some other God, using the like Form of words, Father god will you have my sacrifice? Their usual Sacrifices are Rein-Deers, Cats, Lambs and Hens. The usual time of their offering up their Sacrifices is in Autumn, because that Winter and Nights approach∣ing, they think they have the more need of their Gods assistance: Their way of Consecrating is in this manner, First they Sacrifice the Rein-Deer, then taking out his Bones they anoint the Idol with the Blood and Fat, and bury the Flesh and Bones under ground, but this they do not till the God has approved of the Sacrifice, after which they bind the Rein-Deer be∣hind the house, then with a sharp knife they run him thro the heart, and gather the heart blood, wherewith they anoint the I∣dol, into a Vessel. After that having placed the Images right, making a new one eve∣ry time they sacrifice, and setting them in order behind one another, the last al∣ways hindmost, they approach with reve∣rence to it, anoint the Head and Back all over with the blood, but on his Breast they only draw several crosses, behind him
they place the Skull, Feet and Horns of the sacrificed Deer; before him they place a Coffer made of the bark of Birch, into whic they put a bit of every Member of the Rein Deer, withsome of the Fat; and the rest of the Flesh they convert to their pri∣vate uses. The next of their Principal Gods is Store∣junkar, that is, Great Commander, he they say presides peculiarly over all Beasts and Cattle; this Gods Name they reverence with the highest respect, and pay him fre∣quenter, if not greater Devotion than o∣ther Gods, for they suppose him to be their Thor or Thiermes Lieutenant, and worship him because that they think they receive all their Blessings thro his hands, and that all Beasts and Cattle are subject to his Will, and he governs them as Thiermes does Men and Spirits; wherefore he can give them to whom he will, and none can re∣ceive them without his pleasure: Thus, Thiermes and Storejunkar are the two pe∣culiar Gods of the Laplanders, the one hav∣ing the Dominion over the Men, the other over Beasts; one bestows life, the other all things necessary for the sustenance of it. When they offer Sacrifice to Storejunkar, which is likewise a Male Deer, they firstrun a Red Thred thro his Right Ear, and bind Him, and sacrifice Him in the place where
they did the like to Thor, preserving the blood also in a Vessel; then he who performs the Ceremony takes the Horns and the Bones of the Head and Neck, with the Feet and Hoofes, and caries them to the Moun∣tain of that Storejunkar, for whom the Sa∣crifice was designed: When he comes near the sacred stone he reverently uncovers his head and bowes his body, paying all the Ceremonies of Respect and Honour, then he anoints the Stone with the Fat and Blood, and places the Horns behind it; un∣to the right Horn they fasten the Rein-Deers Yard, and to the left some red Thred wrought upon Tin with a little piece of Silver. The third and last of their Principal Gods is the Sun, whom they call Baiw, and worship him chiefly for his Light and Heat; also because they believe him to be the Author of Generation, and that all things are made by his means, especially their Rein-Deers, of whom and their Young, they think he hath a peculiar care to cherish by his Heat, and bring suddenly to Strength and Maturity. And being they live in a cold Country, where their heat is diminished and of∣ten wholly extinguish'd, being they have nothing to sustain themselves with but the flesh of Rein Deer; they think it very fit to pay the Sun very great Honours; who is the Author of so great Blessings to them, and who at his return restores them that Light which they lost by his departure, and that not for a day or two, but for several Weeks, which being paid, the new days seems
welcome to them, by reason of long absence. Now the Sacrifices they use to the Sun are young Rein Deers, and those not Bucks, but Does, the Rites being much the same with those before-mention∣ed, except only instead of a red String thro' the right Ear of Storejunkars Sacrifice, they run a white one thro the Suns; then they make a Garland, not of Birch but Willow, about as big as the Hoop of an Hogshead. This they place upon a Table be∣hind the Hut, where they Sacrifice to Thor; not upon the same Table, but one like it. And this Sa∣crifice differs from the Other, in that there are neither Images erected here, nor Horns, the Beasts not being come to their growth. But that there may be some rissemblance of the Sun, they place their chief Bones of the Sacrifice upon the Table in a Circle. But the Laplanders are not more nototorious for their Idolatry than for their Witchcraft; anci∣ent and modern Writers asserting that they have attained to so great a skill in Enchantments and Magick, as that among several other strange Effects of their Art, they could stop Ships when under full Sail, nay and could either by their looks, words, or some other wicked Artifice, to ensnare and bewitch Men, as to deprive them of the use of Limbs and Reason, and very often bring them into extream peril of their lives. Now one of the main Reasons and Motives of their so doing, is, that every one thinks it the safest way to defend himself from the injurious and malicious designs of others; for they com∣monly profess that their knowledg in these things is absolutley necessary, for their own se∣curity. Wherefore they have Teachers, Pro∣fessors
in this Science; and Parents in their last Will bequeath to their Children as the greate part of their Estate, those Spirits and Devils that have been any ways serviceable to them in their life time. Now as to the bequeathing their Familiars to their Children, they consider it as the only means to raise their Family, so that they excel one another in this Art, according to the largeness of the Legacies they receive. By which it is apparent that every Family hath peculiar Spirits, and of different and quite contrary Na∣tures from those of others; and as each house, so has each single person his particular Spirits, sometimes one, two or more; but there are a set number of obsequious Spirits, beyond which none hath. Nevertheless some of these Spirits will not engage themselves without great Soli∣citation and earnest Entreaties, whereas others will readily offer themselves to little Children, when they find them capacitated for their turn, so that several of the Inhabitants are almost na∣turally Magicians; for when the Devil takes a liking to any person in his Infancy, as a fit In∣strument for his purposes, he presently seizes on him by a Disease, in which he haunts him with several Apparitions, from whence accord∣ing to the Capacity of his Years and Understand∣ing, he knows what belongs to the Art. Those who are thus taken a second time see more Vi∣sions, and gain far greater knowledge. If they are seized a third time, which is seldom with∣out great torment or utmost danger of their life, the Devil appears to them in all his shapes, by which they arrive to the very Perfection of his Art, and become so knowing, that without a
Drum they can see things at greatest Distances, and are so possessed by the Devil, that they see them even against their will. And a certain Swedish Author tells a strange Story of a Laplan∣der, who upon complaint made against him for keeping a Drum, brought it, and delivered it up to him, and with Tears confest, that tho he thus willingly parted with it, and never intended to provide another, yet he should still be tor∣mented with the same fearful and troublesome Visions about future Events, which (tho' his Eyes were shut) were always present to his im∣agination, giving him a true and particular Re∣lation of whatever had happened to him in his Journey to Lapland. As for the Art it self, it is according to the di∣versity of Instruments used in it, divided into two parts, one comprehends all that to which the Drum belongs; the other, those things to which Knots, Darts, Spells, Conjurations, and the like refer: The Drum is peculiar to the Lap∣landers, and called by them Kannus or Quochdas, made of a hollow piece of Wood, and must be either of Pine, Fir, or Birch Tree, which grows to such a particular place, and turns directly according to the Suns Course; which is when the Grain of the Wood running from the bottom to the top of the Tree; winds it self from the right hand to the left. It is made hollow on one side, upon which they stretch a Skin, fasten∣ing it with wooden Pegs; on the other they make two holes to hold it by; the shape of the upper part is Oval, about half an Ell in Diameter; upon the Skin they paint several Pictures in red, stain'd with the Bark of an Alder∣tree; and through the middle they draw
some cross Lines in every Quarter, of which they place their Attendants; neither do they alwaies observe the same Gods, and the same Methods. But this is obser∣vable, that they commonly paint the Sun in the middle, their Gods above, and the earthly things under him. And since Chri∣stianity was introduced among them, many of them do place upon their Drum the Image of Christ, and his Apostles, owning him to be, or to have the power of one of their Gods. Moreover, they alter their figures according to the occasion of the inquiry, retaining the general Notions the Heathens had of their Deity, that several of them had peculiar Offices and Employ∣ments. But now, though in many places they have been forced to abandon their Drums, yet do they practice all their knots, have their familiars in the shape of Flies, Bees, &c. But chiefly their black Cats (whom they not only Consult at home about their Domestick affairs, but take with them also in their huntings; tho in the depths of Snow;) and their Diaboli∣cal Exercises, which are performed some∣times with, sometimes without a Drum: If with a Drum, the Sorcerer kreels down, and having a bunch of Rings, and other pieces of Brass laid in the middle of
the Drum, he beats with a Consecrated Hammer, so strongly, that the Rings dance upon it, by the resting of which upon such a figure, they draw forth an answer to what they would desire to know; but if this be not satisfactory, then the Drummer puts himself by dancing and howling into a vio∣lent motion, till he falls down, which he chuses to do upon his Drum; and then he lies without motion and disturbance, and without sense, till he voluntarily rise again, and gives answer to what is desired. This kind of Divination is chiefly used, when something at a great distance is desired to be known. The Stories are so frequent, and from persons not over credulous, that there is no room left to doubt of what they say concerning these Sorceries. A∣mongst other Instances thereof, this is rela∣ted by a Person of worth and understand∣ing; who being one time at Dinner with his Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, &c. his Fathers knife was missing upon the sudden, and could not be found, till two years after a Counsin of his returning from being Fa∣ctor in, or near Lapland, brought it with him, telling them, that out of curiosity he had employed a Laplander, a pretender to great skill in this Art, to bring him notice of the health and condition of that Family;
who after he had lain sometime in this now described manner, brought him news, that they were all well, that he found them at Dinner; and that to confirm his Rela∣tion, he brought away that knife, which he delivered to the Merchant, and the Mer∣chant brought home now to his Uncle. As I said before, they sometimes pra∣ctice these Sorceries without the Drum, using instead of it commonly Strings or Darts, by which they advantage their friends, or injure their enemies at their pleasure. The strings they make use of to raise or quell the Winds, which they sell to Mariners for that purpose. They con∣sist commonly of three knots; the first of which being untied, affords a favourable Wind; the second a brisk Gale; and the third a violent Storm; as has been approved to the great peril & loss of several Seafaring persons, that have given account of it in pub∣lick. By their Darts, which are short Cylin∣ders of Lead; they wound any one who hath done them an injury, or their malice puts them upon to assault: These are said to be the most powerful Charms of any, & upon occasion to have split Rocks, level'd Moun∣tains, and such like incredible Exploits. They have Matrimony in great venera∣tion, it being seldom known they commit
Adultery, but if such a crime be once dis∣covered, it is severely punished. Now, when ever any man purposes to marry, his first business is, to make inquiry after a Maid well stock'd with Rain-Deers; for the Lap∣landers have a Custom of bestowing upon their Children soon after their Birth, some certain number of those Rain Deers, and their Encrease is accounted of not as the Parents Estate, but the Child's Portion. Thus she, who has the greatest number of them, is in the fairest way to have a Hus∣band. Nor have they regard to any thing else, not minding either good Breed∣ing or Beauty, or other the common al∣lurements of Wooers. Now the Spark ha∣ving pitched upon a Mistress, informs one of his nearest friends of his Intentions, and desires him to be his Spokes-man: This Kinsman of his sollicits the business with her Father, Mother, and Kindred, present∣ing and cajoling them with Brandy and Tobacco, or what else is most in request in order to the purchasing their Consent. After this the Suitor has an Invitation to the Hut where the Bride dwells, where he agrees to certain Articles offered by her friends, and then lists himself for a whole year in her Fathers service; though first
presenting the Father with a Silver Cup, & Kettle of either Copper or Alchimy, and a Bed, or at least handsom Bedding. To the Mother he gives a Girdle of Silver, a Robe of Honour, and a Whisk, which they wear about their neck, and let it hang down to their breast, interlaced all about with Bosses of Silver. Besides, he bestows upon the Brothers and Sisters, and all the Kindred, Silver Spoons, Silver Bosses, and some other such knick knacks of Silver; for each of them must be presented with some gifts by the Bridegroom, if he mean to obtain his Bride. But the time of his years Service being expired, he takes to him his Wife, and proceeds to the Solem∣nizing the Marriage, which is ever per∣formed with great Pomp and Ceremony, according to their abilities. The Bride is spruc'd up with the Choicest Ornaments they can get, as pieces of Tin and Alchi∣my, with several Rings of Fish Bones and Brass; though a Bride of the Richer sort first looses her hair, and the Fillet where∣with she bound it up together before, she gives to the Virgin that is next akin to her: Afterwards on her bare head and loose hair she puts a kind of Silver Fillet, guilt over, or two, such as is the womens Custom to wear at other times, instead
of a Garland or Coronet, which is practised in Denmark, Sweden, and other Northern Countrys, so that by how much this Fillet is looser then to environ only her head; so much it hangs down the more behind. Like∣wise about the middle they put on a Silver Girdle, the Bridegroom too is as spruice as possible he can be, having the best cloaths on he can get at his own charges, and those girded with a Silver Girdle. Thus adorn'd is the Bride dragg'd to Church, or to the Priest, seeming to go with much reluctance, and there is married according to the usual Forms. In former times Matrimony was solemnized by the Parents and Friends (the Father supplying the place of the Priest, by striking of Flint and Steel, the patest Emblem, as they thought, of a mar∣ried life; for as the Flint conceals within it Fire, which by concussion breaks forth; so in both Sexes there is life hid, which by the mutual coupling of Marriage, is propa∣gated at last to be a living Off-spring. Poligamy is not allowed of among them, a man being suffered to have but one Wife at a time. Nor do they contract Wed∣lock without the consent of their friends, to whom they refer themselves wholly as to that matter. Thus a stoln Wedding is never heard of among them, neither
are they suffered to trade for themselves, until they have served as Bondsmen their Father-in-law for a certain time, which Custom does seem to be derived from the most Primitive Times and Nations. Pestilential Distempers are very rarely known in this Country, the pureness of the Air still correcting the malignity of them, when they happen to be introdu∣ced. Plurisies, Inflammations, and Soreness of the Eyes, they are sometimes troubled with, which last they cure by drinking a Decoction of the Root of Moss, or the Stalk of Angelica, in the Whey of the Milk of their Rain-Deer. They cure wounds with no other Ointments or Plaister than that of Rosin, which the Trees sweat out: If a Member be benummed with cold, the the Cheese made of Rain-Deers Milk, af∣fords the presentest Remedy to it; they thrust a red hot Iron into it, and with the Fat of the Cheese that instantly disti from it, they anoint the part affected, with incredible success; and when troubled with any Pains or Aches in their Joynts, or Body, as the Gout; Cramp, Sciatica, or the like, they ease and cure them by ap∣plying a Caustick of the flame of any Chips to the affected place. Diseases be∣ing thus rare among them, and the Reme∣dies
so easie, they live to an extream old Age: many being known to live to above a hundred years old, and most usually at∣tain to Seventy, Eighty, and Ninety years, & at this Age are still sufficiently brisk and lively, able to manage their business with expedition, to take a Journey, to Course through Woods and Mountains, and per∣form other such toil and labour, with great vigour; seldom do they grow grey, and that not till the very last declension of their Age; and it is found, that more of them are dispatched by old Age, than Dis∣eases. But when they perceive any one near Death, they send either for the Priest, if near at hand, to prepare him for his Dis∣solution, or else for a Magician, who is said to be able to resolve them by his Drums, of the very hour and manner of any mans Death. In case he dies, they fancy his Soul is restless till his Body be buried, which for that reason they do with all possible hast, commonly carrying him to the nearest Wood or Cave which they pitch upon for a burying-place, sel∣dom interring them in Church-yards, by reason of their remoteness. The dead Corps they carry upon a Sledge, the person who conducts being particularly intreated
to undertake the Employment, and must receive of the nearest kinsman of the De∣ceased Person a Ring of Alchimy, and wear it fastened to his Right Arm; the reason of which is, because they believe it a pre∣servative against the mischief the Manes of the Deceased Person may bring upon them and therefore is fain to wear this same Ring till the Burial be over. When they come with the Body to the Cave, they cast it in, and the Sledge after it, or else cover it with great Logs of Wood, to de∣fend it from wild Beasts, never failing to lay by it a Hatchet, a Flint and Steel, that if ever they come to rise again in the dark∣ness, they shall have great need of spring¦ing a light; to which the Flint & Steel may help them; as likewise there will be occa∣sion for a ready way wherein they may travel to Heaven, to which purpose their Hatchet may stand them instead, them especially that are buried in thick Woods, that if any Trees obstruct their passage, they may cut them down. When they come home from the burial, they make ready a Funeral-banquet, or rather indeed a Sacrifice to the Ghost of the Deceased Person, which they perform, by taking those Rain-Deer, who drew the Corps to the Grave, and offer them in Sacrifice to
the Manes, revelling upon the flesh with Brandy and Tobacco, and quaffing round a Health to the Deceased Person, calling the Brandy which they use for that pur∣pose the Wine of the Blessed, meaning that they drink it to the memory of him, that is happy by his departure from Earth. At this Feast they take special care not to lose the Bones of the sacrificed Rain-Deer, but gather them all up diligently, and lay them in a Coffer, and bury them under ground; but first fasten upon the Coffer wherein they shut up the Rain-Deers Bones, the Image of a Man fashioned out of Wood, bigger or less in proportion to the Deceased Person. But the Scepter of Denmark extending over but a small part of Lapland, it is not necessary to inlarge upon the other To∣picks, which the Description of that Coun∣try does afford; wherefore we will leave it, and steer our Course towards. The Islands of Fero. THE Islands of Fero are only many high Rocks and Mountains covered with thin Earth, of about two foot deep, and divided from each other by rapid streams of deep water: Part of them are inhabited, and part stocked with Cattle;
the Account whereof, with their Havens, Creeks, Inlets, and other Circumstances, take as followeth. They are Seventeen in number; Fugloe, or Fowle-Island, about two English Miles in breadth, and three in length. 2. Swino, in which is a pleasant Valley of a mile is length. 3. Vederoe, six Miles long, and three broad. 4. Bordoe, six Miles in length 5. Kunoe is a long and narrow Island, much of the same bigness as Bordoe. 6. Kalsoe  seven Miles long, & near two Miles broad, 7. Osteroe is almost twenty Miles in length, but unequal in breadth; for some places are two miles broad, others four or six Miles broad, according as the points stretch themselves far out. 8. Fromoe twenty four Miles long, and eight broad, being the largest of the Feroe Islands, and contains the Town of Thorshaven, the Metropolis and place of greatest Trade of them all▪ 9. Wagoe, a round piece of ground of a∣bout eight miles in Diameter. 19. Mig∣geness, three miles long, and one and a had broad, having a high Territory, with high Promontories round about it, there being but one place to come on Land. 11. Kol∣ter, a small Island, a Mile in length, and half a Mile in breadth. Betwixt twenty and thir∣ty years ago, there was found on the
highest top of the Mountain of Kolter, the quantity of many Tonnes of Herrings spread along; the Mountain where the Herrings were found is above two hun∣dred fathoms high, being carried thither by a Whirl-wind. 12. Sandoe eight Miles long, and four Miles broad. 13. Skuo three Miles long, and one broad. 14. Forcdie∣men, or Great Dam, is almost round, being a good Mile in Diameter, with a high Territory, for the most part flat and green, above with great Clefis round about. 13. Lille-Diemen, a small Island, whereon feed a vast number of wild Sheep▪ 16. Suderoi, twenty Miles long, and eight broad, having a very good little harbour fiord, having a bowed Creek, where there is one of the best. Havens in Fero, called called Punthaven. And lastly, 17. Vaages-Lebroc. Besides, four little Isles, or Holmes, namely, Tintholm, Muggenesholm, Troleho∣fred, and Lilly-Diemen, which afford only Pasture for wild Sheep, with several other smaller Holms, whereof the most neces∣sary to be known by Mariners are Hof∣frigsholm, Kirckbockholm, and Combocholm. The Air of these Islands is temperate in all seasons, not over-hot in Summer, nor so violent cold in Winter, as to cause Ice in any of the Bays, and withal wholsom, and
free from all Contagious Diseases▪ unless introduced by Strangers; so that the In∣habitants generally attain to a very long life: Yet the Scurvey, the Leprosie, and a sort of Feverish Distemper, by the In∣habitants called Landsarforo, are Epidemi∣cal Diseases, which reign in most of these Islands, but rarely prove mortal. Besides, the Inhabitants are exceedingly subject to Rheums, which occasion Coughs and Head-achs, which they nevertheless cure by drinking some Whey, as hot as they can bear it. Thunder they never hear in Summer, but often in Winter, Spring and Autumn, and that too attended with vio∣lent Storms. The Fertility of these Islands is not over great, they affording hardly any other grain than Barley, whereof, never∣theless a Tun of Seed will commonly yield twenty or thirty Tun of grain. But their Pasture-grounds abound in good and sweet Grass, and those stockt with as large and fat Oxen, as shall be seen in any other part of Europe. These Islands do likewise abound in all sorts of Medicinal herbs, as Scurvey-grass, Water-cresses, Sorrel, angelica; as also Radix Rhodia, which is no where met with in such abundance, as upon the
Banks of Running Streams and Lakes in these Islands. Thus they want nothing re∣quisie for the cure of such Distempers as the Natives are most subject to. Great plenty, and variety of Fowl is here to be found, as doves, Stares, Owls, Sparrow-Hawks, Crows, Grillins, and Ravens, as well white, as others. The Sea-Fowl with them in most request is a kind of Teal, about the bigness of a Crow, with a long, round, and yellow Bill. The Eyder (a sort of Duck, which yields the Eyder Down) is a Bird pecu∣liar to these Islands, and which usually pulls the Down from her own Breast to make her Nest withal. When her young one are fledg'd and fled, the Natives take away the Down, and change it for use. But if the Feathers be pull'd off by man, they rot away forthwith, and are of no use. Another remarkable Fowl they have by them, called Imbrim, with a long Neck and Beak, the Back grey, and chequer'd with white spots, with a white Ring about the Neck: This Bird has two holes under her Wings, each large enough to hold an Egg; here 'tis thought she hatches two Eggs at once, being never seen with above two young ones at a time, nor known to come ashore.
The neighbouring Seas do provide the Natives with God, Whiting, large Floun∣ders, Marts a kind of Pilchards, of which such store, that the Havens and Creeks are filled with them, besides, Seals, Grind Whales, Morsses, and Dogfish, though their fishing Trade is much decayed of late years to what it was formerly. These Islands were first inhabited by Norwegians about the year 840. and so the Norwegian tongue was for a long while generally spoke, though of late years the Danish Dialect has much prevailed. The people are humble and civil to one another, and especially Courteous to Stran∣gers; Loyal, and liberal in their Contribu∣tions to the Government, and Charitable to the Poor: they are moderate and fru∣gal in their Dyet, which is chiefly on Milk, Fish, Gruel, and Flesh. They dry both their Flesh and Fish in the Wind, having Wind houses for that purpose, when the flesh is dryed, they boyl it in Water, and thicken the Broth with Barley Meal; which is reckon'd one of their greatest Delicacies. As for their Apparel, the Men wear woollen shirts, flannel Trowces, and Wast∣coats, with short loose Coats of the same. The Women rich and poor, go all alike, in strait Growns without skirts. Their
Stomachers are commonly large, and a∣dorn'd with thin gingling guilt plates of Tin. Their Shoes have no soles, but have pieces of leather drawn together at the Heels and Toes, and fastned with a string, or ribband about the Ancle, and are of Sheep-skin for the Women, and tann'd Neats leather for the Men. They lie on Beds of Hay, overspread with pieces of flannel. These People were first Converted to Christianity in the year 1000. by Sigismoad Bristyon, a Native of Fero, who was sent by the King of Denmark into his own Country for that purpose, Immediately after the Augsbourg Confession was recei∣ved in Denmark, and Norway, it was estab∣lished in Fero, these Islands containing at this day thirty nine Parishes, which are all officiated by Ministers of the Lutheran Religion. Besides Sundays, Holy-days, and the usual days of Prayer, as in other pla∣ces, they annually observe six peculiar days of Prayer, three in Ascension week, and three in Michaelmas week. They have one publick School endowed by King Chri∣stian the 4. and Nichilas Trolls, Vice-Ad∣miral of Denmark. As to the Government of these Islands, it is divided into the six Districts of Nor∣deroe,
Ostaroe, Stromoe, Waaegoe, Sandoe, and Sanorce. Each of these Districts has a Sheriff, who sits as Judge, and determines all Causes and Controversies of less mo∣ment. The Laws of Norway are the Laws of these Islands. They having none pecu∣liar of their own. The Ecclesiastical affairs are governed by a Synod of the Priests and Ministers, who meet and fit once a year. Out of the whole Synod one is Elected to preside o∣ver the rest, with the title of Provost. The Principal Commodities these Islands afford, are Skins, Feathers, Tallow, Train∣oyl, and Stockings; upon all which there is a particular price set. Stockins are the chief staple Commodity they have, in the making of which, all the Inhabitants of all Conditions are constrained to employ them∣selves for the getting a lively-hood, which the smallness of their Incomes, their slender possessions, and inconsiderable sti∣pends, would hardly otherwise afford. As for the Isle of Schetland, which many will have to be the Ancient Thule, it lies about sixty Degrees, & a few odd Minutes of Northern latitude, and has nothing very observable, the manners of its Inhabitants, the natuae of its Soyl, the temperature of its Air &c. being much the same as in Iseland.
Of Iseland. Iseland is an Isle in the Deucalidonian Seas, scituate under the Artick Circle, at 13 Degrees, and 30 min. of longitude, and 65 deg. and 44 min. of latitude; being bounded on the East with the Northern O∣cean; on the South with the Deucaledonian Sea; on the North and West, with the frozen Sea of Greeland. The Discovery of this Island was first made by one Naddoc; who sayling near the Coasts of the Fero Islands, was by a storm forc'd upon the Northern parts of this Island, which by reason of the abundance of Snow, wherewith the Country was then covered, he called Sneeland. After that, it was a second time discovered by a Sweedish Marriner called Gardar, who called it Gar∣darsholm, after his own name, and finally discovered by one Flocco a Norwegian Py∣rate, who called it Iseland, from the vast quantities of Ice in it, and about it; being frozen continually for the space of eight months, and so vehemently chilled with the Northern winds, that it yieldeth neither Corn nor Trees, except Juniper only.
Ingulph a Norwegian Baron, is said to have brought the first Inhabitants into this Island, in the year 874. though there is reason to believe it was peopled before that time, & known too, by the English and Irish, it being acknowledged, that the Ancient Iselan∣ders, called the Irish Papey, and the Western part of their Isle, as most frequented by Irish Merchants Papey. Besides, there is still several remains and monuments of Idolatry in this Island, which show its ancient Inha∣bitants to have been Pagans, whereas the Danes and Norwegians at the time of their first setling there were Christians. The modern Natives are for the most part plain and simple, living on what is gi∣ven them by nature, without the help of Art, more then that of making Cheese and Butter: the Mountains serving them for Towns, and the Rivers for Drink, and they quarter with their Horses and their Oxen under one and the same roof. As they do not stand in need of either Physick or Phy∣sician, so neither do they use any, their temperance in meat and drink, and the na∣turally strong constitution of their Bodies enabling many of them to attain to the age of 150 years, and more, Nay, Olaus Magnus affirms they commonly live to the age of three hundred years, and Blykenius
reports, that he saw a man in Iseland, who told him that he had then lived two hund∣red years. Their habitations are for the most part of timber, roofed with slags or turfs, with a hole on the side of the roof to let in their light; though in their Cities of Hola and Shalholt, instead of Tiles, they make use of fir-boards. But in their Hurts scatter'd up and down the Country, the Iselanders and their Cattle have the same lodging for the poorer sort of the Inhabitants, being desti∣tute of Wood and Turf, and not able to pur∣chase fuel from abroad, are forced in the extremity of Winter to betake themselves to a corner of their Ox-stalls, and there borrow warmth from their Cattle. The food of the Iselanders is upon Beef, Mutton, and the like, with most sorts of Foul, which they have in great abundance, the truth is, they have no variety of Sau∣ces, but the sharpness of the air furnisheth them with stomachs which need none. Fish they have great plenty of, and which dried, is indeed their only bread, and their Ling is so excellent, that even with us it is counted one of our greatest Dainties. Their most common Drink is Whey, which is generally so good, that an ounce of it will very well bear half an Ounce of
Water. They have also a sort of Mead, made of Barley flower, and a Honey-comb boyled in Water, and another liquor squee∣zed out of a certain reddish Berry, pecu∣liar to this Isle. But though they have neither Ale, Bear, nor Wine, they can make a shift to be sumptuous, nay, profuse in their Revels and Banquets, for we read that Theodore, and Thorwald (Brethren and Citizens of Hialtedat in North Iseland) so∣lemnizing the Funerals of their Father Hialta, entertained twelve hundred Per∣sons for fourteen days together at a Ban∣quer; and at the departure of his Guests made 'em all presents, every one suitable to his quality; many more instances have they of the same kind. They have little mony in Iseland, what they have is Danish, but that in very small quantity; bartering one Commodity for another, being their method of buying and selling, as it was of all other Nations in the Non-age of Commerce. The principal Commodities of this Coun∣try are Whalebone, which they have in such abundance, that many of 'em make Houses of it, and the only Bridge in the Island is framed of the same matter, they also formerly exported vast quantities of Beef, Mutton, Butter and the like, and do
still, dryed Fish, and Brimstone, the great Veins whereof do feed and nourish the flames of Mount Heela, which is one of the greatest Vulcanoes in the Universe, it belches forth by fits such inundations of fire, as menace the whole Isle with a gene∣ral conflagration, vomiting not only flame & fiery Coals, but large torrents of water, which burn like Brandy, or Aqua-vitae. At other times it casts forth stupendious quantities of Cinders and pumice stones, insomuch that it darkneth the Sun. The West wind occasions its greatest outrages; so that when the wind blows moderately from that quarter, the People of the adja∣cent Plains, knowing the safest passages to the Mountain, crow'd up to the mouth of the furnace, where they find their Diver∣sion by throwing great stones into the flames, which return them with as great violence as a barrel of Gunpowder blows up the slates of a House. Whereby a man runs great danger in approaching the flames who is not perfectly acquainted with eve∣ry part of the mountain, for he not only runs the risque of being knocked on the head with some of those stones which fre∣quently comes to pass, but also the ground does surprizingly open, and the flames swallow up men alive. Of this and two
other Mountains in this Island called Helga and la Croix, more strange circumstances are related, than what are said of Aetna, many of the silly superstitious Inhabitants believing that underneath it is Hell, and the abode of the damned, & some do confidently report that they have frequently seen whole Herds of Devils throng into the mouth of the furnace with their Burthens of damn'd Souls, and having eas'd their shoulders, re∣turn for a new leading. Nay, they will con∣fidently pretend to know the very day that any Battle is fought in any part of the world, by observing the more than usual importation of Souls on such days. Ano∣ther place of Torments the Natives do i∣magine to be under the Rocks on the Sea Coasts, and the clashing of the Ice against the shoar, and banks, makes such a noise, as they take for the howling of the damn'd. There is also said to be a Foun∣tain in Iseland, which petrefies immediate∣ly whatever is thrown into it; so that if a man takes a long pole, and stick part of it into the bottom of the lake, that part of the staff which sticks in the Earth, will pre∣sently be turned into Iron, the middle into Stone, and the uppermost part remain Wood, which came not into the water, the same Authors write of another lake there
which sends forth such pestiferous exhala∣tions, as poyson the Birds which flie that way. The modern language of Iseland, is the true old Danish Tongue, used in ancient inscriptions, and other monuments of Ru∣nick learning, which has been preserved Chast and pure to this day in Iseland, by reason of the little Commerce they have had with other Nations. Iseland was formerly divided into four Provinces, called East, West, North, and South Iseland, from the four quarters of the World: Each of these Provinces was subdivided into three lesser Districts, except North Iseland, being larger, into four. E∣very Districk had in it three publick Courts of Judicature, and ten or more Ʋreppar, or Constable Wards, the Govern∣ment of the Isle was Aristocratical till the year 1260. when being brought under the Crown of Norway, it since followed the fortunes of it in all Changes of Church and State made subiect with it to the Kings of Denmark, together with it reformed in matters of Religion according to the Con∣fession at Augsbourg, retaining still their Bi∣shops with a limited power, and turning the Revenues of their eight Religious Houses of Pingore, Remestede, Modur, and Monke∣nire,
under the Government and jurisdicti∣ion of the Bishop of Halar; and those of Videy, Pernebar, Kirckebar, and Skiade, un∣der the Bishop of Schalholt unto other u∣ses, according to the will and pleasure of their Lords of Denmark. But their Gods in the time of their Pa∣ganism, were, 1. Thor, who is said to have come out of Asia, with his Father Woden, and is answerable to Jupiter among the Romans, and gave name to our Thursday, in Iseland called Thorsday, and by the Ger∣mans Donderdag, that is, the Thunderers day, which signifies the same thing. 2. Wo∣den, or Oden; the Captain of the Asians, who first peopled these Northern Coun∣treys. From him the Iselanders call the fourth day of the week Odens dagur, and we Wednesday. Besides these two, we sometimes read of Freyer, one of Wodens Companions, and Friga, Wodens Spouse (whence our Fryday with several others of less note.) They have but two Cities, and those no better than our Ordinary Vil∣lages, yet the Seats of their two Bishops, the first is Hogin, the second is Shalholt, their other places of any note are Hatten∣fort, a Haven Town, where under ten the Dutch Merchants barter their Com∣modities, and beside a Castle, the ordinary
Residence of the Governor for the Kings of Denmark. As for their Court of Judicature, it is held once a year in a pleasant Plain in the middle of Iseland, where twelve men lear∣ned in the Laws of Iseland, having heard all the Plaintiffs and Defendants have to say, pronounce sentence, and decide the Controversies. And have power to deter∣mine all Civil Causes, and pronounce Con∣demnation as they think convenient against all Criminals. Such as receive sentence of Death, as Adulterers, Murderers, and Notorious Thieves, are beheaded; less Misdemeanors and Offences are marked in the Fore-head with an hot Iron. Of Freezland, or Friseland. FReezland so called from the continual frosts unto which it is subject, lies South-west of Iseland in 60 degrees, more Westerly than any part of Europe; it is said to be little less in extent than England; being a ragged and high sand, its mountains covered with Snow, and the Coast so full of drift Ice, that it is almost inaccessible. The longest day in Summer not exceeding
20 hours; nevertheless the Soil is so cold and barren, that it produceth neither Corn nor fruit, Fish being the principal, and al∣most only Food of the Inhabitants, and as it is their Food, so it is the chief Commo∣dity the Country does afford, there being good fishing every where upon the Coast. It was first discovered to us by Nicolas and Antonio Zani, two Venetian Gentlemen that were here Shipwrackt. Our Sea∣men in their soundings brought up a sort of Pale Coral, and little stones clear as Chry∣stal. They called it West-England, and one of the highest Mountains Charing Cross. The chief Town is called Friezland by the name of the Island; situate on the East∣ern shore of it. Besides we find some o∣thers in the Maps as Sanestol, Ocebar, Caba∣ra, Sorand, and some more very inconside∣rable. And now let us proceed on to Green∣land. Of Greenland. GReenland, so called, as some say, from the greenness of it in Summer, or as others, by Antiphrasis, for that it's never green, by reason of the sharpness of Win∣ter,
extends from 65. to 7 degrees of Northern latitude; so that the longest day in the most Southern parts is 21 hours and a half; and in the most Northern they have no night for three months and two weeks. The length of it is not known, nor whether it be an Island or a Continent, being chiefly frequented for the benefit of the Whale fishing. The chief commo∣dities are Fish, white Bears, wild Deer, and some store of Cattel there bred. The greatest part of the people dwell in Caves, and delight to a high degree in Necroman∣cy Other Lands there be, but not of any note, nor hardly worth the Claiming of the Crown of Denmark. FINIS.
