P2310 E993_4 99866800 119086
THE HAMMER of PERSECƲTION: Or, The Mystery of Iniquity, In the PERSECUTION Of many Good People in SCOTLAND, Under the GOVERNMENT OF OLIVER Late Lord Protector, And continued by others of the same Spirit; Disclosed, with the Remedies thereof. By Rob. Pittilloh, Advocate. Pro. 26.24, 25. He that hateth, dissembleth with his lips, and layeth up deceit within him. When he speaketh fair, believe him not: for there are seven abominations in his heart. Pro. 11.21. Though hand joyn in hand, the wicked shall not be un∣punished: but the seed of the righteous shall be saved. Pro. 16.2. All the ways of man are clean in his own eyes; but the Lord weigheth the Spirits. London, Printed for L. Chapman. 1659.
the apple of whose eye is touched when they are touched: he suffereth no man to do them harm, but rebukes Kings for their sake, saying, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my prophets no harm. He shall say to these on the left hand, In as much as ye did not to one of these little ones, ye did it not to me, Mat. 25. Fourthly, in an especial manner the advancement of the glory and kingdom of Jesus in the destruction of Baby∣lon, and the freedom of his Church, calls for Englands care towards the godly in Scotland. Whatsoever ye do, whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. The words of the Army in their Declaration at Muslebrough in Anno 1650 are, We found our hearts extraordinarily stirred up by the Lord to assist the Parliament against the King, being a∣bundantly satisfied in our Judgments and Consciences, that we were called forth by the Lord to be instrumental to bring about that which was our continual prayer to God, (viz.) the destruction of Antichrist, and the deliverance of his Church and People. Thousands of the Lords Saints are living in this faith, and not without strong Scriptural Grounds, that the times and days are now come, wherein the Lord hath so made bare his Arm to plead Sions controversie, that he will not withdraw till her hoofs become iron, and her horns brass; till the weak become as David, and David as an Angel of God; till the light of the Moon become as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun as the light of seven days; till there be upon the bells of the horses, Holiness to the Lord; and the pots in the Lords house be like the bowls before the Altar; and there be no more the Canaanite in the house of the Lord of Hosts. The Lord alone shall be exalted in that day, and wo will be to those who are found at ease in Zion, with their hands upon their loyns, not regarding the work of the Lord, when they are called to be instrumental for advan∣cing his glory, in furthering the liberty of his Saints, and breaking the yoke of the Oppressor in pieces. Lastly, the sixth Command, Thou shalt not kill, not onely forbids the ta∣king away of the life, and all degrees thereof, but also com∣mands the performing of all Christian diligence, for the pre∣servation thereof, and all things necessary therefore, accor∣ding
to the calling of every one of the commanded. It was the voyce of the Murderer, Am I my brothers keeper? and it was the heroick resolution of the Reubenites and Gadiets, when the children of Israel went into the Land of Canaan; We our selves will go ready armed before the children of Israel, until we have brought them unto their place. We will not return unto our houses, until the children of Israel have inherited every man his inheritance. The second kind of tyes, are the voluntary Ingagements under which the honest party in England have come, in refe∣rence to the honest party in Scotland, which are, First, the Obligation of the League and Covenant where∣by they are obliged to take what is done to another as done to themselves, in the prosecution of the true ends of the Covenant; and albeit we neither desire to idolize the Cove∣nant, (as many do) nor to mention it as a ground to advance any Antichristian Designe, as others with too much impu∣dence have done, nor to lay it down as the onely ground of the duty of the godly party in England; yet are we assured in the consciences of all such who fear an Oath, who have lift up their hands to the most High, and sworn by his great Name, in so far as is agreeable to his will, it is Obligatory be∣fore him who is a swift witness against the false swearer, and will not hold him guiltless who takes his Name in vain; and he is guilty of the height of Perjury, and a Denier of the glo∣rious Attributes of the Almighty, who having ingaged before God, Angels and Men, in a mutual defence, with those who shall pursue the true and lawful ends of the Covenant, ac∣cording to the plain and candid meaning thereof, leaves them as a prey unto their enemies, to be troden under foot with contempt and reproach, as myre in the streets. The curse represented in the similitude of a flying Roll twenty cu∣bits long, & ten broad, (for containing multitudes of Woes) shall enter into the house of him that swears falsly by the Lords Name, and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume it with the timber thereof, Zach. 5.24. If the Oath rashly given to the Gibeonites by Joshua and the Elders of Israel, without asking the mind of the Lord, was
so Obligatory, that in Davids time because of Sauls slaying the Gibeouites, and violating the same, there was a Famine for three years, year after year, upon the Land; and for an expiation seven of the sons of Saul were hanged up before the Lord, 2 Sam. 21. how may they tremble, who make no conscience of keeping Oaths in the days of Gospel-light sworn in truth, in judgment and in righteousness? The second particular we shall remember as a voluntary tye, is, The Declaration of the Army at Muslebrough in Scotland, Aug. 1. 1650. when their hearts were in a tender frame, and they were ready to jeopard (not knowing at what hour) their lives in the high places of the field for that cause, in prosecution whereof, there hath been so much luke-warmness since; wherein first, they declare, page 5. Let us here speak for our selves; yea, the Lord speak for us, who knows our hearts and all our ways, we value the Churches of Jesus Christ, who are the lot of Gods inheritance, ten housand times above our lives: yea, we do bless the Lord, we are not onely a rod of iron to dash the common enemies in pieces, but also an hedge (though very nuworthy) about Christs Vineyard; and if we know our own hearts, where ever the lot of Gods inheritance shall appear to be found in Scotland, we shall think it our duty to the utmost hazard of our lives, to preserve the same. Secondly, they declare and appeal, page 7. We could be contented, should we not thereby idolize the Covenant, to march to any Ingagement with you, if called thereto by the Lord, with the Covenant on the tops of our pikes, and let the Lord judge who hath observed the ends of the Covenant best you or we. Thirdly, page 8. they declare their wish and expectation: And thus we have in the naked plainness of our souls, opened our hearts unto you, our dear bre∣thren, that fear the Lord in Scotland, where ever you be found, in the highest Councils or poorest Cottages, who though ye be scattered, the Lord will in his due time bring you together, and bind you up as his jewels, and make you one with those that fear the Lord amongst us. From which we shall humbly desire all that fear the Lord in the Army, in the Parliament, whose Army they were, and in the Churches, who then assisted them in their prayers, and incouraged them by their missive Letters, in sincerity, as in the sight of God, who searcheth the hearts and tryeth the reins, to ask their own hearts these few questions. From the first, if the Churches of Christ in Scotland, and the lot of Gods inheritance there, should require us to be a hedge about
them, and protect them from their enemies, whether Papists, Ma∣lignants, or such of the National Church as are tyrannical in their principles; could we refuse their desire, without being esteemed hypocrites before God, and dissemblers with men? We called God to be a witness of our sincerity: and if our practise become contrary, would he not be a swift witness against us? From the second, since while in judgment and practise we main∣tained the liberty of Gods people, whether Baptists, Indepen∣dents, or others, worshipping God in spirit and truth, (albeit in different external Forms) we solemnly appealed to God against those who were onely for a National Church, and for this to fight against us with their King, to judge whether they or we had ob∣served the ends of the Covenant best; and the Lord gave judge∣ment on our side: if we should refuse to protect, defend and main∣tain the godly in Scotland, in Covenant with us, albeit separated from the National Church, we were not such as deserted those ends, and laboured to make the Almighty a Lyar? From the third, if the godly in Scotland should desire us, in a lawful way to remove such impediments as may hinder their ga∣thering together among themselves, and becoming one with us, and it being in our power we should refuse; could our wishes and desires be esteemed to have come from an honest and upright heart? Or rather might they not be looked upon as empty Com∣plements to delude simple and credulous souls? It is a good Chri∣stian policy whereby men may finde out the deceit of their hearts in prosperity, to consider what frame they were in, in the time of difficulty, and to look upon that as the fittest time for solid reso∣lution to follow duty impartially. The third and last tye, is that of the Commissioners of Parlia∣ment at Dalkeith in Anno 1652. wherein they declare they will protect and incourage such as walk soberly and christianly, albeit serving God in a different way from the Presbyterian and Natio∣nal Church; wherein we humbly conceive the faith and credit of the Nation of England is ingaged. The second particular to be considered, is, of how great con∣cernment the right settling of all Judicatories, and places of Trust in Scotland, is to the safety and well-being of the godly there. And truly, if narrowly considered, it is of so great concernment, that on this depends their whole well-being or evil-being, as to their condition in the world: the honest Magistrate onely being
a praise to those that do well, and a terrour to those that do e∣vil; but if otherways, the horn of the wicked is lifted up on high, & he that calls for justice maketh himself a prey; their lives lye open to their malice: albeit a Tyrannical and Antichstian Ma∣gistrate cannot take it from them without some shadow of Law; yet how many under pretext of Law, without any just and legal ground, have come to an untimely end by the oppression of the Magistrate; England, Scotland, and many others can testifie. The security of all their worldly estates derived to them by a right from their fathers, or purchased by their own industry, lyes at the Magistrates door; sometimes whiles they are active in purs∣ing for what is their own; sometimes whiles they are passive, de∣fending what they have acquired: and where they are hateful to Authority, former experience hath shewed, even from those who had large professions of piety, they have met with much partiali∣ty, and been witnesses to the preferring of one before another. Their future preferments, and all which they may acquire for the time to come, hangs much upon the pleasure of the Magistrate: if any hath bred his Children in the knowledge of the Law, when they come to plead at the Bar, if the Judges check, frown, rebuke, or threaten them, their Clients will be few, and their imployment vanish: if to be a Physitian, he will get few Patients: if to teach Liberal Sciences, he can be admitted to no profession: if to be a Merchant, yea, a Shooemaker, or Taylour, or the meanest of cal∣lings, the influence of Authority tends much to his advantage or disadvantage. Their good name, which is as a pretious oyntment, lyes open to the Obloquies of all. Their external peace depends much upon the Magistrate in things civil: where his displeasure is intimated against a person or profession, others become horns in his sides, and pricks in his eyes. In things spiritual, the Ec∣clesiastical Powers, when strengthned by Authority, persecure with zeal; and when disowned by Magistrates, keep them with∣in their own bounds. Hence, and from nothing else, hath it flowed that some in eminent Authority have lately been relaxed from excommunication, when others of no more guilt have continued under their sentence. To which we might add the concernment of Sess, Excise, Customs and Quarterings, in all which cases Magi∣strates may ease or oppress, if not rightly principled, and that in a way so subtile, that it is hard to get remedy. Many will seek the favour of the Prince, Pro. 19.6. and the fear of a King is as the roaring
of a Lyon, Pro. 20.2. And as the streams are found in a Nation; so the Prince, the supreme Authority and Fountain whence they flow, are esteemed to be. The third particular is, what have been the Plots and Practises of the Adversaries of the Libertie of the true Church of Christ these five years by-past, to enslave and bring them in subjection in their Liberties both Civil and Spiritual in Scotland. After Worce∣ster fight when the condition of the Nation was brought to a set∣tled and full calm, without enemies appearing, except some un∣considerable Tories or Moss-troopers in the Highlands & Borders, the English in Scotland intimating much tenderness to the godly there, and afterwards the Commissioners of Parliament met toge∣ther at Dalkeith, giving them further incouragement by their pub∣lick Declarations, they thought the winter had been past, and that the Voyce of the Turtle should still have been heard in their Land: whereupon those that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another: a willing people seemed to be coming forth in the beauties of holiness in the day of Christs Power. There were many and frequent meetings of the godly in Edenburgh and Leith among themselves, and with Christians in the Army come from England, who had been groaning under the burden of a National Church, constitute of members for the most part meerly men of this world, often praying and speaking on the Word, with and to one another in order to a Christian fellowship in a Gospel-way. Master Thomas Charters, Minister at Kilbrayde, declared himself for separation: Mr. John Rue, Minister at Aberdeen, left his Natio∣nal Ministry, and became principal of the Colledge of the Old Town: Mr. John Meinzies, Minister at Aberdeen, ceased from sprinkling Infants for several years: Mr. Seatown, Mini∣ster in the Old Town of Aberdeen, demitted his place: Mr. Willi∣am Youngstone, Minister at Doors, declared himself a Baptist: Mr. John Forbes, Minister at Kincardine, declared the same: Mr. Mer∣cer, a Minister nigh Aberdeen; and Mr. John Young, Minister at Birse, verbally covenanted to make progress with such as were separated; and a very considerable number of Ministers, Magi∣strates, and the vulgar sort of people, separated from the promis∣cuous constitution of a National Church, associated themselves together, and in presence of the mixt multitude did break bread together, as a seal of their resolution never to return to the errour of the multitude any more. But in a short space hereafter,
the zeal of their Patrons became cold, and they not onely found want of freedom and protection from those of whom they ex∣pected it, but so soon as Oliver was lift up to the Throne, some heads of the Presbyterian Faction were sent for: and to ingra∣tiate himself with them, (intimating tacitely it was his Law, that no Minister in Scotland should have allowance of a Livelyhood, but a National Presbyterian) he ordered that none should have stipends as Ministers, or receive a ratification in order to their livelyhood from the Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Affairs, which were to enter in the Ministry, but such as had testificates from some four of a select party, being thirty in all, condescend∣ed upon in his order, of the honest Presbyterian party. And al∣beit the greater part of them refused this Episcopal Dignity, as coming from such an hand, yet many made use of it for establish∣ing their own Creatures in the Ministry. But not resting here, after his further establishment, when his Council was sent down to Scotland, the Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Affairs having formerly used such moderation, that if any wronged by a Presby∣tery or Assembly had complained to them, and called for redress, they would have heard both parties; and finding the Plaintiff unjustly vexed, whether by deposition or suspension, they would have continued his Livelyhood with him: then the persecution came to a greater height, (viz.) the rigid Presbyterians finding they had not as ample power to depose, and thrust out as to im∣pose and set up upon a new address to his late Highness, a fresh Order or Mandate by way of letter was sent to the Council, whereupon they might no more dispute the sentence of a Presby∣tery, or Provincial Assembly, but fide implicita, were forced to approve depositions, and ratifie admissions, giving warrant to the intrants for taking up the Livelyhood belonging to the place right or wrong, whereby (albeit we shall not deny it was a pres∣sing burdning to some of their spirits) the Sufferers of the Mini∣stry were brought to an harder condition then ever they were in the time of the Bishops, or in the flourishing times of the Na∣tional Assemblies: in which times if any had suffered wrong in a Synod or Presbytery, he had the benefit of appeal, and might have been redressed by the Bishop or National Assembly; but under Oliver his late Discipline, he could have nothing for his Livelyhood, though unjustly taken from him, but the production of an Act of the general Assembly, ordaining that no Minister
deposed shall have any part of the stipend belonging to that place from which he is deposed after his deposition. On the other hand, the Magistrate began much to run in the same channel: My Lord Hopton, one of the Commissioners for administration of Justice, was left out of the Commission, for his honesty and affection to a Commonwealth. There was but one Commissary in all Scot∣land declaring himself of the Baptists judgment, Mr. Claud Ha∣milton, who was first removed from Edenburgh to Striveling, and thereafter driven from all. Mr. Dundas supervisor to the Messen∣gers, a Baptist, was likewise removed without fault. There was but one Sheriff, Clerk and Keeper of a Register of seasings a Bap∣tist in all Scotland, Mr. Archbald Weir, and he was pursued for a Drunkard, (albeit innocent, and of a blameless conversation) and a contemner of Ordinances: under which suffering in the grief of his spirit he dyed. There was but one Clerk to the Peace of this Judgment, Mr. Alexander Dick, and beside that he was forced to part with the interest he had in the Clerkship of the Commis∣sariat of Hadington in favor of another, a number of Gentlemen of the County appeared against him, before the Council, desiring that he might be put out. There was but one Schoolmaster of this Judgment, Mr. David Pearsone, and he was forced to go for England to purchase a Livelyhood, where in his grief he dyed at Newcastle. There was but one Collector for the Publick, James Lindsay, of this Judgment, and he was laid aside. Mr Robert Gordone in Judgment for separation, kept in place (as is to be presumed) because related to a person of Power greater then him∣self; but yet degraduated from being Clerk to the Exchequer, to be Presenter of the Signatours. I shall not mention the base usage I met with my self, lest I should seem to be fishing to my ownner, but leave the discovery of it to its own time. But concerning Ministers and such as were Students of Divinity, and their relations, this was the consequence; Mr. Rue his wife, a woman of a thousand for eminency in piety, of the Baptists Judgment, overwhelmed with grief, died under the burden. Mr. Meinzeis returned to his old practice. Mr. Sea∣tone left the Country. Mr. Yongstone had another Minister put in his place over his head by his Lord Patron; whereupon he was forced to sell a little inheritance he had, and thereafter died of grief. Mr. Forbes was threatned with the loss of his livelyhood, and sentence of excommunication, and died under the burden of
his grief. Mr. Burnet, son to the Laird of Leyes; Mr. Malice, and divers others, for their Judgments, were forced to flee out of the Nation. Upon these actings of the adverse party, and sufferings of the other, the begun reformation was blasted in the bud, the wea∣ker sort being terrified, and such as continued constant, being scatte∣red and made the object of the wrath of their enemies, many were retired to the holes of the rocks, and the secret places of the stairs. And hence the great mistake of some in England appears, who think all Scotland to be Presbyterians, and for a National Church. It is not their judgment, but the greatness of the stumbling-block which lies before them, that keeps many in this fellowship: and we do confidently believe, before this day there had been thousands in Scotland separated from the National Church, who would have jeo∣parded their lives for the godly in England, if they had met with that freedom and encouragement which justly they expected, when first the English came to Scotland: albeit having several times within these five years by-past travelled thorow the greatest part of that Nation, I could never learn of four National Presbyterian Mini∣sters that would put up one Prayer to God for the Commonwealth, to gain whose favour so much pains is taken. But at first Nicodemus came to Christ but by night, and many that believed on him durst not confess him for fear of the Jews. It requires more then the strength of an infant Christian under ordinary Dispensations, To for∣sake all that a man hath and follow Christ. We humbly conceive the supreme Authority, from what hath been said, will rather be convinced it is their Christian duty to search out and gather together the outcasts of Israel formerly dispersed, and put marks of honour upon such jewels of Christ, then to receive this or any other such List from which for the most part such are banish∣ed; and therefore we shall say little thereto: yet conceiving the hand of Joab may be in the matter, & that Robert Andrew would not imagine he had such an interest in Scotland as of himself to make a List of persons fit for all places in that Nation, for preventing the like in time coming, we shall give it these few Characters. First, it is made up, at least altered or addition made thereto by him, who for al∣ledged misdemeanours was lately put out of charge in the County of Pearth, upon the accusation and complaint of several Gentlemen there. Whether justly or un∣justly we shall not determine; but while the latter appears, not only he ought not to be a maker of lists, but he ought not to come in any List for a place himself. Secondly, It is carried on closely and secretly from his Country-men, both here and in Scotland, more concerned to be accessorie both to the knowing and making thereof then himself: and he that doth truth, comes to the light that his deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought in God. Thirdly, in this List there are persons nominated for several places and offices which are not vacant, (viz.) to be Commissary of Edenburgh; to be Justice Clerk, albeit none of the said offices are vacant: in so far
as Mr. Claud Hamilton was appointed Commissary of Edenburgh; and Mr. Alexander Hamilton, Justice Clerk, both of them by the Parliament, or such as had power derived from the Parliament to dispose of the said places by Autho∣rity of Parliament, before the 20 of April, in Anno 1653. In regard whereof, they are continued in their places as formerly, by vertue of the late Act of Indempni∣ty, although their places have since been disposed to other: which was done with∣out accusation, guilt, or misdemeanour proved against any of them. Fourthly, as we are informed by honest persons who have seen this List, all Scots men separated from the National Church, are excluded therefrom, except such whose eminency would have been as the sons of Zerviah, too hard for him. Where by the way we shall desire it may be remembred, while we speak of his List, it is to be understood as it was at first, when seen by several honest persons here, and not as it may be since by alteration. Lastly, we offer to prove, he hath not onely secluded them, but also declared in presence of several witnesses, Gilbert Gardia of Tallifrusckie, and William Dua∣das late supervisor to the Messengers (both Baptists) uncapable of any place whatsoever; of whom the first is known to be pious, able & of a blameless conver∣sation, who meerly for conscience sake about 17 years since, suffered the sentence of excommunication by the National Ministry in Scotland; and since for the same cause close imprisonment by their power above a years space and an half, in which he was put in the most disgraceful place among the whores, thieves, murderers and witches: and when extremity of sickness threatned him with death, neither Phy∣sitians nor his friends were admitted to visit him; and thereafter was confined nigh five years to the great ruine and destruction of his estate by this and other oppressions, partly open and partly secret, without the least tincture of guilt layed to his charge, except the following the light of his own conscience. The other was in office six or seven years formerly without being questioned for ignorance, neg∣ligence, or infidelity in his office, or blame in his conversation to this day, albeit he be likewise excommunicated for following the light of his conscience. In regard whereof, reason can make no other sence of this assertion, but because they are a∣gainst sprinkling of infants, therefore they are incapable, and consequently all Baptists are incapable of publick office in these Nations, because they are such: wherein how much the Churches of Christ are concerned, and all assertors of true spiritual liberty, we leave to all unbyassed persons to consider. Lastly, seeing it may be alledged, in regard the Parliament of themselves are un∣acquainted with persons fitly qualified for places in Scotland, a List from some must be had; and if so, from whom must it proceed? We answer, if any such List be necessary, we humbly conceive it ought to come from the congregated Chur∣ches in Scotland, (whereof there are two in Edenburgh and Leith, one of Indepen∣dents, another of Baptists, assisted with such moderate godly Presbyterians as the Parliament shall think fit, and members of the Army there acquainted with the affairs of the Nation. 1. Because they onely being of that latitude in their charity, as to love and esteem all honest persons capable of places, albeit differing in judgment from themselves, can onely of Incorporations be look∣ed upon as unbyassed in their Constitution, and impartial in making up a List. 2. They only in that Nation are Incorporations to rational charity of pure and spiritual principles, all others being made up of a mixed multitude, clean and unclean. 3. Some of their number are English Judges of un∣questionable integrity, and abundantly accomplished for the knowledge of the nature of all places in that Nation, and the qualifications of all persons fit to be put therein, having been six or seven years experienced in the practise of the Scots Law, and well acquainted with the greatest part of persons considerable in the Nation, by riding the Circuits twice a year, these five years by-past, where they were attended by Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Freeholders, and others. Lastly, it is most agreeable to the purpose of God upon the Wheels, who will overturn, overturn, overturn, until he come whose right it is; and who hath promised and will fulfil it in his appointed time, The Kingdom and Domi∣nion under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most High, whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him, Dan. 7.27. FINIS.
