P3629 E889_11 E937_2* 99863337 168512
The PROCEEDS of the PROTECTOR (so called) and his COUNCILL against Sir HENRY VANE, Knight. A late Eminent MEMBER of the COƲNCILL of STATE of the Common-wealth of ENGLAND: As touching his Im∣prisonment in the Isle of WIGHT. Together with his Testimony delivered in writing to the said Prote∣ctor, by way of a peculiar addresse to himself, and faithfull advice of an old Friend and Acquaintance. Faithfully Transcribed and Attested out of the Original Copy's, And published by a reall Well-wisher to SIONS Prosperity and ENGLANDS Liberty. Prov. 29.1. He that being often Reproved, hardeneth his Neek, shall sudaenly be destroyed, and that without remedy. Gal. 2.18. For if I build again the things that I have destroyed, I make my self a Transgressor.
Reader, THou hast here a true Narrative of the whole proceedings against Sir Henry Vane Knight, and his Imprisonment in the Isle of Wight. Occasion be∣ing taken (as thou wilt find) from his writing and publishing a discourse En∣tituled, An Healing Question, &c. tending to the Composure and Ʋniting all honest mens hearts and spirits, who from the first beginning of all the Warr all along have been engaged in the Cause of true Freedome, against Oppression and Tyranny, unto which he was invited by the Declaration for a solemn Fast, set forth by those in power, the thirteenth day of March 1655. exciting the good people of England and Wales to wait upon the Lord for light and conviction, professing in the sight of God and man, a most willing mind readily to receive, when convincingly offered by any. This being in short the true state of the Case, and falling providentially into my hands, out of duty to my Countrey, and respect to that worthy Patriot (who at this day so eminently suffers for the Cause of God, and true Freedome, and that from the hands of those he hath deserved better measure) I have exposed the whole to publique view, that thereby thou mayest be informed of the truth, and the Nation may know what is become of so considerable a Member, who may deservedly be a Pattern for all true English men to immitate, in this Aposta∣tizing and back-sliding Age.
The Copy of the Summons for Sir Henry Vane Knight his first appearance at White-hall. In pursuance of an Order of his Highnesse and the Councill, you are to attend the Councill on Thursday the 12. of August next, at 11. of the Clock in the fore-noon, Dated at White-hall this 29. July 1656. Subscribed by Henry Lawrence President. To Sir Henry Vane Knight. A true Copy of Sir Henry Vane his Answer sent to this Sommons. Sir, LEast my silence might be mis-interpreted upon the last Paper, I have received, subscribed (as I suppose) with your hand, appointing my attendance at White-hall the 12. instant: I have held my self ob∣liged to returne you this account, that my purpose is (God willing) to set forward from this place to my House in the Strand, the beginning of the next week, which is assoon as I can well expect to have a Coach to meet me half way, this very hot season for travail, and my own being in no condition to performe so long a journey upon so short a warning given to. Belleaw the 4. of August 1656. Your humble Servant Hen. Vane. To Henry Lawrence Esquire, President of the Councill at White-hall. Sir Henry Vane's Letter to Mr. Jessop Clerk to the Councill at White-hall presently after his coming to London. Sir, IT being declared by Parliament (as is very well known) that it is against the Laws and Liberties of England, that any of the people thereof should be commanded by the King (when there was one, to attend him at his pleasure) but such as are bound thereunto by spe∣ciall service (which others therefore are not) It will I hope be per∣mitted me without offence, to claim the same priviledge and liberty
in these times, and in the case of the Sommons sent me, wherein I find no cause for my appearance expressed but meer will and pleasure: Yet in vindication of the innocent, and peacable deportment I live in according to the Laws; I have not refused to be upon the place at my House here in the Strand ever since Thursday night last, as I made known unto you by this Bearer the next Morning. And as ever since I have been, so I am still ready to appear when I shall be sent for, un∣till the pressingnesse of my occasions (in reference to my Family con∣cerns, which at this time by reason of my Fathers Debts are very great, and heavy upon me) shall require my attendance upon them in other places of the Nation. All which I held my self obliged to make known unto you in the relation you stand in, especially not having heard from you Yesterday, as I suppose I might. I am Charring-Crosse House  the 20. August 1656. Your Servant H. V. For Mr. Jessop, Clerk to the Councill at White-hall. The first Order of the Councill concerning Sir Hen. Vane here followeth. Thursday, the 21. of August 1656. At the Councill at White-hall. SIr Henry Vane having this day appeared before the Councill, and they having taken cosideration of a seditious book by him writ∣ten and published, entituled a Healing Question propounded and refolved &c. the same tending to the disturbance of the present Government, and the peace of the Common-wealth, Ordered that if Sr. Henry Vane shall not give good security in five thousand pond bond by Thursday next to do nothing to the prejudice of the present Government, and the peace of the Common-wealth, he shall stand committed, and that Or∣ders be drawn up accordingly. W. Jessop Clerk of the Councill. Sir Henry Vane his Letter to Mr. Jessop upon the receipt of this Order of the Councill. Sir, IT is a great quiet to my minde, and satisfaction to my conscience in the sight of God and man; to perceive at the first entrance into
my sufferings, that the Witnesse owned by me, under the title of a Hea∣ling Question (when I was at White-hall 21. present) which asserts the Principles, Spirit, and Justice of the Cause we have professed and fought for in our late Warrs) is now thought fit by those that are in power to have the name given to it of seditious, especially considering that the Healing nature, and great tendency, that cleerly shineth forth thorow-out that discourse (to the uniting the whole party of honest men in the true publipue interest warranted by the Lawes of the Land, and in away of safety against common danger) doth with its own evi∣dence wipe of the blemish of that reproach, with the same breath that it is caston. Nay I can truly say, I am very well content to take this as a marke of honour from those that sent it, and as the recompence of former ser∣vices, as knowing a better reward is laid up for me in his hands, tho∣rough the wisedome of whose providence, this may be the means pre∣pared to keep me unspotted, and undefiled from the evills of these back-sliding times unto the day of Christs appearance, which shall be my joy, when my enemies shall be ashamed. Nor can I but observe in this proceeding with me, how exactly those that have made this Order do in this (as in many other things at this day) tread in the steps of the late king whose designe being (as is ex∣prest in the Remonstrance of the state of the Kingdome 15. December 1642.) to set the Government free from all restraint of Laws concer∣ning our persons and estates, and to render the Monarchy absolute, did thinke he could have no better means to effect it, than to cast into oblo∣quie and disgrace, all those that desired to preserve the Laws and Liber∣ties of the Nation, and to mantain Religion in the power of it, under the names of Puritans, factious and seditious persons, as well knowing that the light of their pinciples and practices, were like to stand most in the way of bringing to passe such an evill designe. And truly it is with no small grief, at this time to be lamented, that the evill, and wreched principles of the misgovernment, which the King then aymed to worke out his designe by, but could not effect, should now revive, and spring up so evidently in the hands of men professing godli∣nesse (to the great prophaning, and reproach of Gods name) and arri∣ved at maturity in practice, which former times abhorred to thinke of, and the designers themselves with all their pollicy and power could never reach. This appearing but with too much evidence in my conscience, when
the present Governours held themselves obliged to call the people of these three Nations unto a day of publique humiliation, and to invite to the giving in of Light and conviction, with a free and open professi∣on of a ready subjection of mind thereunto, was a chief motive that in∣duced me to prepare my Wituess, as I did, which being asked for from me by one of the Councill, I delivered in writing and it continued in their hands about a Months space, with out any prohibition to Print, & then was put to the Presse in the ordinary way of all other bookes, and had the usuall warrant for the comming forth, and nothing laid to its Charge ever since, till (for what reason of State I know not) it is now thought meet to be called seditious, and occasion is taken thereby to threaten me with Bonds, unto which I say the will of the Lord be done; through whose supporting grace I am made not carefull in this matter, and therefore have been willing (without any circumlocution or advantage I might have taken) to own with all readines that Witness for which the Lord hath given me a heart most freely to suffer whatso∣ever he shall call me unto, in the faithfull discharge of a good consci∣ence therein. And this being said (as is needfull in my own vindicati∣on) my Answer to the Paper, that ordereth me to stand committed, un∣lesse I will give security by Bond, &c. and so by my own voluntary Act, do that which may blemish and render suspect my innocency, and the justice and Good of the Cause I suffer for; is this, That my purpose is God willing, to give no such Bond, but rather expose my self to the commitment mentioned; althoughl must ingeniously profess, I neither know, nor acknowledge the Authority, which those that have made the Order, do exercise over me in this Case: Nor do I conceive their Votes and Orders have a binding force by the Lawes of the Nation. This is my Answer to the Paper I received from you, which I desire may be accordingly presented to their view, that ordered my Com∣mitment; my intentions being to make use of the little time of liber∣ty, which is remaining to my own dispose for the visiting of my near Relations in Kent where I shall be sure to be heard of, and howe∣ver do propound to my self not above a weeks stay, before my return again to my House in the Strand, so subscribes Henry Vane
A true Coppy of the first warrant. To Edward Dendy Esq. Serjant at Arms attending the Councill, or to his Deputies and every of them. VVHereas upon consideration of a seditious Book written and published by Sir Hen. Vane Knight, Entiused An Healing Question Propounded and Resolved, &c. tending to the disturbance of the Present Government and the peace of the Common-wealth. It was Ordered by his Highnesse and the Councill on the 21. of August last, that if he should not give good security in 5000 pounds Bond by Twesday then next coming, to do nothing to the prejudice of this present Government, or of the peace of the Common-wealth, he should stand Committed. And whereas he hath not given security according to the tenor of that Order, but refuseth to do the same. These are therefore to will and require you forthwith to apprehend, and take into your charge, the body of the said Sir Henery Vane, and him to convey in safe custody to the Isle of Wight, and there to de∣liver him to the Governour of thr Island, or to his Dputy, to be by him disposed of according to the Order of his Highnesse and the Coun∣cill. Hereof you are not to fail: And for so doing this shall be your sufficient Warrant. Signed in the Name and by Order of his Highnesse and the Councill Henry Lawrence President. Given at Whit-hall  this 4. day of September 1656. A Coppy of the Warrant to the Governour of the Isle of Wight or his Deputy. Whereas upon consideration of a seditious Book written and published by Sir Henry Vane Knight, entituled an Healing Question Propounded and Re∣solved &c. tending to the disturbance of the present Government and the peace of the Commmonwealth. It was Ordered by his Highnesse, and the Councill on the 21. of Aug. last, That if he should not give good security in 5000 l. Bond by wes∣day then next coming, to do nothing to the prejudice of the present Government. or of peace of the Commonwealth, he should stand Comitted. And whereas he hath not given security according to the tenor of that Order, butrefuses to do the same. These are therefore to will and require you, to receive into your Charge from the Bea∣rer hereof, the body of the said Sir Honry Vane, and him to secure, and keep in safe custody in such place within the Isle of Wight under your Command, as you shall judge most convenient, not suffering him to speak with any person during
his abode there, but in the presence of some Officer, and to continue him thus under custody till you shall receive other Order; whereof you are not to faile. And for so doing this shall be your Warrant. Signed in the name and by Or∣der of his Highnesse and the Council, Hen. Lawrence, Pr. Given at White-hall this fourth day of September, 1656. Here followes the TESTIMONY of Sir HENRY VANE delivered in writing by his own hands. My Lord, HAving something in my mind to speak by way of more peculiar addresse and concernment to your Lordship than the rest of your company, I have chosen to do it by these lines, as the Testimony which upon this occasion I desire to speak before your own conscience in the sight of God. The Scripture saith, he that will save his life shall loose it, and he that will loose his life for Christs sake and the Gospell (in faithfull witnesse bearing) shall save it; This Word of the Lord is in especiall manner fulfilling amongst the Saints and people of God at this day, whom the Lord is bringing very eminently upon the stage of tryall and sufferings, and that not onely from open enemies, that sin in a decla∣red prophane spirit, but from equalls and friends that have gone into the House of God in company, and taken sweet counsell together in all their concern's, but yet come at last to hate their Brethren, and cast them out under a pretence of Zal and glorifying God therein. And to come a little nearer the Case in hand, this great Truth is ha∣stening a pace to be made good in those principles, that spirit, and course of action your Lordship is found in, and in those which the Lord enables me to own and professe, and is bringing me through his rich grace in some weak measure, to the practice of, which are to cleave to what is right and good, though power be on the other side to oppose it. The Messuage which in former times you fent me, is in my Memory still, it was immediately after the Lord had appeared with you against Duke Hamiltons Army, when you bid a Friend of mine, tell your Brother
Vane (for so you then thought fit to call me) that you were as much unsatisfied with his passive and suffering principles, as he was with your active; and indeed I must crave leave to make you this Reply at this time, that I am as little satisfied with your active, and self-esta∣blishing Principles, in the lively colours wherein daily they shew them∣selves, as you are or can be with my passive Ones, and am willing in thi to joyn issue with you, and to begg of the Lord to judge between us and to give the decision according to truth and righteousnesse. And having named Truth and Righteousnesse, surely it may but too truly be said, that amongst us remains nothing but the Name, the power and life thereof seems to be ceased from our land, and is banished from the societies of most men; Yet my Lord, it is that whereby the actions and practice of all men are to be ruled, as well of Governors as of the governed. Governours themselves are neither to be, nor make them∣selves more then what in truth and righteousnes they are and ought to be: When they swerve from this rule, they become sinners and must look by transgression to fall, as well as the lowest of the People. That which in truth of fact you were, is vissible enough to every eye, that is to say, under the Legislative Authority of the People Represen∣sented in Parliament, duly chosen and rightly constituted: you and the Force under your command are the Nations strength, and formed military Power, kept up by a derived Authority from them, at a settled Pay to be imployed for the Nations use and service, and theirs onely; and over this Military body you are by them placed as the head. This then is the Power, which duly and properly you are, and more than this, I am not satisfied in my Conscience is in Truth and Righte∣ousnesse, appertaining unto you; to use this power lawfully, is your honour, your duty, your safety, as well as their well-fare, and pre∣servation, for whom it was raised, and is still pay'd. To use this un∣lawfully as evidently you doe, when you go about to assume and esta∣blish to your selfe the Power of your head, and at best will but allow them but to share with you in their known Right to the Legislative Authority, unto your whom your self, and the Army under your Command acknowledged the whole to be due, when as a seale set to this their Authority, they caused justice to be done upon the late King; you then become like that one finner, which Eccles. 9.19. is said to destroy much good, and do forget that wisdome which teaches, and restrains from such unlawfull use of force and strength, is better then weapons of war mannaged never so successefully in a way of destroying that
which is right and good, whatever worldly gain and advantage in o∣ther respects to be obtained thereby. And although your own Conscience cannot but consent to the truth of what is here told you, in the name and fear of the Lord, yet being strong and trusting to the power of your sword, which is Flesh and not Spirit, is man and not God, your heart is lifted up, if you speedily re∣pent not, unto your destruction; for you are not able to hear the re∣proofs of the Lord, nor the faithfull witnesse and advice of his Saints and people that in love and true friendship disswade you from going on in this way, as foreseeing and foretelling your ruine and destruction therein: And the fears they have, that you will not ruine alone, foras∣much as their outward safety & welfare is so very far included in yours. Nor doth the Witnesse of the Saints which they bear against you rest here; but it is too evident to those of them, that have a spirit of discer∣ning, that in reference as well to Christ your heavenly head, as to the good people of this Nation in Parliament Assembled, and rightly Constituted who were, and ought to be your earthly Head; you lift up your heel, and harden your self every day more than other, in a fixed Resolution not to become subject, as is your duty, nor to hold and keep your self in your due station alloted to you in the Body; but are ayming at the Throne in spirituals as well as Temporals; and to set up your self in a capacity of not holding your head either in the one consideration or the other. And if this evill be in you at the bottome, be assured the Lord will speedily lay it open as before the Sun, and none of the webbs you are weaving will prove garments to cover your nakednesse; neither will your agreements or convenants with death stand; even those pollitick contrivances and conjunctions with those that are the enemies, whe∣ther open or secret, against the Spirit of life, and the workings and manifestations thereof, in the suffering Saints and annointed ones of the Lord Jesus, whom the Lord is about to own for his wisedome in the midst of the Earth, unto which excellent Spirit that shall be found in those holy ones of the Lord, not onely this Nations wisedome in their very supream Assembly, but the Ruling powers of the whole world shall yield subjection, and think it their glory to become sub∣servient to the bringing forth of the new Heavens and that new Earth, wherein dwells righteousnesse and truth; this is the foundation Stone, Elect and precious, which through faith is seen to be laid already in our Sion at this day, which those that believe, and make not hast, shall
arrive to the experience of, and shall discerne that this Stone is in cut∣ting out amongst us without hands, to its becoming a great Moun∣tain, and filling the whole Earth. Take then in good part before it be too late, this faithfull warning and following advice of an ancient friend, but is now thought fit to be used and dealt with as an Enemy. Break off timely your sinnes by repentance, do judgement, execute justice, and walk humbly before the Lord; yea, rent your hearts and not your garments, for those are the fasts the Lord hath chosen, break every yoak, and let the oppressed go free; in one word, proceed no fur∣ther in lifting up your self against the Lord of Heaven, but instead of causing the vessells of his house, even his most precious Saints to be brought before you (as you do daily) for to exercise publique scorn and tryumph over them, see that your true interest lies with them and in them, as well now as hertofore, and endeavour to recover their hearts to you, and their prayers for you, least your God in whose hands your breath is, and whose are all your waies, whom you have not cared to glorify as you ought) should arise suddenly and teare you in pieces, by the immediate stroak of his own vengeance, and there be none to deliver, even such of you who live in pleasure on the Earth, and have been wanton, and nourished your selves as in a day of slaugh∣ter, who have condemned, and in your hearts killed the just One, and he doth not resist you; But behold the Judge standeth at the door. FINIS.
