P4257 43077568 151657
THE COPIE OF A LETTER Written unto Sir EDWARD DERING, lately put out of the House, and committed unto the Tower, Feb. 2. 1641. HIS BOOKS CENSURED TO BE burnt by the common Executioner, for his strange unadvised, and sudden differing from himself, and opposing the whole House. Which Letter was sent, as is suppo∣sed, by a Worthy Member of the House of Commons, Feb. 4. 1641. LONDON. Printed for Iohn Tompson. 1641.
The Copie of a Letter written unto Sir Edward Dering lately put out of the House, and committed unto the Tower, Feb. 2. 1641. SIR, I Have heard men no Novices in the world often say, that the fals of the wise are often∣times dangerous unto them, if not wholly mortall, with much pain and toil they rise, and recover themselves, if ever at all. I wish some reason may be given for it, which will bear good colour of probabilitie, if not of certain∣tie. Envie and admiration attend notable and tran∣scendent abilities, as well as conspicuous and emi∣nent fortunes, both strike at them, both wound them, though severall, nay almost contrary wayes, envie flies at his throat, openly detracting him, and therefore is so farre from hurting a prudent and well poysed man, that (though little thanks to the e∣steem'd) she maketh him more advised and circum∣spect: But admiration claspeth with him, and by slights, better discovered by the fact done, then by the predominacy in doing, betrayes a man to himself, and holds him a slave within his own doores, not permit∣ting
him to walk abroad as formerly, and to behold and view the counsels, resolutions, proceedings, reasons and concurrences of other men (if not equall yet may be not much cast behinde) with the ground-work and Supporter wheron they may stand, which kind of trea∣son is the more to be dreaded by how much the reme∣die of release is difficult, the partie thus enthralled not being contrived by seducement into a peremptory con∣ceipt of the weight of his own sufficiencie or deme∣rits, but absolutely possessed with a tantum non, mates and ties up his very will from ever inclining to other condition then what he is already in, or to other free∣dome then what he shall think to be so, although in the intellectuall eye of all the rest it be most mise∣rable thraldome, and the depth of slavery, taking no mans dimensions but his own, judging and blaming the course of the sunne of other mens judgement by his own Diall: Sir Edward, Sir Edward, to leave sen∣tencing, and to come in honest plainnesse to it: I fear admiration hath been more your foe then envie; the world so doting upon your accomplishments both in∣nate & acquired, as wel it might set you so Idolatrously above others, that at last you stepped up above your self, scanning the words and conceptions of others, if not with a diffident difference, yet with a reserved di∣stance, expecting that what you either voted or writ, should be taken as authorized, if not enacted; and ve∣rily to give you your due, & not to deprive or deprave you in the least title of what by the Court of every honest understanding conscience for almost sixteen moneths worthy deportment: and unmatchable heed∣full travail amongst those Peerlesse Worthies, for
the good both of Israel and Sion Church and state, you may justly challenge: you behaved your selfe like a true Nathaniel, in whom was no guile found or suspe∣cted, like another Apollos with the edge of your pow∣erfull Rhetorick, with the hammer of your sound and profound Arguments, wounding and bruising the no∣torious, though mighty delinquerts both of Church and State, and had surely carried that ever flourishing tro∣phee of neverdying praise, and high commendation of a happy procurer the good and endles welfare of Gods people here in England, and left it as an honor entay∣led to your Family, had you but remembred those words of our Saviour endure unto the end. Sir Edward you know full well, that perseverance is called Regina virtutum. I suppose the reason may be this, because that though all other vertues may run, strive, and doe masteries, yet onely perseverance is crowned. But alas Sir, you have made a forfeit of that Crown, with more willingnesse or wilfulnesse is hard to say, your own strength becomming the cause of your fall, pray God not of your ruine, Physitians say that the most dangerous diseases arise from the superfluity of the best humor, viz. the blood, nay that the much a∣bounding of pure and good blood is a disease it selfe, and further, that the corruption of the purest humour is ever as most perilous, so most noysome, it is often so seen in the humours. I mean qualities and endowments of the mind, and I wish the world might not bring in yours for instance, yours Sir Edward, which are turned from the very best to the very worst by a strange Ca∣tastrophe, if any ever was, rather procuring astonish∣ment then wonderment.
You have given such president, that puting my Lord Digbie aside, I trust in that Right Honourable, right Worthy and Religious assembly, you shall never twice be parallel'd, that a third should be found amongst them so hypocrising and deluding the expe∣ctation of all right honest men, that not onely relied but wholly confided themselves, as to betray as much as in you both lay, the cause both of God, the Church and the Country, wheeling and veering about whether some unexpected glance or Courtly glimmering hap∣pily invited you, forgetting wholly what you were, and not well resolving with your self, what you would be, only not content with what the Kingdome had ap∣propriated lately vnto your deserts, you were ambiti∣ous, that whatsoever came of it you would administer larger matter of discourse vnto them, yea in malam partem, rather then none: is it possible Sir, that you who were so vehement, yea and the very first so vehement (in malignam partem) should now after so long perso∣nating vpon the Stage, and in the third Act, as the world may judge, acquit them and condemn your self, is it possible Sir Edward, that you; who shewed your self not onely so Reall, but also valiant against the Straffordian faction, should be poysoned with the dregs of that Cup, and you, that abhorred the brim, should now hunt after the Lees, and shew your selfe for that party (at least for those Tenents) when that they cannot appeare, or at least dare not stirre for themselves, did you, so cordially as it seemed to the whole House, adjudge and condemn the Lord George Digbie, for counterfeiting, if not disavowing himself, and his own actions, and are you the next man who is
guilty of the same crime, did you, at the first sitting down of this happy Parliament, so parthetically cry out upon the Patriarch of Lambeth and his mytred Brethren, protesting that you had rather, or at least with as much devotion have been subject vnto Tybur, as vnto Lambeth; and is the wind come about so sud∣denly, so vnexpectedly, surely then we must not sud∣denly hereafter for strong pretences cry up men, ex∣cept we may further guesse (which is hard) what lyes hid within the buttons. But you are adjudged for your misdemeanor vnwor∣thy to be counted a Member of that vnquestionable Assembly, and held for your trespasse (that I may not say crime) worthy of another place, whom shall wee blame for this? the House, or you, let others judge as they list: but for my part I am of opinion that a drop may be more easily corrupted then the whole Ocean, and that it is more safe, if not more wise, to condemne particular persons, then a general State; you that of late have bin so stiffe for supposed vniversals, will give me leave in this point to cleave vnto a true one, Sir not to be longer tedious unto you, let me crave pardon to tell you what I think of your miscariage, which in honest tearms, I take to be this, the hearkening vnto them that had no way to patronize their own foul facts but by the interposing this of yours, not any course left to work their own safety, but by the drawing of more Company; misery purchased by bad deserts is often found malitious, thinking to raise it self, but by sucking in others, vnder it, I judg charitably, deeming that your error sprang first rather from suggestion, then choice, but when you saw your self so far ingag'd
in it, that the world taking notice of it, you mut ei∣ther retreat with a Peccavi, or proceed with a Sic Volo, you rather chose vtter shipwrack, then to be voi∣ced to have leaked, Sir, at parting J must tell you the truth, and you must be content to hear it, by this late vnfortunate carriage of yours, were it in writings, words, or both, you have lost more to your self & wel wishers, then ever I fear you know how to repaire, and thus desiring of God, that hee would give you a true sight of it, to acknowledge it, and in that right Hono∣rable Assembly an inclination, if not totally to remit, yet compassionatly to mittigare your punishment for it, and to all others yet standing, an heedfull and dili∣gent observation to take example by it, and with hear∣ty sorrow, that a Star in all good mens opinion (yea and wise mens also) so fixed, should at last prove if not a Meteor, yet a Planet, with affectionate and sym∣pathizing griefe J take my leave, and remain yours, wherein with fair devoyr I may serve you. Covent-Garden Feb. 4. Anno Dom. 1641. I. P. FINIS.
