P437AA E1022_2 99867419 119730
The Famous HISTORY OF That most Renowned Christian Worthy ARTHVR King of the Britaines, And his famous Knights of the ROƲND TABLE. depiction of King Arthur
To all all those noble spirits, who after antiquity joyned with truth. WOrthy Country men or women, by what name, age, title or quality soever you are distinguished, I present you here with a piece of that huge volume of antiquity; wherewith our ancestors were (for the most part contentedly) furnished. Love to the party oftentimes causeth partiality in publishing of praise-worthy deeds; this was the notion that the Zelots (of that age so far super∣abounded in their historical relations of this (indeed) match∣less mirror of Monarcks, and example of heroical Actors; insomuch, that proposing improbabilities they have (in some sort) drowned realities: to be brief (where brevity is aim∣ed at) Geofry of Monmouth (and other Clarks of that time) have so fabulously written of King Arthur (and his Knights of the Round Table) that divers by these Hyper∣bolical discourses, have been pusselled with ambiguity whe∣ther any such story were essential or no, which to doubt were no less the nto question, whether Wil. (the Son of Robert) Duke of Normandy was ever King of England. King Arthur is (and hath been ever since his life and death) ac∣counted for one of the 3. Christian Worthies, whereof not only our own Countrymen, but also others of forraign Na∣tions have (interchangably) written: This have the French in as glorious a stile, as they have done of their own Charls Maine, or Godfrey of Bullaine; therefore to explode one is to hisse all the rest from the stage of Christianity; which I being confident you wil not refer to what follows truly col∣lected by a lover of truth, VVith antiquity, M.P.
The Contents of the severall Chapters in this following History. Chap. 1. HOw King Ʋter (sirnamed Pendragon) slew in batel Coisen the proud Duke of Cornwall (that rebelled against him) and took his widow faire Igren to wife, of whom he begot our renowned Arthur. Chap. 2. How the learned Merlin (who flouri∣shed in those daies) had the tuition of the young Prince Arthur committed unto him, and how he tutured him. Chap. 3. The death of King Ʋter Pendragon, and how Prince Arthur at the age of 18. years was crowned King of Britain by common consent. Chap. 4. Of the great triumphs, tilts, and turna∣ments used in his Court at the beginning of his reign, and the wonderfull resort of gallant warriers. Chap. 5. Of his war with the Saxons, and how he victoriously overcame them in 12. several set battels to the uter subduing of their pride, and preventing the progress of their conquests, during his own and his next successors reign. Chap. 6. How King Arthur crost the Seas, and subdued Denmark and Norway unto him, in which voyage many admirable occur∣ances hapned well worth observation. Chap. 7. How King Arthur instituted the order of the Round Table, and graced it with a 150. Knights, and the reason of its institution to maintain concord with the names of the first Knights of the Order; so in all none under the degree of Paron. Chap. 8. How King Arthur fought against the Picks, Scots, Irish, and Saxons in one bat∣tell, and slew Colgrim King of the Saxons, Bladust his Brother, and Childrick a Prince of Germany, who came to their aide, and how he forced Guillamore King of Ireland to become tributary unto him. Chap. 9. How King Arthur sayled to subdue Ire∣land, which he performed with great honor, converting that People, and all the adja∣cent Lands to Christianity, and obedience to him and the British Monarchy. Chap. 10. How King Arthur and his Knights of the Round Table, went into Palestine to fight against the Pagan Infidels, where they performed wonderfull feats of Arms, to the honor of Christ and Christendome, converting or confounding all where ever they came, and how in the intrim the tray∣tor Mordred nephew to King Arthur, whom (as Viceroy) he had left to govern the Land in his absence, usurped the Crown; which King Arthur heating of, made hast to come home; and in his march through France, encountred and overcame Lucius the Roman Consul, and many Princes of great birth and valour. Chap. 11. How King Arthur returned into England. He and Mordred were both slain in battel, and how noble King Arthur was buried at Glasenbury in Summerset-Shire,
The History of Arthur King of Britain. CHAP. I. How King Uter sirnamed Pendragon slew in battell Coisen the proud Duke of Cornwall (that rebelled against him) and took his widow (fair Igren) to wife, of whom he begat one renowned King Arthur. THe Britains having drawn their necks out of the Ro∣man yoak, which they had borne almost 500. years (from Julius Caesar who conquered Casibelan King of Britain) unto Gratian the last Roman governour here, who ended his life (and with him the dominati∣on over this Iland) in Anno domini, 376. After this Vortiger of the Race Royall of Britain, dio by murder and usurpation possess the Diadem and jurisdiction over this noble Kingdome; but by hi sexecrable life, and wicked government, gowing hatefull in the Subjects eyes; he (fearing their justly instigated arming against him) sends over into Germany to a Noble and warlike Nation, there called the Saxons (of Saxonie) to intrent their aid against his Natives (whom he called Subjects.) The Saxons under the conduct of their two Princely Leaders, Hengist and Horsus, having gotten an invitative entrance into this Land (which pleased them so well) they never loit of procéeding their warlike policy, until they became in fine sole Masters of the Field; chasing the Britaines (by degrees) into that mountanous County now called Wales (then Cambria which hapned about the year 590 under Careticus) the Britaines deposing usurping Votiger, put Vortimer his Son into his stead, who being poisoned by Vortigers wife (who was Hergists Daughter) Vortiger reassumes the dominion raigns with much vexation 19. yeare, and then both he and Rowan (his Saxon wife) are burnt in their Castle by Aurelius Ambrose of the linage of Con∣stance, whom Vortiger (to get the Croven) had murthered: To this Aurelius Ambrose (after 32. years raigne) succeeded Uter Pendragon
his Brother: (All the premises are as so many steps ascendant to our story) this Uter was the Father of our renowned Christian, wor∣thy King Arthur the great of Great Britain, King and Emperor, (the noble subject of this Kingly and most Heroick History) in the be∣gining of King Uters reigne, the great Duke of Cornwall named Coisen, prompted by ambition, avarice, and oppulency (three strong cords to draw an evill disposed man to destruction) raised an open Re∣bellion against his Soveraign; in which lawless enterprise he was slain, and his Wise Igren (the mirror of Ladies for her beauty and ver∣tue) became as lawfull prise to King Uter; and although the death of Coisen her late Husband might seeme to besome obstract, yet the just∣ness of his death, the Kings cause and request, overcomming all nice∣ties to the increase of her joy and dignity, by the marriage of the King, she became Quéen of Britain: Of this gallant Lady (Queen Igren) our worthy Arthur was begotten and born, of whose matchless achiev∣ments, for the honour of God and his Nation, and the terror of his e∣nemies; this following epitomy or abstract of his History, gives a briefe and reall notion; this first Chapter serving as a proeme to what follows in order according to the Rule of Chronography or Histo∣ry. CHAP. 2. How the learned Merlin (who flourished in those daies) had the tui∣tion of Prince Arthur committed unto him, and how he tutored him. IN those daies lived (and flourished) that learned Clark Mrlin (by some accounted a Negromancer, by all a Prophet) of whose predictions a Prophecies, so much talk is at this day (especially among the Welch) who being in great favour, with King Uter (as one by whose coun∣sell he was chiefly governed in all his actions) to him was committed the tuition and education of the young Prince, whose advice gave him his name Arthur, for some cause which he propounded. Merlin having gotten himselfe to be intrusted with the government of this Child (of whom he Prophecied great and admirable deeds to be done) applied all his best of skill and industry, to continue and augment the good o∣pinion which both the King and his People conceived of his Learning, Wisedome, Gravity, and Fidelity to his Nation and his Soveraign; so that he nurtured the Prince in his minority in rudiments sutable to
his age and proclinity, and as he grew and increased in years, so Art. Learning, and Vertue grew and increased in him; insomuch that in him appeared all that might promise a future greatnesse and goodness? his mind and study above all things earthly, he dedicate to divine docu∣ments, and next unto that his discourses were all military, and his déeds answerable (exceeding the compass of his age), briefly, what may be possibly expected in a Prince every way pointed out (or set apar) for God and his Countrey, honour (and service) in our Arthur, was so conspicuous, and visible, that the whole world made him the severall objects of both envy and hope: Thus much concerning his education under Merlin; in the next Chapter we will bring his to Father his Se∣pulcher and him to his Throne. CHAP. III. Of the death of King Vter Pendragon, and how Prince Arthur at the age of 18. years was crowned King of Britaine by common consent. KIng Uter having royally and lovingly both governed, and nourish∣ed the sickly estate of Britain, for the space of 28. years, in which time he had gotten many fortunate battels against the Saxons; then being a prevailing party here, at last to verifie our now common saying, too much familiarity breeds contempt) growing too much familiar with a Saxon Prince called Enerinus, he was by him (or his appointment) poisoned at a great feast held in the Town of Salop; leaving his noble Son Prince Arthur the expectation of England, and the just revenger of his Fathers death, who immediately seconded his exit, with his own entrance upon the stage of majesty; he was at that time but a strippling in age, having past over but 18. Winters, and as many Summers, but in Statute, Strength, Wisoome, and Valour he passed thousands that doubled his days. Such majesty in his eyes, such gravity in his gest∣ure and countenance, such mediocrity and modesty in his behaviour, and comportment joyned with subtle wisedome, prudence and tem∣perance in his words, that justice and fortitude in his actions were void of doubt or question, so that his wise and cunning Tutor presenting his Pupill so exquisitly qualified, gained the lasting love of the Commen-Wealth, for his so artificially yoaking grace and nature, to draw on the Chariot of Britains honour and happiness; The same night that his Father was poisoned, Prince Authur in a dream saw a vision (in this manner) a huge spreading Vine, with great ripe clusters shewed them∣selves
red and ready to be crushed: From the roof of this Vine issued a venomous Viper, which Viper was seconded with a great Snake; between the Viper and the Snake was a cruell Combate, the Snake for her advantage wound her selfe about the body of the Vine, and from thence parlied with her enemy, the Viper breathing out threatnings against the Snake instead of hurting her (with his vene∣mous breath) poisoned the grapes which a man in sad sable habit, com∣ming after to tast of died immediately: Soon aftar all this came in a lusty raging Lyon, that with his roaring scared away both the Viper and the Snake, and also awaked Prince Arthur. This dream and vision Merlin disected in these (or the like words) most noble branch of British Royalty, whom my prophetick spirit dares in the present tense (regarding of the future) call the sole and absolute Monarch of all Christendome; this last night thy royall Father hath by late reconciled enemies (whom we are forbidden to trust) been invited to a supper, and though as yet fame hath not sounded the trumpet of his death; neither do I know any (thing by the voice of the People) but that he is very well and in perfect good health: yet (worthy Prince) my genius (conspi∣ring with your highness dream and vision) dictats to my thoughts that he is by this time (to our great sorrow) dead, being poisoned by Remon at the appointment of Querinus, the Saxon Prince; who was lately of a fierce foe transformed into the shape of a feined friend. This I tell you and this you will find true; these are the Viper and the Snake (for they were at variance before, but agreed for the poisoning of Vter) which have between them poisoned the Vine (intimated by the grapes) which your Father signified by the man in a sable habit (a fit emblem of death) tasted and dyed thereof; well what (renowned Prince) remains now, but that you must he that raging, fierce, revenging, and roaring Lyon, who with your powerfull and frightfull voyce of command shall make this Snake and this Viper, this Remon and this Querinus with all the rest of that hellish rabble of heathenish Pagans; these miscreant Saxons to fly away and hide themselves from your (Lyon like) fury. No sooner were these speeches by learned Merlin uttered, but present∣ly a Post came in all hast to give information of the business, signifying that King Uter Pendragon was poisoned: the Saxons had possest them∣selves of the Town of Salop, having most treacherously butchered man, woman, and child that were therein; first ravishing both Wives and Virgins before their Husbands and Parents faces, and then made a ge∣nerall massacre of all together: When Prince Arthur heard this sad, (and horrible) report (after sundry short ejaculations invoking divine
assistance,) he furning to his Tutor (Merlin) said thus; learned Sir your words are oracles, and so I shall ever esteem of the same, during my mortal life, when I swerve from your counsell, I can expect nothing but destruction to my self and my people; and if Alexander estermed so much a dead Homers works, what shall I Arthur deem of a learned Mer∣lins voyce, the noblest Barrons, Prelates, & commen people of the King∣dom, when they had notice of this Royal Tragedy made hast both to have a King to govern them, and a revenging scourge for their enemies, so with a unanimous consent they chose Prince Arthur for their Soveraign. CHAP. IV. Of the great Triumphs, Tilts and Turnaments used in his Court in the beginning of his reign, and the wonderful resort of galliant warriers. THe barbarous Saxons having performed that treasonable practise in the poisoning of King Uter (as you heard in the precedent chap∣ter) though they had made sure work for the totall extirpation of the British blood, not thinking this our Arthur to be his successor: though the hearts of the Britains (in this exigent) were set upon the consideration of his promising vertues, which were the step by which he principally ascended the Throne. For although I do not, many then did question his legitamacy of knowing that the love which King Uter professed to fir Igren (for her beauty and vertue) caused the jarre between him and her husband; but thats not pertinent to our story. Arthur is crowned King of Britain, and that the Saxons shall soon know to their cost. At his first initiation into the government, he proclaimed a generall Tur∣nament for all commers, at the City of Rerulam (long since buried in ruine and oblivion) near to St Albons) King Authur was crowned (by the hands of William Bishop of London) to this Triumphant Tilt, and Turnament: it is wonderful to relate what resort there was of gal∣lant warriers from all-neighbor Nations; from Scotland, Ireland, France and Almaine, the most approved Knights for valour gave luster to King Arthurs Court, who for munificent entertainment and large hospitality far surmounted all his predecessors: at this Turnament (which lasted all the Whitson week and four daies after) was much galantry perfor∣med, both by our Britaines and Foraigners, which were tedious to relate in particular. In this brief discourse it shall suffice to nominate some of the principall actors in this martiall scene, how they were mated and who were Victors. First Cador Duke of Cornwal a most valiant and British Knight, encountred Macpar Prince of Lenster (in Ireland) a mighty man in statute and conposure of body so of equall skill and courage with the best knight then living. These two Heroes at
their first carrier found fortune so impartiall in her friendship that they were were both sent one way, their bodies fell to the earth, and their spears mounted (with their same) into the the aire. This they did thrée severall times with the like issue. Cador likewise ran against Godrey Count of Henault, a very good, and experienced Knight, to whom Lady Fortune had been heretofore extremly prodigall in curtesies, but now to shew her mutability, her same left him, and so did his vitall breath; for being a corpulent man of body, with the violent fall from his horse he broke his neck and died presently in the place, whose death was so gene∣rally lamented, that the good Knight Duke Cador sorrowfully threw off his armour and titled no more during all the time; briefly the Earle of Ludlow overthrew and wounded the Duke of Mountpelier; the Earle of Rothsay (a gallant Scot) did the like to the Count St Paul, and the King of Northwals running against the Duke of Halstein threw both him and his horse to the ground, breaking (with the violence of the fall) the neck of the horse and the arme of the rider, the Duke of Britain did the like with the Count of Ipre; but the most notable combate of all that I have either mentioned or (for brevity omitted) hapned upon the last day between the Count Palatine of Chester and the Daulphin of Viena, which considering all circumstan esdeserves expression (though in a brief manner) turing the Courtly entertainment before the Turnament (and in the intrim) these two young gallants, both Batchelors, became mutually enamoured on the matchless beauty of the Lady Jaquinta sole daughter and heire to the Earle of Flintshire, who was a Courtly atten∣dant on (and Neecè to) the Queen Igren the Kings Mother, and be∣ing jealous of each others fortune in the affairs of Cupid; Mars (upon this offered occasion interposing himselfe as a moderator to decide the difference, so that being interiorly (as well as exteriorly) armed, and both gallantly mounted they entred the Lists with extraordinary engagment, and courage (as the event justifies) at their first encounter, both of them fell horse and man to the ground sorely bruised, and recovering their legs (contrary to their forratuners) fell to it firecely with their swords, their manhood whetted on that fair Ladies perfections, turned friendly tryall (by turnament) to the mortal thirst of revenge, with such eager stroaks one of them pursued the other, that the Princely spectators must need judge death to be the umpire of the controversie; for doth being disswa∣ded by Royall command, and intreated of friends, all was answered with desire of prosecution, with such accerbity and accrimony of heart, did they strive to defend, and offend, that it was hart to censure whe∣ther malice or valour had most predominance, the Count Palatine
judging his native right to the Lady more then the Dolphin which was an Aliene, and the Dolphin deeming that Princely birth, and correspon∣dent qualities might merit affection in any part of the world. This is the beginning and ground of the quarrel; whereof the end and issue is death to both, s you shall hear presently; the Dolphin hit the Count Palantin such a forcible blow on the helme, making way by steele (through steele) it both pierced his skull, and also brought him upon his knées, at which advantage, he ran violently upon him to have crush∣ed him to the earth, but the Count Palatine (acttive both in body and spirit) reassumes his legs (the Dolphins strength being much inferior to his) and with his kine sword lent him such a lucky, or unluckly stroake between the head and shoulders, that cutting his win dpipe, down fell the Dolphin, but as he fell he thrust his sword under the skirt of the Count Palatines armor, which visiting his intrals with the point of death: these two noble Knights and lovers, though not of each other, dyed both together in hatred, neither of them injoying his wish, but re∣venge: and so with the end of them I will finish the feast, and turna∣ment, and withall conclude this chapter. CHAP. V. Of King Arthurs first War with the Saxons, and how he victoriously overcame them in twelve several set battels, to the subduing of their pride and preventing their progress of conquest during his own, and his next successors raign. THe triumph thus tragically begun and ended; our worthy Arthur, having first solemnized the funeral obsequies of his Royal Father; also the Count Henault, the Dolphin of Viena, and the Count Palatine of Chester, which was on four severall dayes performed with all due celebritie, begins to think the redemption of both upon his native Coun∣try from Pagan slavery, and revenging of his Royall Fathers horrible murder. And to this intent he with all possible celerity, musters op all the bold Britains of this Kingdome Christains and Barrons assembling at London the metropolitant city of the realm, he made an oration unto them to this or the like effect. Noble natives, on whom, next to divine help, my honour, wealth, and safty depends, now is the time that we must arme our selves with Christian confidence against these misbesee∣ming miscreants, who for so long a time have gurndized
and glutted themselves in ours and our worthy amatours blood, the execrable massacce at Salop begun in the poison of our Royall Father, being yet in fresh bleeding memory, néeds no other incentive, it being of it selfe a motive forcible enough to conglutinat your hearts, and put edge to your valour against these blasphemors of Christ and his Law, and captivators of us, and what should be most dear to us, even our consciences: to the heathenish Idolatry and merciless tyranny, much néeds not be said to excise, when the cause it selfe is so urgent, and pres∣sive. Be ye true to me, your Soveraign, as I by Gods assistance, whose substitute I am, will be faithfull and just, to defend and protect you my Christian British Subjects, from the vasalage of these infidels; and I doubt not but we shall bring these our godly resolutions to a happy and a glorious period. This speech was received with a generall plauditie, the acclamations of the people were so loud, and great, that it is almost beyond credit to tell how far they were heard, of arme, arme, arme, now is all the cry, and there was no need of pressing of souldiers as we use now adayes, for souldiers pressed forward to this War, with∣out command or pay: So that within a fortnight space and less, there appeared in sundry places of the Land above 200000. able fighting men, all compleatly armed, all crying for God, King Arthur, the British Liber∣ty, and Christian Religion: Well, but what do the Saxons all this while, are they idle? no, great preparations are made, new forces arm dayly at the several ports and havens of the Land: Some at South∣hampton, others at Sandwich, and a third at Famouth; now is Britaine become an Acceldama, nothing but blood, ruine and slaughter is to be expected, but the best of it, it is King Arthur and his noble Britains are alwaies victorious: the Pagan Idolaters fall under the Christian sword; insomuch that within 18. months 12. mighty hosts of Saxons are over∣thrown in 12. severall set battels, fought in sundry places of the King∣dome; the first and greatest was in Shropshire near Salop upon New-Years day A. D. 517 where 46000 Pagan Saxons were sent to the devil for a New years gift, 3000. chiefe Commanders, and Pymen, as they call them, taken prisoners; this memorable battell in a manner made ship wrack of all the Saxon greatness in this Land; yet in March fol∣lowing by the aide that came from them from beyond the Sea, and their scattered forces which they had rallied together they openly opposed K. Arthur and his British Army, near to Oundly in Norhampton shire, where with the slaughter of above 18000 Saxons and 150 prisoners,
King Arthur abtainted a glorious victory. To make short, what would bed verlong if I should tell you all; in the space of time above mentioned tbis noble Christian worthy, became conqueror of these bloody, and amhious Saxon conquerors. 12. severall times; insomuch that they not being able any longer to withstand his never changing Fortune, were at the last (so many as were left alive) ensorced quite to abandon the Land, to which they never returned during the raigne of Arthur, and his next successor, which was (his Nephew) Constantine, Son to the late mentioned Cador the valiant and magnanimous Duke of Corn∣wall: Thus much for his first war with (and extirpation of) the Saxons, wherein he shewed himselfe to be a true Son to his poisoned Father, and a just Father to his his oppressed, distressed, and captived Nation great Britain. CHAP. VI. How King Arthur crost the Seas, and subdued Denmark and Norway and Gothland unto him, in which voyage many notable occurrances passed well worth observation. HAving thus victoriously triumphed over his enemies at home, our (not idle) Arthur caused a Navy of 400. ships to be presently well rigged and manned, and an Army, consisting of 60000. foot, and 20000. horse to be ready to attend his Majesty upon what designe he would be pleased to imploy them; which done, himselfe in his Royall person, his kinsman Cador Duke of Cornwall, whom he made Cap∣tain Generall of the horse, the Earle of Ludlow named Sr Marston, Lieutenantgenerall under him; the Earle of Leicester, Lincolne, Salop, and Flintshire, all imployed in places of great charge in the Army. Morgan King of Norhwales, and Theoder (of whom the moderne name Tender originally sprung) King of Southwales each of them voluntari∣ly offering unto King Arthur (to whom they did fealty) their aide and assistance in this gallant intended voyage; So that having all things fitting, and nothing wanting (that might promise property) our famous and renowned Navy, with our bold British Christian Army, put from Dover in the Ides of March, Anno 519. for the Conquest of those thres then Pagan Nations, Denmark, Norway, and Gothland, and with such happy gales they were befriended, and waited on by such auspitious stars, that as they were not long under saile, so upon the shore their wishes were answered with successe accordingly, insomuch that
it was no more then hope and have, wish and win; for our Arthur might alwaies say with Caesar, veni, vidi, vinci I came, I saw, I over∣came; so the divine power was so immediately assistant, with this valiant Christian Champion our worthy British Arthur, that what enterprise soever he took in hand (though never so much difficulty appeared in it) he was certain to come off victor; at his arrivall in Denmark, mighty opposition was made to prevent farther entrance into the Land; but all in vaine, our Noble Brittains (had been by former experience) taught to account that ground whereon their feet stood, to be their own inheritance, and that they would never part withall alive: this re∣solution caused King Arthur to conquer where he came, whatever oppo∣sion was made. The King of Denmark whose name was Eschilleus, was at a strong hold of his, called Bull Castle, which King Arthur (a∣ving overcome the Danish Army) laid siege to, and in four dayes took it by maine assault: the King to save his life, humbly upon his knees did homage to K. Arthur, for his Kingdom, which he would hold of him as his leige Lord, paying to him (and his heirs, Kings of Britain) an an∣val tribute of 40000 Ducass: which when Dolleivius King of Gothland heard who was comming to assist Eschilleus (fearing the event) he be∣gan to retire; but our horsemen so plyed the opportunity, that overta∣king the reare of the army; they gave fierce onset to them, holding them in play, till the maine body of the British foot came up, and indeed little ado their was to-gaine this victory, which fear had halfe done already, the King was taken (with 12. men in his company near to a wood side) by a party of our horse, who were imployed in pursuit of the (dispierced) army: who being brought before, King Arthur, submitted, resigning himselfe (his Crown and Kingdome) to hold in Fee of the British Monarchy, yearly allowing a tribunary stipend of 700. Franks (of Gold) delivering his own brother Harpus (Prince of Finia) in hostage till security was made for the true payment of it. With this prosperous successe, our worthy Arthur set forward to Norway, the King whereof (Lotho by name, a man of marvelous strength and valour) having had intelligence of all that had passed in Denmark (and thereby conjecturing what would come to pass) gathering all the premission that might be of men and armes to check the caréere of this unresistable army; which he indeed had accomplished, but that a power more then humane prevented it: at the first arrivall of the Britaines (which they permitted as tru∣sting upon their lands strength, which was 300000 horse and foot in a minute all that the Land could make) King Arthur sent a messener to King Lotho, requiring of him his Kingdome, and people to yeeld obedi∣ence
to the Christian Crown of Britain, as his neighbor Kings had done; which if he refused to do (without effusion of blood) he doubted not to gain by force what he sought to win by favor: the proud Pagan Prince (presuming upon his own, more then common ability of body, and the magnitude of his army, sent back this despicable answer (by way of defiance and challenge) to King Arthur, and his chevalry. Know daring Arthur, that thou and all thy crafty Christians, whom contemptuously thou hast brought against the decree of the gods, into this Northeen part of Europe, shall be the laughing stock of Lotho and his matchless Nor∣veigians, and although fortune have smited thee to triumph over the cowardise of Eschillius and Dollavius wits; assure thy selfe all this will conduce to the greater glory of me, who am (by the gods) designed to be the Conqueror of thee, who hath conquered so many of their devout supplicaters, thou art come upon my land without my leave, but shalt never depart thence with thy life; but because I intend to win a particular praise in thy ruine (and the chiefe men with thee) I challenge thy self to méet my self, in personal combat, and if thou, & they think well of it, 10. of the most approved Knights in thy army, against 10. of mine, this if accepted by thee and thine, shall be performed by me and mine, to morrow morning by 9. of the clock, upon Armond plain, two leagues from either Army; bring you courage along with you, and let your horses bring you to the place of destruction; at the time & place appointed; if you fayle, our expectation, we will not fayle to be with you (to the ruine of your hoste) in the afternoon of the same day; in the in∣rim, take leave to pause upon the words of thy mortall enemy Lotho, Rex Norvegia▪ This Letter comming into King Arthurs view, it is un∣expressible with what joy he read it, and calling his Princes, Barrons, and illustrate Knights before him, unto them he communicated the pre∣mises; when presently a vertuous emulation (and strife arose among them) who should be the combators in this glorious hazard; to be briefe, the business could no otherwise be decided then by casting lots (so hun∣gry were their Christian appetites after this honourable breakfast) the lots fell upon Duke Cador of Cornwall, Morgan and Theodore King of North & South Wales, the Earle of Lecester, Lincoln, Flint, Ludloe, and Salop, the Barron of Aberqueny, and the Barron of Bark; these 10. gallant Knights to the spirituall envy of many others rode along with King Arthur (at the time to the place appointed) where they met there resolute opponents, so punctual to promise, that I may well say they met indeed, neither party staying for the other; but just comming to the place together, as though the 22. horses had been privy to catch others se∣crets,
or known their riders intentions: Thus being mutually met after a few course complements (such as the present occasion dictated) they fell to the business which they came about, with such impartiall hardines, that you might well guess that the one party fought to win a Kingdome, and the other fought to save one: it would be both trouble∣some and tedious to recite the particulars of this happy bickering, there∣fore I will content my selfe with the rehearfall of the two Kings encoun∣ter combat, & success, onely generally telling how the rest behaved them∣selves, and to whom the victory hapned: King Arthur charged his enemy so furiously at their first encouner, that Lotho being a man of admirable strength, & not able to unhorse him, he himselfe was so near dismounting, that he recoyled into thecrouper of his Saddle, at which his very eyes re∣vealed the anger of his heart, so that recovering his seat, and at a second passge both their Lances (though marvelous strong) flew into the ayre, but with the vehemency of the stroke King Lothos left shoulder joint was dissocated, which he chafing (like a bore) sought his best advan∣tage by sudden dismounting, but King Arthur (the activist man alive was on ground with sword in hand before him, and at the first veny struck him on the head so vigorously, that he cleft his helme and head to the eyes; so down fell Lotho like a mighty Oake, yeelding his body and King∣dome to the mercy of King Arthur, how he would bury the one, and dis∣pose of the other; in the intrim our hardy British Knights had slain 6. of their 10. Antagonists, and mortally wounded the other four, either of them having received any notable hurt: the Earle of Flint had his horse slain under him, the like had the King of Northwales, Duke Cador was cut in the arme, the Earle of Leicester in the leg, and the Earle or Sa∣lop in the shoulder, no other hurt was done unto the British Party, the dejected Norveigians bearing these tydings (so full of horror to them) threw down their weapons and fled, whom our Britains overtaking; King Arthur caused a proclamation to be made, that whosoever would forsake the worship of their false gods, and adore the true God Iesus Christ, and be baptized into the Christian Faith, should be received to mercy, the obstinate to expect none: upon this many thousands promised, and in four dayes performed the same, by baptisme, and confession of the Chri∣stian Faith; among the rest, the Duke of Erikine next heire to the Crown of Norway, was baptized, and Crowned both in one day (by the Bishop of Menevia (since called Saint Davids) who was alwaies attendant on King Arthur, who receiving homage of this new Chri∣stian King (the first of that name and condition, for so he was named at
his imitation to his Kingdome and Christianity) for the Kingdome of Norway, our illustrions King Arthur (with his Royall British army, laden with honour and victory) left these coasts, and set sayle for Britain, where soon ariving, they were received with uncredible gladness, and triumph, as such a sprosperous voyage deserve. CHAP. VII. How King Arthur instituted the order of the Round Table, and graced it with 150. Knights, with the reason of its institution to maintain con∣cord. KIng Arthur having filled all eares with the fame of his incompara∣ble victories, and being at home on all sides quiet, by none molested, by all loved or feared, to honour those high born Princes Nobles, and Barrons, who had done God and him such notable service, he betheught him how he might in some manner guerdonize their (incomparable) worth, with some honourable Order of Knights, had (a thing customa∣ry in many renowned conquerors) and because he took notice that being most of them of equivolent condition, both in birth, and haughtiness of spicit, to avoid emulation, envy, and heart burnings, incident to such a Company about priority or precedency of place at feasts, to prevent any such occasion of distraction (and to continue concord, and mutuall corre∣spondence among that noble fellowship,) he instituted at the City of Winchester where he then was residing) the Order of the Round Ta∣ble, causing a certaine number of Round Tables to be made, at which these illustr ous Heroes dined, and supped, the salt and the bread alwaies set in the middle, there was neither upper end nor lower end (of the Ta∣ble) but all equall; into this noble Order was received 150. men of high bloud equality which (or what high birth soever) none were under the degred of Barron) were called Knights of the Round Table, and be∣cause I find many of their names to be at this day great sirnames in the Monarchy of great Britain, I think it convenient (to the honour of the beaters, notwithstanding my promised brevity) to set down the names of the first Knights of the Round Table in Alphabeticall order as I found them long since in an old Chancerian manuscript.
depiction of the Knights of the Round Table 1. SIr Acolon. 2. Sir Alot. 3. sir Agar. 4. sir Aucruise. 5. sir Ambross. 6. sir Ascot. 7. sir Ascue. 8. sir Albone. 9. sir Aubaurne. 10. sir Ash. 11. sir Amice. 12. sir Beumans. 13. sir Belamore. 14. sir Bersunt. 15. sir Belvoire. 16. sir Bos. 17. sir Beleobus. 18. sir Basset. 19. sir Bygot. 20. sir Brian. 21. sir Bevis. 22. sir Best. 23. sir Buacie. 24. sir Baude. 25. sir Betris. 26. sir Baulks. 27. sir Cador. 28. sir Christian. 29. sir Carlon. 30. sir Cleere. 31. sir Clare. 32. sir Cade. 33. sir Cosels. 34. sir Callin. 35. sir Clay. 36. sir Coats. 37. sir Castor. 38. sir Daubeny. 39. sir Delamore. 40. sir Deucie. 41. sir Dallin. 42. sir Doughty. 43. sir Daynty. 44. sir Dunsmore. 45. sir Darcy. 46. sir Dalby. 47. sir Duncombe. 48. sir Dotrill. 49. sir Doguery. 50. sir Doriner. 51. sir Evan. 52. sir Ector. 53. sir Eincrie. 54. sir Esmeere. 55. sir Eatone. 56. sir Eger. 57. sir Edwards. 58. sir Erskeine. 59 sir Euball 60 sir Eupheos
61 sir Ermin 62 sir Floll 63 sir Frith 64 sir Fly 65 sir Forscue 66 sir Felde 67 sir Foulke 68 sir Fly 69 sir Flesk 70 sir Forbs 71 sir Fleere 72 sir Frisk 73 sir Font 74 sir Fode 75 sir Freake 76 sir Fax 77 sir Ghislet 78 sir Gavin 79 sir Gaheris 80 sir Gareth 81 sir Gravet 82 sir Geuls 83 sir Gortrim 84 sir Gilden 85 sir Giles 86 sir Goulde 87 sir Gaull 88 sir Guest 89 sir Hard 90 sir Hay 91 sir Hope 92 sir Hill 93 sir Hunt 94 sir Hugin 95 sir Harcourt 96 sir Harold 97 sir Hamond 98 sir Hoby 96 sir Hollis 100 sir Jermin 101 sir Ingram 102 sir Islip 103 sir Ipre 104 sir Jones 105 sir Joyce 106 sir Ive 107 sir Killian 108 sir Kirk 109 sir Kercacy 110 sir Knevet 111 sir Kilegrew 112 sir Lancelot 113 sir Lanjon 114 sir Lyonell 115 sir Lewes 116 sir Loftus 117 sir Laude 118 sir Leuellen 119 sir Lovelace 120 sir Leukor 121 sir Maurice 122 sir Martin 123 sir Morton 124 sir Miles 125 sir Meridith 126 sir Mariot 127 sir Newton 128 sir Norton 129 sir Norman 130 sir Nayler. 131 sir Nudigate 132 sir Napper 133 sir Oliver 134 sir Osbolstone 135 sir Ouldtoire 136 sir Osbourne 137 sir Percivall 138 sir Pelleas 139 sir Pallamaide 140 sir Peregrin 141 sir Playster 142 sir Querin 143 sir Reiner 144 sir Roderik 145 sir Randolph 146 sir Sugris 147 sir Tristram 148 sir Tramore 149 sir Tracy 150 sir Valentine These were the Names of those Princes and Noble Men.
FIrst brother of this honourable fellowship (and fraternity) called Knights of the Round Table, betwéen whom there was such an una∣nmious and mutual correspondency, that all the whole world admired the admirable feats of chivalry by them performed; for with those 150. scarce any 300. Knights in Europe durst adventure to Combat: of their noble acte you shall hear further in the progress of our history to the end. CHAP. VIII. How King Arthur and his Knights of the Round Table, fought against the Pits, Scots, Irish, and Saxons in one battell; and how he slew with his own hands, Colgrim King of the Saxons, Balduff his brother, and Childrick a Prince of Germany, and how he forced Guillamore King of Ireland to become tributary unto him. SHe Saxons envying King Arthurs prosperity, and vexing at their late success in Britine, have now suborned the Picks, Scots, Irish, and the Hesens of Germany, to aide them in revenging themselves upon K. Arthur; so they came hither with an army composed of all these afore∣mentioned Nations, consisting of 200000 horse and foot under the con∣duct of Colgrim their King, balduff his brother, Guillamore King of Ireland, and Childrick: (Prince Coras now Landsgrave) Hesen meaning to share the Kingdome of Britain, among them, they landed suddenly in the North of England, and burnt and spoyled before them for the space of 18. miles without any opposition, but so soon as ever our Lyon like Arthur, & his Knights heard of it, they came with a puissant force to withstand them, and near to Humber obtained a glorious victory slew 28000. in the Field of the common sort, and took 300 of the ir chief Commanders prisoners; but which most adornes the victory, King Arthur himselfe in person slew head to head Colgrim the Saxons King, with Balduff his brother, and Childrick of Hesen, but Guillamore King of Ireland trusting to his footmanship (for his horse was slaine under him) ran towards the , thinking to escape by shipping, but Sir Cador overtaking him, brought him prisoner to the King, who forced him for the safeguard of his life, to resigne his Kingdome unto his majesty, and to that effect he did homage, yeelding to pay unto King Arthur (and his heires) a yearly purtion of nine thousand pounds: Thus was our noble Arthur every way magnified, his foes every where confounded; and the monarchy of Britain under his government
became the most most renowned throughout all the whole world; the Saxons never daring to come towards it, during his reign nor his next successors (Constine) as I told you heretofore. CHAP. IX. How King Arthur (and his Knights) sayled to subdue Ireland, which he performed with great honour, converting that, and the adja∣cent Lands, to Christianity, and obedience to him and the British Monarchy. GReat Spirits cannot be idle, the thoughts once fixed on honoura∣ble atchievements, and cherished with happy success, are ever bu∣sied in finding out this iewel, where ever it lie hid in the world: This is evident in our Christian Worthy, and his gallant Knights, who loathing to be backward in putting forwards Gods glory in the en∣largement of Christendom: and hearing that Ireland, and other people thereabout lived in heathenish Idolatry, and blind worship, not having the light of the Gospell as yet revealed to them; he raised an army to reduce them to the Law of Christ (and obedience to him,) with happy success this voyage goeth on, King Arthur and his Royal army, consi∣sting of no more but 0000. depending on divine Auxiliaries, adventure upon this great enteprise, and arive happy in Ireland, where they find great opposition, yet overcome with small difficulty: The people by Nature rude and savage, as hardy as their Country is cold; yet these cold comforts nor the peoples frozen conscience, dismay not our undaun∣ted Britains, whose zealous fire is of force both to warme themselves, and to thaw their enemies hearts: a furious encounter they found at their entrance; for the barbarous Islanders were upon a sudden ranged into a body of above forty thousand, their King Malvasius (a renow∣ned and hardy Knight, famoused for many victories against the Laplan∣ders, and Finians) came himselfe in person before his souldiers boldly demanding a sight of, and speech with King Arthur, which (to his happy unhappiness) he soon attained. CHAP. X. How King Arthur (and his Knights of the Round Table) sayled into Palestine to sight against the Pagan Infidels, where they performed
wonderfull feats of chivalry to the honour of Christ and Christianity; converting, or confounding all where ever they came. LOng had not King Arthur and his (honour thirsty) Knights slept at home, but fresh adventure pricks them forward to travel; Europe (by their meanes) is quitted (and the fold of Christ much enlarged) but in Asia the Pagan infidels rage; Palestine (with her Christians) groanes under this heavy yoke; therefore our worthy Arthur and his gallant warriers will not rest in peace, while tydings of ths horrible war and oppression is spread through the land of Christendome: briefly, with the very same army, which he brought out of the cold Countries, he marched upon this hot (yet honourable) enterprise, of all other the most laudable for a Christian Army to engage himselfe in; let us now imagine we see the Christian Banner displayed between Jerusalem and Jericho, upon the plain of Nabor, where an innumerable host of Sara∣res are encamped against the Xerxian multitude (with great confidence) goes our Christian Army, not doubting of (that which they near failed to get) victory, which by divine providence they accomplished; it were incredible to shew what extraordinary vertue King Arthur, and his Knights performed in that service; for three dayes space the battel con∣tinued, and then our Christian Army had the happiness to behold the destrustion and total rout of the whole Pagan host. CHAP. XI How King Arthur returned into England. He and Mordred were both slain in battell, and how noble King Arthur was buried at Glasenbury in Summerset-shire. NOw hath prosperous wind and weather brought our worthy Ar∣thur (and his bold belonists) to the British Coasts; he seeks la∣ding at Dover, but finds it fortified, to impeach his arrivall, the traytor Mordred had so possessed the people with his spirit of treason, and rebel∣lion, that they in stead of magnificent shews, and trumphes to welcome him (as his vertue required, and their duty had heretofore done) defied him to his face (O ingrateful Caitifs) and insolently denies his entrance into his owne inheritance (a very unfit guerdon for the unparalell'd honour) wherewith King Arthur and his Knights had endowed and a∣dorned the British Monarchy) upon the British shore he can set no foo∣ting
but by force, which (if there be no remedy) he knows how to do (being so long (and so well) verst in that business) and so by force doth enter, and is by a huge army of (bastardly) Britaines opposed, a cruell sight is maintained for a long time, in fine the King is victor, the usurper and his wicked company (for so many  es∣caped alive) fly and were pursued by the King, and their own evill consciences, yet being hardned with malice, and as it were steeled with basenesse; the miscreants (in that nature worse then the Pagan Infidels which his all conquering courage had so often triumphed over) have the face again to afront that majesty, the splen∣der whereof had so bazeiled the eye of the world (which looking on his glor ous conquest) that none beheld his countenance (in  warlike construction) without fear and trembling, nor durst they have done it had they not been (too bold in such an action) Britains that dare do any thing. Sir (Cdor that matchless man of men) was slaine fighting against a whole Regiment. Sir Gawin, a man of in∣vincible valour, coming to his rescue, also with him joyned in fellowship of death, the renowned, and couragious young King of Scotland Arguisell by name, coming to the aide of King Arthur, dyed gallantly fighting in his quarrell, Sir Killian de Londre environed with a troup of horse after the death of 12. men, which with his own hand he slew, was himselfe hit with a dart throwne from a common Irish or Pictish hand laid dead on the earth Sir Martin de Foe in rescuing King Arthur encompassed with a troup of horse (that sought to have taken him) was shot into the heart with an arrow, and dyed presently: after this Sir Cador, Sir Gawin, Sir Killian, and Sir Martin, after so many unequalled victories abroad, came to yield their loyall hearis, by the hands of perfidious Rebels, their own nativis, into the power of death in their native Country, also that valiant Scot before mentioned King Arguisel, though not a Knight of the Round Table, yet an undaunted Knight and trusly friend to King Arthur▪ who like an enraged Lyon makes slaughter on every side with his sword beyoud the expectation of humane force; insomuch that the enemy beginning to dispaire of victory, a Pictish souldier ( by Morded)  out aloud in the British Language, fly you Britaines, what do you fight for; Arthur your King (on whom you depend) and all his Knights of the Round Ta∣ble are dead: This made King Arthurs souldiers begin to star, which he hearing made hast to the most eminent place that he could id, where being conspirnous (and visible to them all, he spoke these coursgious words: Fight on (fellows in armes) I am (I praise heaven for it) neither dead nor wounded, but in perfect health (and strength) and that these vailanous rebels and traytors (who speak what they wish) shall soon find these words kindle fresh fire of valour in the brests of all true Bri∣taines, so as the battell did (as it were) begin anew; insomuch that the perfidi∣ous Mordred without hope, fled with his rebellious remnant towards the Towne of Glasenbury in Somerlet shire, whither King Arthus▪ and his Knights, with the rest of his gallantry, speedily pursued them, and there began afresh to sight where King Arthur, who in former fights had received ten severall wounds in his head, but none mortall till now, that the speele of a (broken) Launce hapned to pierce his skull, and that proved his deaths wound; but before he dyed, then when he felt the very agony of death aproching in his hot incensed bloud, he did wonderfull execution upon his enemies, and still continued fighting (as though he had felt no hurt) till a messenger brought him tydings that the Trater Mordd was slain; then said he, the unresistable will and decree of heaven be done, for I am well conten∣ted, and willing to dye: So soon as the Rebels heard, and saw that their Captain Mordred was dead, it is wonderfull to relate in what a disordered confusion they
ran some one way, and some another, they were sensible (by the testimony of con∣science) that their obstract persisting in rebellion (against so rare a King) had brought them beyond hope of pardon, therefore they asked none: in this distra∣ction there was a greater number killed in the flight then in the battell scarce a man of them had escaped, if the suden approach of good King Arthurs death had not pretented further pusuit; there was slain in the battell twelve thousand, and to the slight fifteen thousand: Mordreds hatefull deeds in his life time procured him a generall hatred after death, be dyed suddenly without any care for his soul, thrust thorrow the heart with a Iavelin (in the hand of a Common souldier) and when he was dead none tooke care of his Body; his own kindred (a sit guerdon for a Traytor) which were of the blood royall (and was he being nephew to King Arthur (as you have heard before) the gallant Sir Gawin Knight of the Round Table, who dyed bravely fighting (for his King) in this battell, was his own bro∣ther, he was cosen garma to that Illustrate Cador Duke of Cornwall (another) Knight of the Round Table, who also triumphed over death in his Soveraignes cause) whole Son (Costantine) succeeded King Arthur in the Kingdome, yet all this high birth, and alen ould not purchase a gravs, unless some Country hynde buried him in his (Orchard or Garden) for of his sepulcher (though so great a personage) no mention was ever made to this day: Well, enough of him (unless he had been better) now let us returne to K. Arthus, who lying upon his death-Bed (at Glasenbury) where having (like a worthy Christian as he alwayes had lived) made an eternall peace between God and his soul: and also a likely lasting peace (for the future) to his Kingdome, appointing for his successor (dying without a∣ny issue) his Nephew Constantine the Son of Cador Duke of Cornwall, as I told you lately. So this renowned Christian worthy (valiant King Arthur) ha∣ving first vanquished the Saxons at home, and anexed six forraign Crownes to the Monarchy of Britain: when he had thus victoriously raigned 26. years, he ren∣dred to death his interest, and his soule to his Redeemer, in the year of Grace, 543. and was buryed at Glasenbury, they where in this present modern age (I meane within living mens memory) there hath been an old Epitaph, with some other me∣morials of him, ound the Epitaph (so well as I can) I think it not impertinent to render in English. King Arthurs Epitaph. Here lyes great Arthur Britains King, 'Mongst Christian worthies first of three; His fame throughout the world doth ring, None did such doughty deeds as he. Death all unto this passe doth bring, He can subdue the greatest King. FINIS. London, printed for Francis Coles at the signe of the Lamb in the Old-Bailey, 1660.
