R1150 E456_18 R205046 99864490 162049
THE RESOLUTION OF The Kings Majesties Subjects in the County of Cornwall, and their declaring for his Majesty, and the Prince of Wales, and their Fight with the Parliaments Forces near Tavestock in Cornwall, with the particulars thereof, and the number killed and taken prisoners. Also the Declaration of the Sea-Royalists, for God and King Charles, and their entering of the Town of Portsmouth, and advancing up to the Market place, And a Defeat given to Lieutenant Generall Cromwells For∣ces neare Pontefract in Yorkshire, and the number that were taken, and carryed prisoners to Pontefract Castle. Likewise a Declaration of the Citizens of London, for the raising of new forces, to defend the said City against any opposition whatsoever. SIgned in the Name, and by the Warrant of the Committee of the Mi∣litia of the City of London. A. Bankes, Cler. London, Printed for J. Jones, and are to be sold neer Temple-Barne. MDCXLVIII.
A Fight at Portsmouth, between the Seamen and the Souldiers, and their entering the Town, and declaring for the KJNG, SJR, THe happinesse and the blessings of Peace, which we have for many months last past, enjoyed, be∣gins to be now in these future dayes eclipsed; for about Tavestock in Cornwall, they begin to assemble toge∣ther in great numbers and multitudes, and rise in severall other parts, there are about Tavestock 300. in Armes, and have declared for the King and Prince Charles, protesting to hazard lives and fortunes in this their Engagement; & to oppose all forces whatsoever, that do resist he said power, and it is to be feared, if they be not blasted in the Bud, they will swell in a short time, & spring up to great maturity and ripenesse; but we hear that Col. Sir Ha dress Waller hath sent some forces to suppresse them, the wel∣affected of the County rise freely with him, he is increa∣sing
his number, in case the enemy should be numerous, Si Hardresse drawes up a Brigade to march upon occasi∣on. The wel ff  being partly sensible of the dan∣ger that hangs over them by a forreign force, which are daily expected, begin to provide against the storm, and if the number be not very great, are considering with Sir Hardresse his conjunction to dispute it with them. We hear that a party of Sir Hardresses horse, hath lately fallen upon some of them about Barnstable, and after some dispute, took above 20. prisoners; and killed five of them. From Portsmouth we hear, that the Soldierie are much discontented, but the Semen far more, being much wrought upon by the Royall party, who have instructi∣ons from others abroad; the Seamen must appear, and at the Design, for which purpose about 30. came a shore, entered the Town, and came up to the Market place, where they declated their Resolution to hazard their Lives and Fortunes, for the defence and preservation of the King of England, and the Prince of Wales, against all apposition whatsoever: This puts the Governour, and the other of South Sea Castle to a stand, The Allarm is given to the Souldiery, they advance, the Seamen maintains their ground some action happened, and the quarrell was resolutely disputed by both parties, till at the last, the Seamen retreat, the Souldiers pursue, and in the pursuit took some prisoners and forced the rest out of he Cates, which being shut all was pacified: The plot took not with the discontented Souldiery, as was presupposed, but the Seamen threaten a revenge. Torrington July the 28. 1648.
The Copy of a letter from the North, touching a Defeat given to Licut Gen. Cromwells forces near Pontefract. Sir, COllonel Bonovant, having received intelligence of the dvancing of Lieut. Gen. Cromwells norse into these parts, and that they intended to crosse over at the River of Gesse, 8. miles from Pontefract, to joyn with M. G. Lambert, he drew out a party consisting of 200. horse, and marched to the said place, where he found some in a very disorderly posture; and after a short dispute, he returned to the Castle again, and brought along with him about 15. prisoners, who at their coming into the Castle, a great shout was given by the Souldiery, and others, saying, That Cromwell and his J∣ron sides were now taken, & the bells of the upper Town were commanded to ring for joy. This morning we received in∣telligence, that Scarborough Castle was revolted from the Parliament, and had declared for the King, which might have been long before presupposed. The discontents and jealousies of many there, have been very great, occasioned by some hint of the Governors trea∣chery, which was suspected many wayes, 1, By turning out Capt. Lawson, a faithfull honest man, that long served in that garion. 2. By countenancing all disaffected persons theirin, and discountenancion the rest. 3. By procuring a ship for carrying away his Malignant kinsman, and other Cavaliers with him, and giving great entertainment to the Kings party, with whon he was very frequent. 4. By ex∣pressi g some ill placed words, now confirmed by the Go∣voverner, Collonell Bointons declaring, which is for the King and Prince Charles, his discontents, rather then hopes of a Reward, prompts him to a desperate adventure, having
had no pay, either for himselfe, or souldiers for many Moneths together, and though his Declaration be rash, yet he admits of none of the Royall party to enter; and if an overture of Indempaity, with a considerable sum for him∣selfe and Souldiers were made, the diference might be com∣posed: We further heare that Lievtenant General Cromwells horse, consisting of 30 odde Troops joyned with Major G. Lambert the 27. which no sooner came neere the Major Generalls further quarters, but fell upon action with asmall party with which they resolved to try the Scots Scouts, who forced them to retreat within 2 miles of Appleby, where their maine guard was, the Scots advance not, nor hath the Major Generall given ground this o daies and upwards, no action betwene them, onely the Scouts somtimes dis∣pure it. The Major Generall encreases da ly, his number consists of nine thousand, and with the foot of the Lieut. Generall with other forces (joyned with him in Nottingham, Lei∣cester, and Derbyshire, which will compleat 5000) his Ar∣my will be very numerous, and more offensive. The Letters seized this day in two ships bound for Scoi∣land, and brought to the Committee at Derby house, will discover much Rogery, when reported to morrow to the house; The armes are seized on, and the ships secured till further order. Lieutenant Generall Cromwell is to be for certain to morrow night at Nottingham from whence he speedily advances after he hath joyned with other Forces of those parts; The great additionall Army of Scots mar∣ching into England, appear to be no otherwise then a Re∣giment of 600 poor Scots that are come to take possession of Brwick, who say all is their own on this fide Trent.
Yesterday the Castle forces, made a sally out upon Sir Hugh Chlmleies forces neere Ferriebridge, engaged for the space of two hours, and made good their retreat, and re∣turned with little losse, they brought in on Mr. Resse, (a Country Gentleman) prisoner with them, we heare that the additionall forces are come out of Scotland, and 4 Ro∣giments joyned with Duke Hamiltons forces, their whole body now consisting of about 18000. Horse and Foot, yet notwithstanding all their potent powers, they have but little stomack to engage with M. G. Lambert, who remains with his forces about Barnard Castle, and doth daily ex∣pect the additionall forces to come up to them which if once effected, will prove more offensive then defensive, for his forces increase daily, and he maintains the sield, and keepes his ground, his Souldiery begins to be in action, and sometimes the Scots and they dispute it, which is all at present from, Pontefract, Upper town July 39. 1648. Your most assured Friend Tho: Derton. The Declaration of the Citizens of Lon∣don, concerning their listing and raising of forces, for the safety and preservation of the said City. FOr as much as this Court did apprehend the great dan∣ger the Parliament and City is in, in regard of the many Commotions in this Kingdom, and the distractions thereof.
And that a convenient number of Horse to joyn with the other Forces of this City, would be very usefull and servi∣ceable for the safety and preservation both of Parliament & City: The efore this Court doth now Declare, that it shall be taken as an acceptable service in any that will volunta∣ly Lift any Horse, or contribute any Money their unto, a d declare themselves theirin unto the Committee of the Militia of London; And to be under such Commanders, and observe such directions (tending to the welfare and safety of the Parliament and City) as the said Committee of the Militia shall appoint. And the said Committee are to appoint Treasurers to receive such Moneys, Horse, and Armes as shall bee voluntarily advanced towards that work, and to take Subscriptions to that purpose, and to be by them employed accordingly: And they are from time to time to acquaint this Court of their progresse and proce∣dings theirin; and to receive their further directions concer∣ning the same, as occasion shall require,  Michel. In pursuance of which Act of Common Councell, there are severall Members of the Committee of the Militia appointed to sit daily in Guildhall, in the Irish-Court. to take the said Subscriptions above men∣tioned; and are to sit from 9. till 12 of the clock in the forenoon, and from 3. till 6. of the clock in the afternoon. Mr. Glyd, and Mr. Blackwall are desired and appointed to bee Treasurers. Dated at Guildhall London, the 31. of July, 1648. Signed in the Name and by the Warrant of the Committee of the Militia of London. By Adam Banckes' Cleric. to the said Committee. FINIS.
