R1212 E550_9 99864964 165020
THE VINDICATION OF Abraham Reinaldson, LATE LORD MAJOR OF THE CITY Of LONDON. With Certaine QVERYES Of Conscience Resolved, concerning his refusing to obey a late Order of Parliament, for the Proclaiming an unjust ACT for Abolishing the Kingly Office in ENGLAND and IRELAND. For which supposed Contempt, he was unjustly Fined 2000 l. by the House of Commons, degraded of his Maioralty, and Committed Prisoner to the Tower of London, Aprill 2. 1648. Matth. 7.2. VVith what Iudgement ye judge, ye shall be judged, and with what measure ye mete, shall be measured to you againe. Aprill 10th London Printed in the Yeer, M.DC.XL.IX.
THE VINDICATION OF Abraham Reinaldson, LATE LORD MAJOR OF THE CITY Of LONDON. Gentlemen, and Fellow Citizens, IT hath alwayes been my earnest en∣deavor (with that holy Apostle, St. Paul) to preserve a cleer conscience to∣wards God, and towards man; I have usually applyed my self to the holy Scriptures, and to the obtaining of the true knowledge of Divine Truth, whereby to steer the Actions of my life, which shall alwayes be the Di∣rector to my Conscience; Therefore I hold it expedient (for the cleering of my self from a supposed crime, or contempt against an Order of Parliament as they please to terme it) That I Remon∣strate unto you the Grounds and Reasons moving me not to o∣bey their questionable Authority, in prolaiming their late un∣godly Act, for quite abolishing the Kingly Office in England and Ire∣land; without perjury to my Conscience, and the forefeiture of my Allegiance to my King.
First, as I very well remember, when I was initiated into the Society of men, and made a Member and Freeman of this City I took an Oath to be a faithfull and true Subject to the King that then was, and to his Heires, and to bear to Him true Allegiance. Secondly, I have taken an Oath, That I will Faith and Truth bear (to King Charles) of Life and Member, and terrene Honor. Third∣ly, I have taken the Oath of Supremacy, enjoyned in Stat. 1. Eliz. cap. 1. and the Oath of Allegiance enjoyned me by Stat. 3. Iac. cap. 4. Therefore, fellow Citizens, as it behoveth all good Christians to be carefull before they sweare, so likewise to performe that Oath they have sworne, and especially when it concernes our duty towards our King; I advise thee (saith the Preacher) to take heed of the mouth of the King, and to the Oath of God, as much as to say, That thou obey the King, and keep the Oath that thou hast made for that Cause; and the Prophet Zachary gives us this Commandement from God; Let none of you imagine evill in his heart against his Neighbour, and love no false Oath, for these are things that I hate, saith the Lord. Zach. 8.17. Again, our blessed Saviour, gives me this Precept, Matth. 5.33. Thou shalt not forsweare thy self, but performe thy Oaths unto the LORD. When I well weighed these Scriptures, and applyed them to the former Oaths I had taken, I found, That I could not obey the Parliaments Order, without a great sin against God, and trespasse against my owne Conscience; for having bound my self by so many severall former Oathes made to my King, and his Heires after him, to pay unto them my Allegiance, Faith and Truth, of Life & Member, and terrene Honor, and having acknow∣ledged Him to be Supreame Governor of his Realms; How can I then in Conscience, so persidiously withdraw my Allegiance from his Lawfull Successor, in Proclaiming their unjust Act for Abolishing the Kingly Office, without manifest Perjury, breach of my Oath, formerly made to the King and his Heirs, or an∣swer for taking the Name of God in vaine, by obeying an Or∣der from a questionable Authority, which would enjoyne me a thing contradictory to my former Oaths, which by law∣full Power, agreeable to the Laws of God and the Realme, I have
already bound my Conscience to the strict observance of. And in this Contempt, (as they please to terme it) I have asked Counsell, not onely of the Law of God, but the Law of Reason, which ought to be writ in the heart of every man, teach∣ing him what is to be done, and what is to be eschewed; the Law of God inlightning our Naturall understanding, is given principally to direct our Actions by, for the obtaining felicitie in this life, so as we guide them onely by the Rule of Iu∣stice. These Lawes have instructed me, (and ought to instruct us all) what good is to be done, and evill to be avoided; That I should doe to another that which I would another should doe to me; That Justice is to be done to every man, and not wrong; That a Trespasse is to be punnished, and the like. And if Reason directs me, That good is to be done, and evill to be eschewed, I must then needs conclude, That this Act for the abolishing of the KINGLY, Office, is directly against Law, and I by obeying their Order, or Command, in Proclaiming the same, must needs withdraw my Allegiance and Subjection to my KING from him, and so necessarily loose the benefit or good I should have by his Protection; For the Rule in Law runs thus. That the OBEDIENCE of the SUBJECT drawes Protection from the KING, the King being ordained for the defence of the Law, and the Bodies and Goods of all his Sub∣jects. Neither is, nor can there be any lawfull Power to command me (being a Magistrate) but what is derivative from the Su∣pream Power in the KING, or to His Officer, or officers, who have their Power from him, by His Writ, Patent or Comission; neither ought I nor can I obey the Command of any such law∣full officer, if that thing which he enjoynes me to doe, be con∣trary to the Law of God, the Law of Reason or the Fundamen∣tall Laws of the Kingdome, which have all dependencie one on the other. Then, much lesse, the command of an usurped or Pretended Power.
The holy Scriptures informes me, That I must fear God, and obey the King, that I must obey him for Conscience sake; and the Law teacheth me, That I must avoid evill; but it is evill for me to obey a pretended Authority, in proclaiming an unjust Act, which en∣jones me to deny, and wrong my King, and so not honor, not obey him, by doing of which, I must necessarily disobey God, who enjoynes me this duty of Obedience to my King; Ergo, Their command is not only forbidden in Gods Word, but against the Law of reason. The law teacheth me, to doe, as I would men should doe unto me; But if I were a King, I would not be robbed of my wright, nor dispoyled of the duty and service of my Subjects, Ergo. They or∣der me to doe a thing against the law of reason. It is injustice and wrong to take away the Kings Wright by this law, but you Order me to proclaim an Act that takes away his wright, which must needs be, to doe him wrong. Ergo, I ought not to obey your Order. The law of reason teacheth me, That a Trespasser is to be pu∣nished, and if I obey your Order, I must needs Trespasse in the high∣est nature upon the Kings Interest in me, as I am his Subject, to Trespasse upon his laws as I am de jure, under his Government, and to Trespasse upon his patience and goodness, and so make my self lyable to the punishment that belongs to such a Trespasse. Ergo, there is no reason that I obey your Order. The law of reason is generally taken as a directive Rule unto a goodness of operation; so that by this Law I ought to direct all my Actions to a good end; but by Proclaiming your Act, I direct not my actions to a good end. Ergo, I cannot obey your unreaso∣nable Order. Again, the law of reason is such, that being proposed, no man ought to reject it, as unjust, or unreasonable; but the King may reject the imposing of unlawfull commands upon his Subjects, whereby he is not only deprived of his Crown and Dignity, but of their ayde and Assistance. Ergo, &c. And truly every good Christian ought to reject all such Or∣ders, or commands as unreasonable and unjust, because if they obey them they doe thereby not only break their Oath, (which is a grievous sin) but loose the benefit of protection, which by the
law they may claime, and ought not to have, neither can be de∣rived from any pretended Authority whatsoever, but resides in the power of their Naturall, Lawfull, and Soveraigne Liege Lord the King. Ergo, &c. Againe, whereas the law of reason is never changable by any diversity of place or time; and whereas mine Allegiance is due to my Soveraigne in all places, in all cases, and at all times, I am for∣bidden by this unchangeable law, to change so unchangable and unalterable a duty, by such a flight and unwarantable Order, from a pretended Authority in these changeable times. Now I hope all Moderate and unbyassed Citizens and others will conceive, That as it was against reason for me to obey such an unreasonable, unlawfull Order; so it was against law and reason in them to require me so to doe; for it is most unreasonable and the worst or Tyrannyes, to order, or force a Christian Magistrate to doe that thing, which by doing, he must either commit that nationall and crying sin of perjury and presumption to destroy my own Soul, or by refusing to doe it (because it goes against my Conscience so to doe,) not only to be Fyned a great Summe, (no lesse then Two Thousand Pounds) but to be hurried from my house to Westminster, and from thence to Prison by rude Souldiers, and be degraded of my Moyoralty; Let all reasonable men judge whether this be sit usage for a Civill Magistrate, or whether it be not the greatest injustice and Tyranny as can be in∣flicted by those that pretend Freedom, Liberty, and the like, and yet use more subtilties then the father of lies to ensnare men, only they differ in this, Satan catcheth at the spirituall riches of the soul, and the Senate at the temporall means belonging to the bo∣dy; so that between them both, externall Riches, and in∣ternall Graces are now strongly besieged by red-coats, but God of his Infinite Mercy, give us strength and patience to hold out, so that they may not long exercise their Tyrannyes over us, as they now Vauntingly boast, That they intend to behead all the No∣ble, plunder all the rich, and starve all the Poore; As we already (by miserable experience) are to our great sorrow, very capable of. As for my Fyne▪ I weigh it not, for truly I had rather loose my wealth then my soul; and what it can advantage them to gaine
my wealth and loose theirs, is past my understanding to resolve you. Neither was it ever any custom that any Order for proclaiming Proclamations or Acts in that nature, hath been directed to the Lord Major, because it is the Office of a Sergeant at Armes, an Herald, or the Sheriffes to doe the same; But this Order so direct∣ed to me, to proclaime the said Act in Person, was no other but one of their old State-pollicies to set their hungry catterpillars a feeding, to devour my Estate. But I fear I am not the last by many, that they intend to pu∣nish in this kinde; but I have hope, in committing my present suf∣ferings to Him, that Iudgeth righteous judgement; and leave these new authors of usurped Authority to be Charactarized by the Pro∣phet Amos. cap. 3. Vers. 7. They know not to doe wright (saith the Lord) they store up Violence and Robbery in their Pallaces, and tuine Iudgement into Wormwood, and leave off Righteousnesse in the Earth: and as Solomon saith of such, That they sleep not, except they have done Mischief, and their sleep is taken away, unless they cause some to fall; for they eate the bread of Wickednesse, and are drunk with the Wine of Violence. But I shall conclude, with that Proverbial Exhortation of So∣lomon, which shall be my Advice to every true-hearted Citizen, My sonne, feare thou God, and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to Change. From my Imprisonment in the Tower, Aprill, 9. 1649. A. R. FINIS.
