r1371a 38875724 152343
Lay by your Pleading, Law lies a-Bleeding. HAbak. 1.4. Nahum 3.7, 14, 18. Rom. 6.1, 2, 3. O King, thy Shepherds slum∣ber: Therefore the Law is slacked, and Judgment doth never go forth; for the Wicked doth compass about the Righteous. Bemoan her: Whence shall I seek Comforters? For they make strong the Brick-Hills. Like Fig-Trees with the first ripe Figs; if they be shaken, they shall even fall into the Mouth of the Eater. What shall we say then? Shall we continue in Sin, That Grace may abound? God forbid. How shall we that are dead to Sin, live any longer? Know ye not that so many of us as were Baptized into Jesus Christ, were Baptized into his Death? Prov. 15.18, 19. The Heart of the Righteous studieth to answer; but the Mouth of the Wicked poureth out evil things. Job 7.11. Wherefore I will not refrain my Mouth; I will speak. Job 42.5. I have heard of Thee by the hearing of the Ears; but now mine Eye seeth. Job 12.3, 4. But I have Understanding, as well as you; I am not inferior to you: Yea, who knoweth not such things as these? I am as one mocked of his Neighbours, who calleth upon God. Job 20.27. Doth not the Ear try Words, and the Mouth taste his Meat? Job 24.12. The Heaven shall reveal his Iniquity, and the Earth shall rise up against him: Men groan from out of the City, and the Soul of the Wounded crieth out. Revel. 20.4. Matth. 23.31. Jam. 5.4. Revel. 6.20. For the Witness of them that were beheaded, crieth; and the Cries of them are entred into the Ears of the Lord God of Sabbath. And they cried with a loud Voice, saying, How long, O Lord, Holy and True, doest Thou not judge and avenge our Blood on them that dwell on the Earth? Act. 17.6, 7. 1 Sam. 15.23. Those that have turn'd the VVorld upside down, are come hither also; and these all do contrary to the Decrees. For Rebellion is as the Sin of VVitchcraft, and Stubbornness is as Iniquity. Jude 8.10, 11, 16, 19. These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit: Wo unto them; for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran greedily after the Er∣ror of Balaam for Reward, and perished in the Gain-saying of Core. But these speak evil of those things which they know not; but what they know naturally, as brute Beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves. These are Murmurers, Complainers, walking after their own Lusts, and their Mouth speaketh great swelling Words; ha∣ving Men's-Persons in Admiration, because of Advantage; despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities. Isa. 59.7, 8. Their Feet run to Evil, and they make haste to shed Innocent Blood: Whosoever goeth therein, shall not know Peace. Matth. 11.15. He that hath Ears to hear, let him hear. Jam. 2.19, 20. Thou believest that there is one God, thou doest well; the Devils also believe, and tremble. But wilt thou know, O vain Man? Job 27.11. I will teach you by the Hand of God; that which is with the Almighty, will I not conceal. Job 23.5. Job 22.4, 5, 6. I will know the Words which he would answer me, and what he will say unto me. Will he reprove thee for fear of thee? Is not thy Wickedness great, and thine Iniquity infinite? 1 Sam. 8.7. For they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not Reign over them. 2 Pet. 2.17, 18, 19. These are Wells without Water, Clouds that are carried with a Tempest; to whom the Mist of Darkness is reserved for ever: For when they speak great swelling Words of Vanity, they allure them who live in Error:
While they promise them Liberty, they themselves are the Servants of Corruption; for of whom a Man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage. Matth. 22.29. Matth. 18.7. Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God. Wo unto the World, because of Offences; for it must needs be, that Offences come: But, wo to that Man, by whom the Offence cometh! Gen. 42.21, 22. Psal. 150.15. Psal. 12.4. And they said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our Bro∣ther, in that we saw the Anguish of his Soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear. Who have said with our Tongue, We will prevail. Our Lips are our own; who is Lord over us? Therefore, behold, his Blood is required. Spake I not unto you, saying, Touch not my Anointed,, and do my Prophets no harm. Matth. 23.30, 31, 32, 33. And they said, If we had been in the Days of our Fathers, we would not have been Partakers with them in the Blood of the Prophets: Wherefore, ye be Witnesses unto your selves, that ye are the Children of them which killed the Pro∣phets: Fill ye up then the Measure of your Fathers. Ye Serpents, ye Generation of Vipers; How can ye escape the Damnation of Hell? Jam. 5.6. Jam. 2.13. Ye have condemned and killed the Just, and he doth not resist you. For he shall have Judg∣ment without Mercy, that hath shewed no Mercy: And Mercy rejoyceth against Judg∣ment. Act. 8.21, 22, 23. Repent therefore of this thy Wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine Heart may be forgiven thee; for thy Heart is not right in the Sight of God: For I perceive, that thou art in the gall of Bitterness, and in the bond of Iniquity. 2 Pet. 3.17, 18. Ye therefore, Beloved, seeing ye know these things, beware lest ye also, being led away with the Error of the Wicked, ye fall from your own stedfastness: But grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Je∣sus Christ. 1 John 1.6, 7. If we say, That we have Fellowship with him, and walk in Darkness, we lie, and do not the Truth: But if we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, we have Fellowship with one another; and the Blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanseth us from all Sin. 1 Tim. 5.25. Likewise, also the good Works of some are manifest before-hand; and they that are otherwise, cannot be hid. 2 Tim. 3.4, 5. Traytors, heady, high-minded; having a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof: From such turn away. Prov. 14.4, 6. Where no Oxen are, the Crib is clean. A Scorner seeketh Wisdom, and findeth it not; but Knowledge is ea∣sie unto him that understandeth. Prov. 6.23. For the Commandment is a Lamp, and the Law is Light; and Reproofs of Instruction are the way of Life. Prov. 4.25, 26, 27. Let thine Eyes look right on, and let thine Eye-lids look straight before thee: Pon∣der the Path of thy Feet, and let all thy ways be established. Turn not to the Right Hand, nor to the Left; remove thy Foot from Evil. Prov. 3.21, 23. Prov. 18.10. Gen. 19.20. My Son, behold now, this City is near to flee unto it: Walk in thy way safely, and thy Foot shall not stumble. The Name of the Lord is a Strong Tower; the Righteous runneth into it, and is safe. Joh. 15.3, 4. Now, ye are clean, through the Word which I have spoken unto you. As the Branch cannot bear Fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me. If a Man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a Branch, and is withered; and Men gather them, and cast them into the Fire, and they are burned. Matth. 14.13. Luk. 17.32. Luk. 9.44. But he that shall endure unto the End, the same shall be saved. Remember Lot's Wife. Let these Sayings sink down into your Ears. Luk. 21.36. Watch ye therefore, and and Pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass; and to stand before the Son of Man. 2 Cor. 5.7. For we walk by Faith, not by Sight. 2 Cor. 6.3. 2 Cor. 8.12, 21. Giving no Offence in any thing, that the Ministry be not blamed. Providing for honest things, not only in the Sight of the Lord, but also in the Sight of Men: For if there be first a willing Mind, it is accepted. 2 Cor. 2.14, 15. Whereunto he called you by our Gospel; therefore, Brethren, stand fast, and hold. 2 Tim. 1.12. For the which cause, I also suffer these things; nevertheless I am not ashamed: For I know whom I have believed; and I am perswaded, that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him, against that Day. Isa. 54.4, 5, 6, 8, 10. 2 Cor. 6.2. Fear not, for thou shalt not be asha∣med; neither be thou confounded, for thou shalt not be put to shame: For thou shalt forget the shame of thy Youth, and shalt not remember the Reproach of thy Widow-hood any more: For thy Maker is thine Husband; the Lord of Hosts is his Name. For the Lord hath called thee as a VVoman forsaken, and grieved in Spirit. For the Mountains shall depart, and the Hills be removed; but my Kindness shall not depart from thee. In a little VVrath I hid my Face from thee, for a moment; but with everlasting Kindness will I have Mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer.
For he saith, I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the Day of Salvation have I succoured thee. Behold, now is the accepted Time; behold, now is the Day of Salvation. Isa. 51.12. I, even I, am he that comforteth you. VVho art thou, that thou should'st be afraid of Man, that shall die; and of the Son of Man, that shall be made as Grass? 2 Tim. 6.18. And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil VVork, and will preserve me to his Heavenly Kingdom. 1 John 3.22. And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him; because we keep his Commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his Sight. Psal. 57.2, 3. I will cry unto God most high, unto God that performeth all these things for me; He shall send from Heaven, and save me from the Reproach of him that would swallow me up. God shall send forth his Mercy, and his Truth. I have chosen the way of Truth. Thy Testimonies also are my Delight, and my Counsellors: O how I love thy Law! It is my Meditation all the Day. Psal. 119.84, 85, 86. How many are the Days of thy Servant? VVhen wilt thou execute Judgment on them that persecute me? The Proud have digged Pits for me, which are not after thy Law. All thy Commandments are faithful. They per∣secute me wrongfully, help thou me. Gal. 1.12, 13. Psal. 119.112. I have not de∣parted from thy Judgments; for thou hast taught me: for I neither received it of Men, neither was I taught it, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ. For ye have heard of my Conversation in time past. Gal. 3.7, 9. Know ye therefore, that they which are of Faith, the same are the Children of Abraham: So then, they which be of Faith, are blessed with Faithful Abraham. Gal. 6.9. And let us not be weary in well-doing; for, in due Season, we shall reap, if we faint not. Ephes. 5.14. VVherefore he saith, Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the Dead, and Christ shall give thee Light. 1 Cor. 5.6, 7. For they that sleep, sleep in the Night; and they that be drunken, are drunken in the Night: Therefore, let us not sleep as do others; but let us watch, and be sober. Col. 4.3, 4. Col. 2.5, 6. Philip. 3.18, 19, 20. Philip. 1.18. VVithal, Praying also for us, That God would open unto us a Door of Utterance, to speak the Myste∣ry of Christ; for which I am also in Bonds, that I may make it manifest, as I ought to speak. For though I be absent in the Flesh; yet am I with you in the Spirit, joy∣ing and beholding your Order, and the stedfastness of your Faith in Christ: For ma∣ny walk, of whom I have told you, and now tell you even weeping, That they are the Enemies of the Cross of Christ. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord; so walk ye in him, rooted and built up in him with Thanksgiving. 2 Cor. 2.14. 1 Cor. 11.13, 14, 17. Judge in your selves. Doth not even Nature it self teach you, in this that I declare unto you. Now, Thanks be unto God, which always cau∣ses us to triumph in Christ, and maketh manifest the Favour of his Knowledge by us in every place. Haggai 1.5, 6, 9, 10. Now therefore, thus saith the Lord of Hosts, Consider your ways: Ye have sown much, and bring in little; ye eat, but ye have not enough; ye drink, but ye are not filled with drink; ye cloath you, but there is none warm: and he that earneth VVages, earneth VVages to put in a bag with holes. Thus saith the Lord, Consider your ways: Ye looked for much, and lo! it came to little; therefore the Heaven over you is stayed. Zephan. 1.14. The Great Day of the Lord is near; it is near, and hasteth greatly. Prov. 21.13. VVhoso stoppeth his Ears at the Cry of the Poor, he also shall cry himself, but shall not be heard. Prov. 2.17. Bread of Deceit is sweet to a Man; but afterwards his Mouth shall be filled with Gravel. Prov. 2.3. Prov. 15.10. It is an Honour for a Man to cease from Strife; but every Fool will be medling. Correction is grievous unto him that forsaketh the way; and he that hateth Reproof, shall die. Prov. 1.26, 28, 29. I also will laugh at your Ca∣lamity; I will mock, when your Destruction cometh: Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me: for that they hated Knowledge, and did not choose the Fear of the Lord. Isa. 29.16. Surely, your turning of things upside down, shall be esteemed as the Potter's Clay. Isa. 59.4, 5, 6. They hath Cockatrice Eggs; their VVebs shall not become Garments: None calleth for Justice; not any pleadeth for Truth: They trust in Vanity, and speak Lies; they conceive Mischief, and bring forth Iniquity. Isa. 5.2, 3, 4. VVherefore art thou red in thine Apparel, for I will tread them in mine Anger, and trample them in my Fury; for the Day of Vengeance is come? Jer. 7.18, 19. The Children gather the VVood, and the Fathers kindle the Fire. Do they provoke me to Anger, saith the Lord? Do they not provoke themselves, to the Confusion of their own Faces? Matth. 3.11, 12. Revel. 19.20. These both shall be cast into a Lake of Fire, burning with Brimstone. But he will burn up the Chaff with unquenchable fire. John 6.63. It is the Spirit that quickeneth, the Flesh profiteth nothing. The words which I speak unto you,
they are Spirit, and they are Life. Psal. 5.11. Col. 4.4. Psal. 1.19. But let all those that put their trust in thee, rejoyce; let them shout for joy, because thou defendest them. Let them also, that love thy Name, be joyful in thee. Rejoyce in the Lord alway, and again, I say, Rejoyce. Isa. 52.6, 7. How beautiful are the feet of him that bring∣eth good Tydings, that publisheth Peace, that bringeth good Tydings of Good, that publisheth Salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God Reigneth; therefore my People shall know, that I am he that doth speak; Behold, it is I, saith the Lord God Al∣mighty? 1 Thess. 5.24. Faithful is he that calleth you; who also will do it. Phile. 1.9. Gal. 6.5, 17. 1 Thess. 5.25. Yet for Love-sake, Brethren, being such an one as Paul, and also a Prisoner of Jesus Christ, pray for us. Henceforth let no Man trou∣ble me; for I bear in my Body the Marks of the Lord Jesus. 1 Tim. 4.13, 14, 15. Revel. 3.11. 1 Tim. 6.15. Heb. 12.12, 14. Revel. 1.7. Revel. 12.12. Isa. 55.3, 4. Revel. 2.2, 3, 15. Isa. 66.9. 1 John 2.27. Neglect not the Gift that is in thee. Be∣hold, I come quickly; hold that fast which thou hast, that no Man take thy Crown. Meditate upon these things; give thy self wholly to them till I come; give Atten∣dance. I know thy Works, and thy Labour, and thy Patience. For my Name's sake thou hast laboured, and hast not fainted; hold fast, till I come. Which in his time he shall shew, who is the Blessed, and only Potentate, the King of Kings. 2 Cor. 4.16. For which cause we faint not; but though our outward Man perish, yet the inward Man is renewed day by day. Wherefore lift up the Hands which hang down, and the feeble Knees. Follow Peace with all Men, and Holiness, without which no Man shall see the Lord. Behold, he cometh with Clouds; therefore, rejoyce ye Hea∣vens, and ye that dwell in them; incline your Ear, and come unto me. Behold, I have given him for a Witness unto the People. But the Anointing which ye have re∣ceived of him, abideth in you, and ye need not that any Man teach you; but as the same Anointing teacheth you of all things, and is Truth, and is no Lie, and even as it hath taught you, and ye shall abide in him. Isa. 66.9. Shall I bring to the Birth, and not cause to bring forth, saith the Lord? Matth. 10.26. For there is nothing co∣vered, that shall not be revealed; and hid, that shall not be known. By the Servant of the Lord, JAMES RICHARDS. LONDON, Printed by J. Leake in Jewen-Street, 1685.
