R884 E1182_9 R203382 99863350 115545
THE RELATION Of the unjust proceedings against CAPTAINE BVRLEY AT VVINCHESTER And of his magnanimous and Chri∣stian suffering. Printed Anno Dom. 1648.
NOn paena sed causa facit Martyrem. It is not the punishment but the cause that makes a Martyr. Wee must not pro∣stitute this honour, least wee fall into the Error of the times, and cloath impiety with the Robe of righteousnesse: Let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thiefe, or as an evill dooer, or as a busie-body in other mens matters saith the A∣postle Saint Peter: 1 Pet: 4.15: Yet if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorifie God on this behalfe. Hee suffers as a Christian; first, that suffers for the maintenance of the Gospell, and he sufferth for the maintenance of the Gospell, that suffereth for any part of righteousnesse, with a righteous heart: A righteous heatt is that that is prepard to suffer for all of it, for one part as well as another, and makes God and Christ the ayme and scope of his suffe∣rings: that undergoes his afflictions, not for his own glory but for Gods: No action or passion is right that hath not God for the utmost end of it: God is the God of righteousnesse, and Christ is the King of righteousnesse, he is Melchisedeck the King of righteousnesse, and he is King of Salem; The King of Peace; First King of righteousnesse, and then
King of Peace; It is the order that the spirit hath set downe Heb. 7.2. He that suffers for peace and righteousnesse, than suffers for Melchisedec the King of Salem, for the King of Righteousnesse, and for the King of peace: if his intentions be right, and cleare, he suffers for Christ; this will teach us how we ought to value of our selves and others in point of suffering, yet with some diffe∣rence in the inquisition, for our selves we are to deale more strictly, and to examine the heart and the inward thoughts, as well as the outward carri∣age of the businesse, for our owne hearts are with∣in our cognisance, and God hath given a commissi∣on to every mans conscience to be an impartiall Iudge of it selfe: But in other mens cases we have no cognisance within, and therefore when the cause is good, and the externall carriage doth not evidently betray the heart, we ought to make the best interpretation, where evidence failes, Charity is to be the judge; and the favourable sentence, thereof is much incouraged and strengthned, where the righteousnesse of the cause is publike and knowne, and illustrated by the unjust proceedings of the adversary against it, and the cruelty of their actions, for besides that righteousnesse hath no need of iniquity, mercy doth usually keepe the doore of Iustice, and if she be absent, wee may conclude the other is not within. All this or a great part of it may conduce to the
right regulating of our thoughts concerning the subject of this book. The quarrell that he maintained was not (I con∣fesse) the immediate or entire Ghospell of Christ Iesus, for though it is to be feared wee have Hea∣thens and worse then Heathens enough amongst us, Yet this is not yet made the open and generall quarrell. In time perhaps they may be more clear if they prosper, and can dispatch away that which God hath set for the guard both of Law and Gos∣pell: The Orderly Government of the Magi∣strate. But though he suffered not expressely for the christian profession, yet for divers mean parts and branches thereof which are: obedience to the Su∣preame power and the maintenance thereof, the defence and rescue of oppressed and abused Maje∣sty: The Vindication of his wronged innocency and rights: The glorious attempt of subduing, and opposing perjury, treason, rebellion, faction, and the rest of that rabble of mischiefes and villanyes which now are gotten up into the throne, and have put on the purple robes dyed in the blood and Gore of the Loyall and faithfull people of this Land. And as his sufferings were illustrated by a chri∣stian cause. So they were rendred much more glorious, by the Christian manner of his death. wherein his charity to his Enemies and persecutors
is noted to have bin the sweete companion of his patience and resolution: in so much that it is rela∣ted to have bin his charge Vnto his mournfull wife that Shee should never seeke revenge of those that were the unjust and cruel instruments of his death. Enough a man would thinke if there were any sparkes of honor or ingenuity (I speak not of religion) left alive in their hearts, to have overcom their malice, and to have made them ashamed of their bloody Cruelty. He was not content onely to forgive his persecu∣tors himselfe, but took care for the preventing of all revengefull thoughts that might take fire from the flame of Conjugall love towards him in the Bosome of his wife that he left behind him. O hap∣py Combination of Magnanimity and meekenesse! Oh heavenly Complexion of a true christian heart. The marriage of which 2. together in the soule, all the humane wisdome and prudence in the world, could never make up, but onely the grace of the divine Spirit. And then how beautifull was he in his death, that was thus illustrated with a good cause, and a christian affection with mag∣nanimity of heart in the defence of the one, and with charity towards his Enemies for the manife∣station of the other? But as the splendour of a Diamond, or precious stone, is rendered the more visible by the addition of a foyle. So we may see the Glory of this inno∣cent
and valiant sufferer more clearly, yet in the great and palpable injustice of his persecutors ap∣pearing abundantly in tke strange mannage of his tryall at Winchester. Which I shall here set down as I have received it by relation. It was had before Serjeant Wild acting a Iudge without commission from him, where the foun∣taine of authority & Judicature, doth reside under God. The want whereof is enough to turne the justest sentence into a murder; Prosecuted by one Steele a Lawyer, hardned it seemes for the purpose, for such enterprizes who there Acted the Kings Attorney, without a pattent, or any such power from his Majesty. And both these may seeme to have performed their parts much alike. A Iudge without any Legall Commission acting against Law, and a Kings Attorney without the royal designation, acting in the Kings name against the King, pursuing a Loyall Subject unto death for undertaking the faithfull defence of his Ma∣jesty. And charging him with treason: because he opposed those that committed it. These 2. no doubt were ready and provided for their severall parts. But a Iury was not so easily to begotten toge∣ther for their purpose, untill they had invited one to Dinner, that was to serve their turnes in that feate, and received instructions from him as it is supposed: who undertaking to be the fore-man
they made up a Iury, and therein you may imagine they will not likely be at a fault if there be but 12. in a County that may serve their turnes. Well the Jury at length is gotten together, and then the businesse is set in motion. The Iudge set upon the Bench, and Captaine Burley at the Barre, and a sad Embleme of our miserable times, When Treason and Seditiion, is in the tribunal as the Iudge, and Loyalty and fidelity is arraigned as a Prisoner, and an Offendor: Thus Light is put for Darkenesse, and Darknesse for. Light &c. and may we not than justly appeal unto God in the words of the Psalmist. arise thou O Lord, and judge thou the Earth. The CHARGE is as followeth. THat the said Captaine Iohn Burley was the cheife cause or incendeary for causing a drum to be beat up, For God and King Charles, at New∣port in the Isle of Wight, and causing a mutiney there, contrary to divers Ordinances of Parliament made in that behalfe. This the Monkey Attorney undertooke to make appeare to the Iury to be treason, partly by trea∣cherous and fraudulent alegations, of repealed Statutes, most unchristianly and impudently there by attempting to betray the consciences of the Iu∣ry, and the life of a poore innocent man, and partly
by misapplications of the Statute of treason of the 25th. Edw. 3d. and what piety or honesty can be looked for, from those that can countenance and practise such impudent and cruell deceipt and fal∣shood even in matter of Blood. The Iury when they had their instructions, are dismissed, but the matter falling into debate a∣mongst them, (though it's like they were willing enough to be blinded, to serve the turnes of those that had employed them) yet the matter was too palpable to be dissembled by them: They finde themselves, farre short of any evidence from law to finde a Bill of Treason against the Captaine. Therefore they returne to the Barre to require further satisfaction, because the Statutes that Mr. Steele urged were repealed, and so, void of force: and the statute of the 25th. of Edward the 3d: did not seeme to them to come home unto the bu∣sinesse. Since the high Treasons that are there set downe are only these. 1 The compassing or imagining the Kings death, or the Queens, or their eldest son and heire. 2 The violating of the Kings Companion, or the Kings eldest Daughter unmarried, or the wife of the Kings eldest son and heire. 3 The levying of Warre against our Soveraigne Lord the King in his Realme, or to be adherent to the Kings enemies in his Realme, giving to them id or comfort, in the realme, or else where.
4 The counterfeating the Kings Great Seale, or his privy Seale, or his money. 5 The bringing of false mony into this Realme. 6 The slaying the Chancellor, treasurer, or the Kings Iustices, being in their places, doing their Offices. And the Iury it seemes though they looked ne∣ver so much through Mr: Steeles Spectacles, could not yet read Captaine Burleys act to be treason in any of these particulars, for if it were any of the treasons there mentioned, sure it must be either in the first branch or in the third, and whether Captaine Burley had any thought of Compassing or imagining the Kings death, or the Queens, or their eldest son and Heyre, or of leavying Warre against the King, or of adheering to his Enemies; let the world judge: Vnles to endeavour the de∣fence and rescue of the King, be to imagine or compasse his death or destruction, and to oppose the Kings Enemies, be to joyne with them: This was a matter of hard digestion it seemes un¦to the consciences of the Grand Iury; But Master-Steele would not so give them over untill he had given rhem a medicine for their queasie stomacks, that they may put over this hard meat. He excuseth the matter with shame enough, con∣cerning the repealed statutes which he urged, tel∣ling them, that it was true indeed, they were re∣pealed, but he had forgot to tell them so; But why
then did he urge them at all? or why did the Iudge and the learned Bench forget to rectifie so great an oversight in the Attorney, that might be so pre∣judiciall unto innocent blood? or is that man fitte think you to manage any publike matter that is endued with such a trayterous memory, and such a pernicious forgetfullnesse? But he must be pardo∣ned for that: but to make up the fault, he tells them that the Statute of the 25th. of Edw. 3d. was that he stood upon, and to satisfie the doubt whether it were Treason by that Statute or no? He asked them, whether they did not beleeve that the King was vertually in the Parliament? This it seemes they wanted either wit or honesty to evade: and knew not how to distinguish betweene a Parlia∣ment joyned with the King, and acting all things by his consent and authority, wherein the King is ver∣tually without doubt, and there he may be perso∣nally when he pleaseth: and A degenerate headles seditious thing, sitting under the name of a Parlia∣ment, rejecting the King, disclayming him, and acting against him. But it seemes the Iury were willing to swallow. Small colours will serve the turne, when men are willing to minister unto wick∣ednesse; they are now perswaded to find the Bill. The Bill being found, and the scruple of Law be∣ing so learnedly removed by Mr. Attorney. The Question of the fact is brought into agita∣tion.
The Major was now taken for proved and granted, let reason, or law stand never so much a∣gainst it, viz: That he that endeavours to defend his King, and vindicate him, &c: is a traytour against the King, and guilty of high treason. So the minor is now to be made good, viz. But Captaine Burley did endeavour to defend and vindicate the King; &c. The Iury of life and death are they to whom the examination of this is com∣mitted; And the evidence are the witnesses of the Captaines fact: The Iury therefore is called to the Barre confi∣sting as is averred for the most part of sequestra∣tors, or other Officers of the Houses; to heare the evidence against the Prisoner: The Question is betweene Captain Burley now and the witnesses, whether he were guilty of the fact or no? He holds the negative, denyes himselfe to be guilty as of a crime, for so ir was now stated, and represented, And desires leave to speak for him∣selfe; The Judge conceived, it seemes, there might be danger in that, to transgresse the rules of Par∣liament proceeding, and therefore thinks better to divert him with some faire words for the present, to this purpose, Captaine Burley you shall be sure to have a faire tryall, and be heard to speak at full: ut now the Kings evidence is to be heard, and therefore you must forbeare: the poore Prisoner
must be content, in hope that his turne might come to speak anon: The Witnesses that were brought against him, were three as is related: A Boy, a Woman, and A Man. The Boy is said to have bin of abont 14 yeares of age, And his evidence was this, viz: That Cap∣taine Burley wisht him to go for a Drumme which accordingly he did, and that as he brought it, the Drumme was taken from him. The Woman, That shee heard Capt. Burley say he would be the first that should enter. The Mans: That the Major of the towne came to the drummer to demand the Drumme, and that the Drummer gave him ill Language, and that thereupon Captaine Burley reprooved the Drum∣mer, asking him whether he knew who it was he speake to, and telling him it was the Mayor of the Town wishing him to deliver the Drumme which accordingly was done, See heere what a faire evidence there was to prove him guilty of the fact, which if they could have made never so clear, Was no reason nor of∣fence, but a mater of Duty in the judgement of the Law. But this is enough to satisfie the Iury who knew well enough no doubt what they had to doe. Therefore with this Evidence they are speedily sent away, to consult together for the bringing in of their Verdict.
And now the captaine desires the performance of that promise that was lately made him, of a fair ad∣mittance to speake for himselfe. To that purpose therefore he renewed his Pe∣tition; but Iustice is never in season with the in∣struments of unrighteousnesse; That which was too soone before, was now to late: the Judge tells him that all he could speak, was only for the informati∣on of the Iury, who were now gone, and therefore it was to late for him to speake now. But if the Iudge had bin but so just as to have consulted with the Heathen Poet hee would have told him that Nulla unquam de morte hominis cunctatio longa est, But wild beasts are commonly of much speed when they ane in pursuit of their prey. But why might not the Iury have bin stayed to make good the word of a reverend Iudge, if not to heare the answer of a poore prisoner for his life? or if they were gone, why might they not have bin called againe? But indeede it might have bin a greate hinde∣rance to the businesse, and that question of Nico∣demus Ioh: 7.51. is now out of date. Doth our Law judge any man before it heare him, and know what he saith; where the Law is not the Judge no won∣der if the Prisoner want a hearing. Well. the Iury returne, and finde the prisoner
guilty of high treason, right or wrong, it was so de∣creed, and they must doe the busines they were called for. And thus the Major and Minor being made good by the two Iuries. The Iudge he makes up all with the bloody con∣clusion, pronouncing the Sentence of death upon him. Which was accordingly as wickedly and cruelly executed, as it was christianly suffered and under∣gone, His body is drawne upon an Hurdle to the Gallowes. And there hanged, and afterwards cut downe, and Quartered, and the Quarters hang up upon stakes or poles. And this was the unjust barbarous massacre of this Loyall and valiant christian. And yet least all this might not be Glory enough unto the cruelty of that unrighteous intruder into Indicature, let me commend 2. passages more into your notice, to shew the kindenesse and piety of the Judge, Vnto his poore wife who petitions him for two things; The one that his poore Estate might be divided between his Wife and Children To this he replyes, That her Husband was a trai¦tor, and that his Estate was not in his power to dispose off but but in the power of the Parliament. and therein he committed another act of injustice toward the King, to whom we know all Tray∣tors goods are forfeited by the Lawes.
Another request was, that shee might have his body to bury; to that He replyes with an unchri∣stian Ieere (what may perhaps prove truer than he is a ware of to his small comfort) that he thought he should do her a discurtesie in it, for if his body were suffered to hang there, The Cava∣liers that came by would say, there hangs honest Capt. Burley that was true to his King. But I wish that wicked Serjeant to take heede, that that Ieere of a poore distressed Widdow, be not one day returned into his bosome in the like punishment, when they that passe by shall say here hangs a wicked Serjeant who was a traitor to the Law, to his King, and to his Countrey. Yea let me advise him and all his party to re∣member those deep staynes of innocent blood, wherewith they have blotted their soules, and to consider how they will one day answer for so ma∣ny lives as they have sacrificed to their seditious cruelty: to remember that though their measure be great, yet bloud fills a pace, and it will one day runne over if they take not heed to their great Confusion: to go yet and humble themselves before God, and to their gracious King; That if it be pos∣sible their Horrid iniquities and high impieties may find a pardon. If they stay too long the doore of mercy may be shut. As they have not beene a∣shamed to commit such notorious wickednesse; so let them not now be ashamed to repent of it; they
have a mercifull God and a gracious Prince to deale with, and though they have highly provoked both of them, Yet if they will returne, with humility and sincerity to both, there may be comfort for them; but if they be still resolved to continue in those bloudy and wicked enterprises they have undertaken, let them be well assured that the Iu∣stice of God will find them out at the length, and it is charity both to them and the Church of God, to pray, that they may be speedily cut off: that they may not live to heape miseries upon the Church, and condemnation upon themselves by their wickednesse. The Lord in mercy give them a true sence of their sinnes, and of their wretch∣ed and miserable condition that they are in, that their soules may be saved through a timely repen∣tance, or else put his Hooke into the nostrills of those ravening Wolves that worry the poore in∣nocent people of the land. Now let me advise all men to be encouraged by the death of this noble suferer to put on that meek temper of sanctified courage, Consecrated for our imitation, by our blessed Saviour upon the Crosse, who prayed for thē that crucified him, & became a suitour unto his Father for the pardon of their wickednesse who destroyed him with furious and ravenous rancour of spirit, for nothing but his in∣nocency and righteousnes? which was illustriously
seconded by that great leader under Christ of the Christian Warefare in the New Testament, St. Stephen: who whilst his malicious persecutors were pelting him to death, and sending forth volleyes of stons from their hands, & of malicious thoughts, and rancourous despite against him, harder then those stones out of the quarills of their flin∣ty hearts: He is offering up petitions, for their pardon at the Throne of Grace: and makes it his last suit upon his bended knees unto the almighty, in which he breathes out his holy soule into the bosome of his Saviour: Lord lay not this sinne unto their Charge. And when he had so said, he fell a sleep; patterns. That should be made the frequent prospect of meditation by the suffering party in these evill times: That wee may re∣member not to divide the Christian cause of our sufferings, wherewith God hath honoured us, and allayed the bitternesse of them, (for which his name be for ever magnified) from that Christian temper wherewith we ought to suffer, consisting of humility, and Amity even to our enemies, nor from that Christian ayme or scope of them, which is the Glory of God. without which, neyther the righteousnesse of the cause, Nor the acrimo∣ny of our sufferings, will purchase us a true right unto that Glorious title of Martyrs. since wee know that the holy Apostle hath recorded it as a
greate and unreversible rule of christianity: That though we give our bodyes to be burned, and have not charity, it profitteth us nothing. and this cha∣rity, must extend it selfe even unto our persecu∣tours. ut yet least it should prove a charity mi∣staken, gives me leave to put in a word or two here for the direction of my fellow sufferers, in this point, and to shew them, that are igno∣rant of it, and to mind others that may forget it, of the nature, bounds and limits, of this charity to our Enemies, in these few theses or Positi∣ons. 1. That this charity that we owe unto them, doth not at all bind us to comply with them in their wickedness, or to countenance their ungodly practises. Nay it doth forbid us to do it, and that even out of regard of love unto them, as well as unto justice, innocency and Loyalty, For he that complyes with another in wickednesse, or counte∣nanceth him in it, doth as it were set to his helping hand to set him forward into Hell, and is in great danger to tumble himselfe along with him, and that is no act of love either unto them or to our selves. Besides, that The Order of the worke of Charity doth discharge us clearly from any such thing: for though we are bound to love our enemies, yet this love must act in subordination to that love
we owe to God, our owne soules, to the publique good, to the honour of the Ghospell, to the preser∣vation of the Church, to the substitute of God, to innocent men, and even to righteousnesse and inno¦cency it selfe: All which are to be served with our charity before them, and have power to inhi∣bite all acts of love (if it might be so called) to∣ward them, that thwart any of these or ly in op∣position unto them. 2. That this charity toward our Enemies, doth not any way abridge us from acting against them in their ungodly designes. Wee fayle in our love toward them, if wee do not hinder them in all we lawfully may, from proceeding and prospering in their impious enterprizes, for such prosperity is their misery, as one hath said excellently well. Si miserum est voluisse prava, potnisse miserius. If it be a misery to wish or to attempt that which is evill, it is a greater misery, to pros∣per in it and to be able to bring it to passe. Which will discover a great deale of prosperity mistaken amongst us in these times, if men were not drunk with pride and selfe love. Now cha∣rity bindeth us, not onely not to set forward the evill or unhappinesse of any, but also to do what we can within our bounds and limits to hinder it. And here also the same engagements before mentioned, which are to be served before them, as
they forbid us to joyne with them, so they en∣gage us much more strongly than seemes to be apprehended by most men in these dayes, to act in opposition unto them, otherwise our oscitancy, and sloath or Cowardise herein, may make us guil∣ty, both of encouraging them in their sinnes, and of the ruine of the Church and State, and of the oppression, that I say no more, of the Lords an∣noynted, whom we are bound to defend and main∣taine, both in common Iustice and piety, which bindeth all to maintaine the Ordinance of God, which is the power that is established over us in him, and to defend that which God hath appoin∣ted for our benefit, as is the Magistrate, and es∣pecially the supreme, and also out of thankefull∣nesse as well as duty, when the cause of his suffe∣rings is in all or a great part, the defence of our Interest, and that in those things wherein wee are most concerned, as are our Religion, Liber∣ties, Lawes, &c. upon which dependeth all our spirituall and Temporall good. And it may seeme something strange, that men should act so for the deliverance of him, who suffereth so much for the defence of them. This is a point of conscience, as well as of honour, and wee are growne a man would think unto a strang temper, if neither will work upon us: is it not even time than for us to be spoyled of the
Glory both of our christian and English name? But what said David unto Abner, when he and his Army were asleepe, and took no care to guard the person of Saul their King from violence? This this is not good that thou hast done: As the Lord liveth, yee are worthy to die, because yee have not kept your Master the Lords anoynted. 1. Sam. 26.16. And what said our Saviour unto Pilate? If my Kingdome were of this world, than would my servants fight, that I should not be de∣livered to the Iewes And was Abner worthy to dye, becase hee neglected the defence of a wic∣ked Saul. And shall they think themselves wor∣thy to live that will do nothing for the vindica∣tion of a righteous and pious Prince trodden un∣der foot by wicked and ungodly men. Can they beleeve that their soules shall be able to answer it unto God, or their reputations unto the world, and to posterity? was there ever so good a King deserted by an unworthy Nation, suffe∣ring for them, because he will not sell their liber∣ty to purchase his owne freedome, not buy his his owne safety with the ruine of their soules, by prostituting the Church, and the chast and pure Virgin truth of the Gospell unto the promiscuous lust of all kind of Blasphemies and Innovations? will there be no account for this another day? let not any so farre injure the Charity of my pen
as to imagin that this is the issue of any bloody or revengefull heart; my ayme is much rather, to prevent bloudshed and desolation, then to further it, which with Gods blessing I see not yet but might be easily done if we had but harts to de∣clare our selves unanimously for Iustice and right in time, and to disarme those whose husbandry it is to sow the seedes of perpetuall discords and di∣visions in this poore Nation, and to mancipate, and enslave us to a continued succession of mise∣ries and mischeifes: The intollerable weight and burden whereof, is like enough to make posterity Curse, the Cowardize and faithlesnesse of those unworthy Progenitors that have exposed them to such a bondage of servitude and destruction, and that begot them to such insupportable afflicti∣on. 3. Yet notwithstanding all this what ever acti∣ons, conscience and fidelity may engage us unto, we must abandon all thoughts therein of private revenge, or rejoycing in the hurt or ru∣ine (qua tale,) of our most pernicious adversaries, but only so farre as they do by their own wicked∣nesse and stubbornesse make it of necessity to the preservation of Gods glory, His Church, The pub∣like good of the King & People, the vindication of oppressed righteousnes & innocency, & must pro∣ceed there in not as the instruments of our own af∣fections,
but of the Authority of the supream Magistrate, whose known restraint and oppres∣sion, is without all doubt a sufficient commission, if no other may be had in such a case; The Law ar∣ming every subject with authority enough to de∣fend the Magistrate, and it being an undoubted consequence in the rule of proportion: That if every subject be allowed without breach of Iustice, to defend himselfe with armes against private force, where he is debarred of recourse to the Magistrate for ayd, through want of oppor∣tunity: It must needes be as Iust and allowable for the Subiects without any other commission, but that which their common duty to the Magi∣strate, and their Oathes of Alegiance, and supre∣macy, with the Lawes, and regard of publique safe¦ty, give them: to stand for the defence of the Ma∣gistrate and publique, against usurped power, where they are denyed accesse unto the Magi∣strate through the restraint of his liberty by the force of the said Vsurpers; yet stil with such a hart, as much rather desiring that such an evil might be remedied by their conversion them their confusion, if it may stand with justice and the honour of God: and looking sadly upon that necessity which drives unto a more severe course against them than is otherwise desired. And Fourthly in case, we fall into their hands,
and the Lord shall permit them for our sinnes, or for our tryall, or for the sealing of truth and righteousnesse, to exercise any kind of unjust cruelties against us: Though nothing must draw us to acknowledge or submit unto their uniust power, Yet we must be ready to forgive them, whatsoever is done by them therein against our selves in any of our private interests, whether it be in life, goods, or honour, or any other such like: Lastly to make up our Martyrdoms, though per∣haps, wee are not arived unto that high honour, as to suffer expresly, for the faith of Christ Iesus, yet we must be sure that we suffer in the faith of Christ Iesus with holy & christian affections, un∣tainted wth vain glory or any other ungodly dispo¦sitions of heart therein, and that we defile not our owne bloud shed in a righteous cause, by the wick∣ednesse of our lives. All our loyalty will never save us, nor our constancy in the defence of any particular rule of Godlinesse, If wee give our selves the liberty to wallow in the mire of lust, intemperance, or uncleannesse or to blaspheame God, or to any other kind of knowne sinne, so as to dispense with our selves therein; None but a good man can be the Subject of Martiredome. I hope I may be pardoned for this advice, if the great uncertainty of our present condition, be considered, and how probable it is yet; that the
insolent and impious cruelty of our Adversaries may be yet longer armed against us for our sins, and may call perhaps many more of us, unto such like trialls as these: unto which there is great ne∣cessity that we should take care to prepare our selves, by framing our selves unto the right rules and temper of true Martiredome, and Christian suffering. For the furtherance whereof give me leave to insert here an excellent passage of St. Cyprian, ta∣xing the Abuses and miscariages of some Con∣fessors in his Time, whereby the Iudgements of God were conceived by him to be pulled upon the Church, as perhaps now they are continued upon us by the same meanes, desiring all those of the suffering party to take notice thereof so far as they shall be more or lesse concerned therein:
CYprian. De Causis persecutionis: In∣telligendum est et confitendum pressura istius tam turbidam vastitatem, quae gre∣gem nostram maximâ ex parte depopulataest, et adhuc usque populatur, secundum peccata nostra venisse: dum viam Domini non te∣nemus, nec data nobis ad salutem Caelestia mandata servamus; fecit Dominus noster Uoluntatem patris Et nos non facimus Domini voluntatem patrimonio et lucro stu∣dentes: superbiam Sectantes: aemulationi et dissensioni vacantes: simplicitatis et fidei negligentes: saeculo verbis solum, et non factis renunciantes: Vnusquisque sibi pla∣centes et omnbus displicentes: vapulam ita{que} Ut meremur quas enim plagas, quae Verbera nonmeremur? quando nec confessores qui exemplo caeteris ad bonum esse debuerunt, te∣nent disciplinam Ita{que} dum quosdam inso∣lenter extollit confessionis suae tumida et in∣verecunda iactatio, tormenta venerunt.
It is to be understood and confessed, that, that tempestuous devastation of oppression which hath depopulated our flock for the most part, and doth yet wast it, hath befallen us according to our sins: whilst we stick not unto the way of God, nor ob∣serve those heavenly praecepts, which are given us for our salvation. Our Lord did the will of his Father, but we do not the will of the Lord: But giving our selves to the pursuit of patrimo∣ny and lucre, following after pride, yeelding up our hearts to aemulation and strife: Neglecting simplicity and fidelity, renouncing the world in words onely, and not in deeds, every one striving to please himselfe, and displeasing all others: We have justly deserved that rod which is upon our backs, for indeed what strokes or blowes do we not deserve, when neither the Confessors themselves, that stand for the defence of the truth and righte∣ousnesse, who ought to have been an example of good unto others, do keep within the bounds of chri∣stian discipline? And therefore whilst some are insolently puffed up with the swelling and im∣modest boasting of their confession: The torments of persecution are come in. The God of heaven give us all grace to lay this grave Admonition of that pious witnesse of the truth of God unto our hearts, remembring that dreadfoll Position of the Apostle. Rom. 1.
18.  for the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodlines and unrighte∣ousnesse of men, who hold the truth in unrighte∣ousnes where the Apostle tells us that the wrath of God is revealed against all unrighteousnes, so that though we approve our selves never so spot, les in point of Loyalty, or be never so free from faction or Sedition, yet if wee live in other sinnes, this will not deliver us from the wrath of God. 2dly That it is revealed especially, against those that hold the truth in unrighteousnesse, so that if we stand for truth, & practise wickednes, the wickednesse of our lives is so much the more liable to Gods judgement, in as much as thereby we dishonour, that cause of truth which we stand for: and the same will blot and blemish the glory of our sufferings, and endanger us to fall short of our Crowne. And especially now that we are in some hope and expectation of de∣liverance, let us take heed, as of fainting in those eadeavours, which right and loyalty engageth us unto, with the regards of our owne safety and happinesse, so, of falling back againe after all this Discipline that God hath sent upon us, into our former errors, and iniquities, to make void that blessing againe which we now look for: and to
expose us yet unto greater judgements. And especially let us looke unto the preservation of our charity, which is most in danger in such cases. That no violence or virulency, or injustice of our Enemies, nor any actions, or passions that we shall be engaged unto thereby, may shake us from our christian temper of mind, wherein this noble champion of fidelity and loyalty hath followed our blessed Saviour, and St. Stephen, and is lea∣der unto us, and that in so eminent a manner, for our furtherance in the imitation whereof, give me leave, to commend unto you these seve∣rall short meditations. First consider, That there is no affliction be∣falls us by our enemies, but it is by the appoint∣ment of our gracious God. 2dly. That it is much lesse then the best of us have deserved from him by our sinnes. 3. That God hath been very gracious unto us in the kind of our sufferings, in that he hath done us the honour to suffer for righteousnesse sake. 4. That our adversaries, what ever their in∣tentions are to our hurt or ruine, yet if wee re∣ceive our afflictions as wee ought to do, they shall prove whether they will or no, The instru∣ments of Gods mercy unto us: who useth them as Rods to correct and chastise his children for
their sinnes. As launces to open their tumors and let out their corruptions: as his drudges, to scour of the rust and filth that sticks upon us by reason of those dregs & reliques of corruption that still remain in us whilst we are in this mor∣tall Condition, and are to be wasted and con∣sumed by the sanctified use of the Crosse, which the Lord is pleased apply unto us by their hand. That we may be presented pure and clean vessells of honour unto him fit for the Masters use. 5. That in our Christian sufferings consisteth our conformity unto Christ, the conquest and glory of our faith, Haec Palma victoriae nostrae, tali curra Triumphamus. This is the palme of our victory, saith Tertulli∣an, This is the Chariot wherein we triumph. This is the narrow gate and the streight way, that leades unto everlasting life, and God makes our Enemies, and persecutors the meanes to crushus through this streight passage into heaven. 6thly. That all our Christian sufferings from them here, will be abuddantly recompenced with Glory hereafter. Every brier will beare a Rose in Heaven. Those Crownes of Thornes which they plat for us here, will be Crownes of Glory above. Let us therefore Banish all impati∣ent, all uncharitable thoughts, and affections.
To conclude let me commend unto all the true-hearted christians of this Nation, (whose num∣ber God increase, for there are too few of them, that advice which St. Paul, once gave unto the Philippians. Let your conversation be as be∣commeth the Ghospell of Christ. stand fast with one Spirit, with one mind, Striving together for the faith of the Ghospell, and in nothing terrified by your Adversaries, which is to them an evi∣dent token of perdition, but to you of Salvation, and that of God. For unto you it is given in the behalfe of Christ, not only to beleeve on him, but also to suffer for his sake. Vnto you it is given, therefore be not proud of it, you have not your patience nor your constancy nor your Christian fortitude from your selves. They are the guifts of God. and unto you it is given as a priviledge; as an honour, as an advantage. Therefore Be stedfast, unmoveable, quit your selves like men, and in due season, you shall reape if you faint not let us not by our impatience expose our selves to the scorne of our Adversaries and deprive our selves of the recompence wch is set before us; for our light affliction which is but for a moment, worketh for us a farre more exceeding and eter∣nall waight of Glory. If we suffer with a Chri∣stian affection. Which God grant unto us all, Amen.
A TEARE Drop't at the memory of CAPTAINE BVRLEY MARTYRED, 1647. TWere an unchristian temper to revile The worst of Foes. I would baptize my stile In Burley's innocence, & then distill His sufferings through the Limbeck of my Quill. Whose Sister Springs do not ore flow with griefe, To see a Subject suffer like a Theefe. Prodigious this, the Kingdomes blazing Starre. The Proto-Martyr of a second Warre. Stephen and Thee hard harts have ston'd, Him then The man of Iurie, Thee the Iurie-men. Injustice doubles torments. We might lacke A parallele else for Raviliacke. That vertue's Treason growne, hence I evince,
That Devill stabd, Thou wouldst have sav'd thy Prince When armed burning glasses shal controul Britaines great luminary to a hole, What wreaking soule steept in Religious Zeale Would not enlarge his quarters with his steele? When two roomes shall alive coffin a King Who would not swallow Burglarie? to bring The Royall Shadow into light againe. Ventring his blood a medicine Soveraigne, Tis no pretended Paradox, maintain't: The same may be a Soldier and a Saint. Well then triumphant soule wee'l henceforth call Thee Michaells Lievtenant Generall. Were this our Amasa laid out in sight 'Twould stay an Host, not in pursuit but flight, Make Victory retreat, the King re-crowne: Thus every Limb might underproppe the Throne. Surely thy death Destruction did amaze. And th' Hangman did not execute but gaze. The Countrey were not Divells: they referre The Tragedie to them at Westminster. Actors are there inough, 'twas never well Since Pallace yard, had for its Neighbour Hell. While Furies raigne, tis no unlikelie thing. To see men go to Heaven in a string. Nay, that selfe fellon, Malice is not hid, 'T has chang'd each stake into a Pyramid. State. Hieroglyphicks sure, for they in him Proclaime to th' kingdome whats their Sanedrim.
A drawne and quartard carkas, torne lime-meale By covetous faction, and mis-guided zeale. Wild horses of the mind, upon whom ride As on the City, Asse, Treason and Pride. But great hast spoyles good speed, when th'highwaies sinne The Devil is the mounted Beggars Inne. Cunning State-Lapidaries, who nere could Hammer suchSt Ca bu Be Ye To C¦ct pretious Adamants, with blood, (Nay and their own) they melt them: make us weak And so dissolve, what they could never break. Think, think, you Tyrant Subjects, what y' have got Those Heaven embalmed Reliques cannot Rot. His ayre. swolne Limbs like Trumpets North, and West, Shall sound a charge to every English breast. Those Stakes for's martird flesh, will sticks appeare To beat the Drumme of everie Loyall eare. Each panting heart will an Alarum be, Thus for the King you have raised more then he. Newters those floating Isles of man shall be Henceforth firme continent for Monarchie. His Name will mutiny without controule, And cause an Hurly burly in each soule, Thus having rays'd an Army by his fall. Looke to your Gates: his blood's the Haniball. Your cashierd consciences will then to late Parley, when Innocence has forc't the Gate. Blood guiltines is the soules crampe, it feeles, By it its faculties tyed necke and heeles: Yours may be bug-board by a Drum. but His
Warrs Chorister hath Anthem'd into blisse Th Ephesian Temple Priest Erostratus, At one act graspt at being glorious. Like in intent thou art, not in desire: Thy Temple's sacrific'd, but without fire. But lest thy flesh revive, and raise new stirres, Perhaps th'have brib'd those feather'd Presbyters. To impe their endles malice, for who knowes But thou'lt againe be quartered by the Crowes. On the Drum head how ere enroll his name, T'is Epitaph inough Eccho'd by Fame. ON THE DEATH OF CAPTAINE BVRLEY. I Knew thee not, but ignorance of thy Name Speakes a meere Punic in the Bookes of Fame. Shee with the active tempest of her breath, Hath hurried thee a pitch beyond thy death. Thou art encreas'd, and Death was foyld in thee, Scatt ring the Captaine to a Companie. It was no puling Fate. He scorn'd to sneake, And keep his frame entire, when it should breake. Tame expirations of the Pillow! Hee Calld for a greater ruine than you bee. Hee did not only suffer at the hart, But like the Soule. plac'd death in everie part.
Stretch't the leaue shade, and I beleeve that Shee Found not a Conquest, but a Rack of thee. Here was a ruine equall to our Case, BVRLEY's an Armnie scatterd in one face. Come you dark-lanthorns of the new found Light, Our Church is anchor'd in the Isle of Wright. CHARLES is her head, and Burley made it good: T'was not a Souldiers, but a Martyrs blood. Hee died Rebellion-proofe, and made us know Allegiance ought to be preserv'd, and how. His passive valour out went Action, then We act as Christians, who before were men. His last breath on our Lawes did Comments write, And with his purple maximes prov'd 'em white. This made them scatter the Records, for they The Soule being Fledg'd, did separate the Clay. Yet Quarterd thus, each parcell is a Tome. Compar'd to wch, Prinnes Margins will be none. He fell our Charters Martyr, and did draw In his best blood the Pandects of the Law. III. ON THE DEATH OF THE NOBLE CHAMPION OF LOYALTY CAPTAINE BVRLEY. COuld Roman Souldiers, when Caesars name Was once but toucht, light such revengful flame
As would devour his Enemies? and shall Our Charles be hurried to his Funerall Without resistance? No, heres one has mixt His Valour so with Loyalty, that hee's fixt On all adventures for to save his Prince. Happy successe implor'd for recompence. But he not seconded by prosperous Fate, Proves (like his Prince) too too unfortunate. No Action yet, scarce were his thoughts compos'd For high attempts, ere that he was oppos'd By jealousies let lesser Starres decline Their borrowed light, and then forbeare to shine, When that their Sun's obscur'd, Rivers ne're glide In current streames, when once their Fountaine's dried. Yet lively blood returning to the hart, Does gratefully, what it receiv'd, impart. Hee's apprehended: to such a place confin'd Of darkenesse, that had not his: conscience shin'd With rayes of Innocence, he might have thought. Not he to Hell, but Hell to him was brought. No Furies here, but sacred Zeale does keepe, It's Watch and larum Heaven in the deepe. When thus perplext, yet well resolv'd to die, To hasten Fates, would be a courtesie. Bring him to th' Barre: bring his accusers too. No mercies cran'd, see what can Iustice doe. Accus'd of Treason? who's so void of sense To think it Treason to defend his Prince; Vote a new Name, it cannot reason be,
To stile Defended injurd Majestie. Let Witnesses avouch the guilt and prove The hainous Crime of this suspected Love: Burley has brib'd 'em. He has more confest, (If t'were a crime) then Malice ere could wrest From all their Oaths, and yet the twelve combin'd (Impanneld Im-Peeres) can him guilty find. The Iudge is turned Sergeant unto Death, 'Rests him for Natures debt; which by his breath Can only be discharg'd, the Termes expresse Of's sentence: murder in its Sunday-dresse. Conscience is banisht, Law is ridden Post: Astraea harbours in another Coast. No Goshen here, where Channells stream with blood, And from each Quarter swell into a Flood. No passage now unto the holie land, Unles the Red-Sea does devided stand Hee's dead: nor can I think to die he fear'd That was by frequent Sea-stormes still prepar'd. Could not a floating Billow be his Tomb, And bury him in Amphitrite s wombe? Or could not Landsdowne grant him leave to have A Pyramid of fire, instead of s Grave? And like Eliah climbe eternitie Within a flaming chariot; but must be By Providence irresistible freed From Fire and Water, on the land to bleed? Iobes Wife would here teach how to punish Fate, And what cann't be prevented, for to hate.
Noe roome for such perswasions: He will tread The Churches path, which patient Iob has led. And crowne his innocent and wretched dayes With so much patience, that shall amaze His cruell Enemies, those that forbid him live He not more pitties, than he does forgive. His sad condoling Wife he does conjure By Hymens dearest bands, not to procure Or seek Revenge, as if his word should make Others their Love and Nature to forsake At his Request, thus he put off man, And shewd himselfe a perfect Christian. Ioy mixt with sorrow does my soule divide Since that he must, that he so bravely died. Teares shall distill in streames for griefe, and when They are wip't off, Ile crie for Ioy agen. Rest now blest Soule, and (whats to us deni'd) Enjoy of peace an everlasting tide. It would be Sacriledge to doubt at all Thy happines, when that thy funerall Speakes thee true Saint, to the Elizium A knowne, not beaten way is Martyrdome. London and Bristoll would be for the first Martyrs, and Winchester for thee accurst, Did not your Bones (nay if but Reliques found) Both antidote and consecrate the ground. The Gibbet shall hereafter be had more In our repute, than hated twas before. And if it lawfull were of Deaths to take
My choyce, Il'd choose the Gallows for thy sake, Let timerous spirits to dull ashes turne, Neglected lie, deprived of an Vrne: That never could, unles on vertue frowne, And pay their cheefest Votes to die in Downe: Let their memoriall, vanish and so passe Away more nimble than their Fatall glasse, Whilst thou shalt live by death, and by it raise Trophies beyond the number of thy dayes. Wee'l tract thy footsteps, gain what thou hast lost, And for successe, we will implore thy Ghost. And whosoere doth fall shall on this Stone Have this engrav'd. Heres one of Burleys Sons. Of Burley's who hangd, drawne and quarterd died For loyall treason, and for Rebells pride. This loyall Martyr hangd and quarterd paint In his Vermilion, and y' have drawne a Saint. ON CAPTAINE BURLEY, MARTYRD FOR KING CHARLES, AND MVRTHER'D By THE MEN AT WESTMINSTER. IS Burley dead? who sayes his stifled breath Was his life's period, lies, and scandalls death. Nay hangs him once again, and wrongs him more, Then did the Hangmen-Iudges all before.
No! hee lives still, and fresh, and like his name Is treasurer of a New life and fame: So neer immortall, it were scarce a lie, To say it must out-last eternity. So innocently good, and free from staines, He hangs alone, his murtherers in chaines. And by a Lawfull, and new sinlesse art, Revenges, and returnes the Shooters dart, A pious peice of mischeife, and may bee Intitled well a martyrd mistery, Or a misterious martirdome: so high, And full of Patience, Valour, Loyaltie: That who his storie reades alone, shall look As on a trifle, on all Fox his book. And be assur'd bright soule, while Charles his name Is blowne abroad by the just trump of Fame, For all that's great or good: (in spite of all The dogges barke at our Sun Imperiall:) Thy Noble suffering for him shall be seene. And honour d next unto himselfe, and Queene; A peerelesse pair of Princes in whose times, Might conquerd right, & gaind a crown by crimes; Thrice happy Burley! who so soon art laid In such a heat of sin, in such a shade; And this I le adde more to thy praise and pride, Had st thou till Domsday liv'd, th'ad'st sooner died
Monumentum Fidelitatis. A Memoriall of the Noble and Loyall CAPT. BURLEY. TI's sad employment, when our Freinds do dye, To melt in teares, or write an Elegie; But tis a duty which neglected, Wee From imputation cannot well be free. If we to Nature, or to wit pretend, Who can nor weepe, nor write, hee is no freind: Nor worthy to bemoane thy Noble Fate. The third grand Martyr of a Tyrant State: Burley; nor doth my modest pen presume To be compos'd of so aspiring Plume, As to reach thee; who art so brave a thing, As scorn'd A life, to save a dying King. For Kings have Double Deathes of Nature one, Another by A State privation; From which how much must all good Men esteeme Him, who would either dy or else redeeme. Thy cause embalmes thee; while the varied Verse, Of all Apolloe's Sonnes adornes thy Herse: Whyle friends in Nature weepe thy Obsequies, Thy Freinds in honour, have erected Eyes: And look in some sublimer Orbe, to see If plac't thou there A constellation be.
And from the influence of thy Noble soule, Learn not to shune a fate, but to Controll. For hee who meetes a death, without a feare, Or'e Death it selfe, becomes a Conquerour. Where thy black Murtherers another day, Shall from the Earth with trembling sneake away: And unlamented as unhonerd dye: Without or Epitaph or Obsequie. Leaving no more A Chronicle to fill, Then that they did 'gainst Lawes, and Conscience kill: When as loud-speaking and long lasting fame; Shall fill her Trumpets with thy glorious Name. And when the last shall blow, and thou appeare Amongst the Martyrs to thy Saviour deare: Those Caitiffs shall surpris'd with horrour flee: And aske the way to Hell, at seeing thee. And by their Guilt anticipate their Doome, Rebells with Martyrs cannot hou'd one Roome. C. A.
AN ELEGIE. In memoriall of the worthy CAPTAINE BARLEY, who was executed for endea∣vouring to release his Mejesty King Charles from the Isle of WIGHT. 1648, By I. M. AM I awake? or dreame? Who is it tells These Men have faith, whom we find Infidells, With strange Dilemma's is my soule perplext On this side horror, murder on the next. A suddaine passion seizes on my hart: My blood strives too, as if they both would part. Burley is dead, Shot like a falling Starre: And is true Captaine in another warre. Condemned for Loyaltie! tis strange, yet true. Once more Astrea bids the world adieu. His Iuries braines were mixt with so much clay They hardly could distinguish night from day: How shall my words in due proportion keepe, When discord swells like billowes in the deepe? He did not loose his life, but was beguild: No safety there, when as the Iudge is Wild. These are the bloody Herods, who are bent
VVith guiltie, to destroy the innocent. The World to its first Chaos now reflects. Here's Babell, not of languages, but Sects: Like Phillips Clisophi, these people halt After the time, accounting goodnesse fault. Their torrid Zone parches our temperate clime. And Nilus choakes us with corrupted slime. Send Noahs Dove, and twill return in hast, To certifie our Deluge is not past. Noe place for loyaltie to set her feet. Treasons vast waves are all the bounds we meet. Ignorance is exhald in vapours, who (Not hearing of our better times) shall view Our Island through them, will not swear that wee Are in an Vniversall Lunacie; Some, like materia prima, un-refin'd, Comprehend all impressions in their mind: Having the  of disorder, nay Proving we erre, except we go astray: The Nomalists may well be stiled now, Grand Patrons unto Loyaltie. We bow To Living Idolls: Daughters some do prize Like Agamemnon, for their Sacrifice. Their Superstition brings upon the Stage, A new rays'd Primum mobile, Whose rage Ravishes all the Spheres of Government, Except reverting lust as they are bent. Democritus might weepe, not laugh to see This Metamorphosis, when Monarchs bee
Trampled on by their Subjects: but what then; Vertue's not knowne without mischance to men. Reason's as naked as an Adamite. That is term'd Zeale, which we might construe spight. A Laughing vizard vayles a killing face. To live in favour now is most disgrace. Spirituall-cholerick criticks, who in all Religions find a fault: One day this shall Be your best choyce that next invades your harts. The true one thus by Ostracisme departs. Our Streetes (like Romes in Sylla's dayes) do runne With native blood. hee's happiest is undone. Zorobabel's convinc t: Money is found Stronger than Truth, and lay's her on the ground. There is no clue for this Dedalion maze. Loyaltie's Treason, Infamy is praise. The World s to subtile for an honest man: No roome but for a Machivilian. All braines do teeme with mischiefe, as with joy: Transporting more then Hecub s wombe to Troy. The drunken fumes of bold Ambition, Makes their soules reele, and dash against each stone, But HE goes to his grave as Courtiers woe, Calmelie, Not struggling as the Traytors doe. These like a Iezabell where beauties scant, Vermilion shall adulterate the want. Oh would their pride might purchase their just fall; That Doggs might celebrate their Funerall. Thus Absolom by flatterrie stole the bart
Of Israell by a pretended Art. Thus Euphuia oft times is so like Grace That it is taken for it by the face. But pull the vizard off, and you may know The Whister's but the Prologue to the Show. Ir would enrage a Stoik Martyr, Saint, A Coward too, to see a Pursivant, Sent from the new-found States to take away The taper from our night, the light from day. And in his Zodiake to empale our Sun, Who else might unconfined swiftly runne To either Tropicke, and this man struck dead, For striving to release his Royall head. For this let all our candles in a fright Burne out themselves, and so defraud us light. For now we know by this mans death, to some A Life is not a Life, but martirdome. Fer every Cobler and mechanick man Rising up King, turnes Dioclesian. You Sophisters, who search what fire shall burne. This worlds great fabrick and to ashes turne The same; may well suspect that it may be Th' aspiring flames of Subjects Loyaltie. May we not justly feare it? when each day The Rubrick, fills and sinne tis to obey. VVitnes this Paradice of vulour, who VVas wasted not by men, but serpents too, He knew that Treason an Erratum was Wanting an Index to expound the glosse.
Thy death will strike into their hearts more feare Than Thunder in the trembling Indians eare. Antiquities are new, what Annals boast Of Champions, is reacted on our Coast. Romans may write of Scevola's great name. Alas, once more he may shake hands with Fame. The three Horatij, Triumuirs of rage In him were executed on our Stage. He is a true Pyrocles in renowne, And pitie 'tis Dametas trode him downe. He is our Sun, not to endanger eyes, But to direct and teach us how to rise. This act adopts him Son of Anacks brood: They for their stature great, and he for good. Loyalties false, that glisters not like thine. The Ore's not knowne untill we sound the Mine. Vp, up, my drowsie soule, and tell the world The giddie headed multitude have hurld Away their riches, Strafford, Laud, This one, Ordaine another Constellation. And as the same sword those horrid Traitors kild VVho had the blood of Royall Caesar spilld. Soe may thy murderers die, the same string be The Engine to their wist Catastrophe. Were the soules transmigration true, I might Think that the two Phitaeni's soules did light Within thy brest, who being but one, didst doe As much as they for Carthage wrought, though two Loyalty kindles Calentures in some,
And is to others sleepie opium. Their Names shall perish in a Lethargie: Thy reputation shall be extasie. Tis safe to give the dead their owne, noe feare Of Sequestrators or Committees there. Come let them boast their Sts. thy soule shal see A small inch measures not infinity. Thou couldst despise bold Sphorsa and his nation. And now Rebellion is not Reformation: Borgia to thee w s Devill: and we may See thou hadst rather perish, then betray. Although no Deane or Canon, thou mayst be To our Religion good pologie. Thy Death a Sermon was: oh I could spend My age in commenting his glorious end. Ashes of Loyall men are like the snuffe Of a perfumd wax-candle, strong inough To recompence the losse of light with th' sent O fragrant odours, left to raise content. We will view thee as Tamberlaine read ore Heroick deeds; not that we may deplore Thy losse, but by example to inspire Our brests with Sols, not with Promethius' fire. Iustice, lend me thy Sword and I'le restore To thee thy eyes as perfect as before Who would in corners snort away their lives, Or spend their oyle upon Luxurious Wives? When he finds Charles dethroned, when vertue's made The step we unto faelix scelus wade.
I am turnd Anabaptist in my teares, And overprest with greefe, as they with feares. Were all the Engines of tormenting Hell Fixt to my tender Limbes, I would not fell My Kings blest thoughts, like Scots, but be content My brest should harbour them for ornament. Twas Constancie made Roman Vertues last. The mettall weares no forme until its cast. Beasts wrong the innocent, not men; conclude Thou injur'd wert by th' Hydra multitude. Thou art noe Meteor or wandring Starre, No nine dayes wonder, that we heare from farre. But a fixt Starre within the hearts of all Those who account Treason Apocrypall. And as in Iulia's monument I heare One Lampe held out the 1500th. yeare. So may this noble act remaine, that we Speaking of valour, may eternize thee. He that goes free when as his King's confin'd, Not greeving, hath the Divell in his mind. Were Alexander but a live, to know Thy martyerdome, all Conquests hee'd forgoe, To owne this Pearle, more orient to the eyes, Cause Honor tures the ballance of the prize. No darknes shades his deeds from common view, His soule sent forth a lustre lights him through. No Pits or Caves, no Lanthornd Faux is here. The day was not more innocent and cleare The Drum did sound thy Fame, they victors were
But thou shalt triumph in a Consulls Chaire. Though narrow was thy passage, I dare say To spangled Heaven thou trodst the Kings high way Come Cavaliers, put on your brest-plates then: Courage brave Lads, approve your selves like men. Since he is murderd, steel your thoughts, let brave undaunted browes raise goodnesse from her grave To ayd your undertakings: Larum Fate And tell him hee's too slow to help our State. Could I command the Lightening, I would send These daring Gyants to their dismall end. Prove Cicero's to these false Catalines. Although your purses emptie be, y' have Mines Of faith unfathomd, which can never passe The triall of a false Geneva Glasse. Yee are no Erra Paters Pupills, yee, Nor have yee yet profest Astrologie. That every accent spinnes a doubtfull threed. No clowded visage, but an open head. It is their words are aenigmatticall, And doubtfull as an Oracle to all. Murderd, the word sounds hoarse, and being dead Barr'd the prmission to be sepulchred? His limbs are scatterd: true, but Birds shall flie And as they bring them, sing his Elegie. What though his owne are gone? his verie Name Will borrow Leggs inough to beare his Fame. Heaven shall seeme thy Temple, hung a new With black, the Starres are thy Torch-bearers too,
Thrones of our Verses shall to that height rise, That on their feet thou mayst ascend the Skies: For Truth thy Cynosura was to guide Thy soule upon the billowes of this Tide. But let thy Ghost haunt them who lent an hand Before twas time, to bring thee to the Land. C. C THE TRIVMPH OP LOYALTY TAke downe the sable Blacks againe, and dry, The Christall currents of the mournfull eye Unles you mean a Iordan thence shall spring, There to baptize him martyr, for his King. But that's already done in his owne blood: Shed for his King for Loyalty and God. Burley s not dead, but born, and therefore wee With Ioy should celebrate's Nativity. Me thinkes A Christian still is in the Wombe, Vntill he be brought forth by martyrdome. Death is our life, and persecution's The churches throwes, delivers her of sonnes: Of Sonnes and heyres, at age as soon as born: Heyres to immortall Crowns, and shall we mourn; No, lets rejoyce and triumph, blesse; the day, Wherein this happy issue found the way, Out of this darkesome prison to that light, And liberty, where faith is turn'd to sight.
The world mistakes; our times of troubles be The teeming times of christianity: The church is youthfull than and doth increase: Shee's old and Barren in the, times of peace: Her age now seemes to be renewed than: A Nero or a Dioclesian, Of Old, were but her midwives: and Fox sayes That such was mary in some latter dayes. But these were Kings and Queens: How comes the state O'th churches Birthbed now thus to abate: That every Vassall now should dare to be A Bold Intruder to this midwifery? A Savage Lawyer, with his rusty Steele, Are these fit instruments to cause her feele, Her child birth throbs? to bring a Burley forth So Brave a Stemme of loyalty and worth. Burley: whose Spirits could not rest to see Slaves trample on imprisoned Majesty? Burley that durst oppose rebellion, When it was gotten up into the throne? Burley, Great Charles his second, for whose right He challengd Victor Treason to the fight. And overcame, by dying in the cause: Blood is triumphant when it runnes for Lawes. Avaunt your sordid singers! Touch no more The Mother or her Children: from this Gore Our Ioy doth not absolve you, nor his gaine? He hath the Honor, but you have the staine. Such is the riddle and the mystery
Of your Vnjust, Vnchristian cruelty. That though he lives, yet still it is most true; Burley that lives was murdered by you. FINIS.
