S937 E1638_3 99867960 170191
A VVarning-Piece FOR THE Slumbring Virgins. OR, AN ALARM TO THE Friends of the Bridegroom, IN Some Awakening Meditations upon Christ's own Watch-word, Matth. 26.41. Watch and Pray, that ye enter not into temptation, &c. By Geo: Scortreth, Preacher of the Gospel in Lincoln. Revel. 16.15. Behold, I come as a thief, blessed is he that Watcheth, & keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked, &c. London, Printed for Thomas Brewster, at the Three Bibles in Paul's Church-yard, near the West End, 1657.
To the Friends and followers of the Lamb. Beloved in our Lord, I Had not thought to have prin∣ted any of my poor Labours in the Lord; though i'has been much upon my heart, they might be imprinted upon the hearts of the hearers by the Spirit of the living God: But some late impulses have been upon my spirit, (since infirmi∣ties have grown upon me) to leave a few Words with the servants of Christ before I leave them; looking up to him, to leave his blessing with them; and that upon these and the like Con∣siderations: 1. The strange Slum∣brings of so many backsliding Chri∣stians at this day, have somewhat awakened my drowsie spirit; and my eye hath affected my heart, to see so many sleepy eyes, and heavy hearts; so that I am not at rest; till I have
eased my own soul in warning them openly, as in weeping for them in secret. 2. The Lord hath been fol∣lowing me with awakening dispen∣sations; morning by morning awake∣ning my ear to receive instruction: and while he hath shaken his rod of Fatherly Correction over me, a deep Conviction hath fallen from Hea∣ven upon me, that it is the work of the day in its day, for the Watchmen to cry aloud, saying, Awake, Awake. 3. I have some sweet perswasions through mercy, that whiles I am at the Lords work, stirring up others to watch and pray, I shall find him at work within, stirring me up to take hold of him; and giving in some awakening heart-reflexions upon these Meditations of Watchfulnesse; and my heart tells me, the Watchmen of all others would be well awakened, and ever upon their Watch at such a day as this. 4. Pity to slumbring Saints, who hear not the sounding
of their own bowels to make them pity themselves, hath moved me to knock at their doors, and ask them how they do at heart; They little think (alas) now their hearts are asleep, of the sorrowes, that are coming upon the men and women that are at ease in Zion, as sorrow upon a woman in travell. 5. The love of Christ con∣strains me to call upon his sloathfull Servants to arise and fall to their Masters work; who hath most to do i'th last dayes, and would not be left alone at it: many heads, hands and hearts busie together, would make light work: 'twould go merrily on, and not so heavily, as now it does, whiles so many heads and hearts are heavy with sleep. 6. The stirring Appetites of some hungry craving ones, (indeared to me in the bonds of the Gospel,) who are daily waiting with longing for one cluster of grapes or other, from the Celestial Canaan, have made me the more willing to
presse this one grape for their sakes: happily they may find a little sweet∣nesse in it, (though none else should) as taking and tasting it with a good will, from his hand, whose heart is towards them. And if any of these should unhappily be overtaken with that dead sleep of midnight-security, which hath surprized so many at this day; who knowes but the importuni∣ties of one that is their friend, may prevail with them, to rise and open the door of their hearts, when the Bridegroom himself shall knock, who is their best and dearest Friend i'th World. These being the wheels which have set this Watch on motion, you may not expect any Eye or Ear-affecting curiosity, but heart-awakening Go∣spel Simplicity; the entising words of mans wisdome have lull'd many asleep: and 'tmust be plainnesse of speech in the demonstration of the Spirit, that must awaken them. I
have most to do in this Work with Wisdomes Children, who have learnt to become fooles, that they may be wise, and had rather hear one word spoken to the understanding, then a thousand words in an unknown tongue. The corporal weaknesses and spi∣ritual wants of one groaning under an heap of infirmities, will make a sufficient Apology for all wants and weaknesses as to matter or method: 'Tis broken meat, this, for broken hearts, who will be gathering up a few Crums here and there; and if it be well digested within, 'twill be the lesse matter, though it be so indi∣gested without. I am very sensible, 'tis sowen in great weaknesse, (alas, how can so poor a nothing Creature do other∣wise?) yet I am not out of heart or hopes, through grace, but it may rise up in power, to the raising up of some that are asleep in sin, and the row∣sing
up of others that are under a sinful slumber, by the power of the Spirit: which is his hearts design and desire, who would willingly be∣speak your heart-remembrances, while he takes the humble boldnesse to be one of your weak, (though willing) Remembrancers in the Name of the Lord, that he may be accounted wor∣thy to be found a Watchful Servant of Christ Jesus our Lord, and Your faithful Servant for Jesus sake, G. S. From my Cham∣ber in little Queenstreet, Lond. M. 7. 1656.
To my welbeloved Friends, endeared to me in the love and bonds of the Gospel, at Lincoln, or elsewhere. Dear Friends, BEing laid aside by the hand of my righteous Father, as to the publique work of the Mi∣nistry amongst you; you have been much upon my heart, in my private Meditations, to stirre you up and put you in remem∣brance to wait upon our Lord, and for him, who will meet those with rejoycing,Isa. 64.5. that remember him in his wayes. The openings of your hearts to me in much affection, and compassion, as many of your eyes witnessed at our parting, (not knowing whe∣ther we should see the faces of one another any more) and as your affectionate remembrances
of me, while absent, and under present bodily pressures, do suf∣ficiently testifie, have much be∣spoke my heart on your behalf to leave this Watch-word with you, if I should now take my Rest and sleep in Jesus. And if the Father of mercies should graciously raise me up by his strength, to spend and be spent amongst you, 'twould be a sweet mercy, to find you in a waiting, watching posture: 'Twill be the more seasonable to knock, where they are awakened, and to strike while the iron's hot; The Word of Life will be most welcome to quickned spirits. That you may read these fol∣lowing awakening Meditations with open eyes and hearts, let me present you with a few pre∣paratory hints, to an awakened posture, happily your sight may be a little cleared by this fore∣taste
(as Jonathans was upon his tasting a little honey from the end of his rod) if you look up for eye-salve from Heaven, while you are looking on them. And first, by way of Counsel, 1. Hearken as with both Ears to the glad-tydings of the Go∣spel; you'l find, that good re∣ports from Jesus Christ, under Evangelical dispensations, will exceedingly affect, and effectu∣ally awaken your hearts. The sweetness of the bunch of grapes upon that staffe of beauty feel∣ingly tasted, will set you a long∣ing after the choice fruits of the heavenly Canaan; and hungry souls will not easily sleep over their spiritual food. 2. Walk up to light received in the love and power of it; you'l find it a good thing indeed to behold the pure heart-quickening beams of the Sun of Righteousnesse:
It's Soul-taking too; 'Twill fol∣low you, as you follow it; Then shall you know,Hos. 6.3. if you follow on to know the Lord; his goings forth will be prepared as the morning, shining upon you, and within you, and causing your path to shine more and more to the perfect day: And you will find this Sun-shine marvellously clearing and quickening the eyes of your understanding: 3. Knock oft at your own doors, you may be bold at home, and ask every day, How all does within; what strength of faith; what warmth of love; what growth in grace, &c. much Soul-searching, will very much prevent Soul-slumbring: Com∣muning with Conscience will keep it awake, and it will cry loud in your ears to keep you awake. 4. Stir up one another, and that with importunity, to
stir up the grace of Christ that is in you, to do good to all, &c. and all the good you can; and to do what you find in your hands to do for God, with all your might, and that while you have opportunity;Eccles. 9.10. for there's no work i'th grave, whither we are going. 'Twill be one of the best deeds of pure charity at this day, to visit crazy sickly soules, that lie languishing and slum∣bring under spiritual Consump∣tions, in the Name of the Lord; and to propound heart-searching Questions to quicken them, in∣stead of heart separating Que∣ries, which have deaden'd them. And sure it would be a very sea∣sonable work in this hour of temptation, amongst Christian friends, (at distance) to take up that Primitive practice of the blessed Servants and Martyrs of Jesus, by quickening up one an∣others
spirits with heart-awake∣ning Letters. I cannot but com∣mend this labour of Love to such as are present with one an∣other in spirit and love, when absent in body, as that which some in our dayes have found a sweet blessing in, even as in that cluster mentioned, Isa. 65.8.5. Give all diligence in the fre∣quent and fervent performance of all Gospel-duties with a Go∣spel-spirit, setting grace on work in all by the supply of the Spirit; and if you find your hearts rea∣dy to follow the Lord fully in all the work he has cut up for you, you'l find work enough ready at your hands and hearts to keep you awake. 6. Cast up your spiritual accounts every day, with an eye to that great Day, when every one must give an account of himself to the Judge of quick and dead; oft
Soul-reckonings will rowse up your spirits much, to wait for the Bridegroom with loyns girt, and lamps burning,Matth. 25.6. as if you heard the cry at midnight. Secondly, by way of Caution. 1. Take heed of an heavy Ear under the Sound of the Gospel, lest your ears should tingle for it another day. The Seers eyes must needs weep in secret for you, if they behold you sleeping openly under the Lords all-see∣ing eye; 'Twill sadden the hearts of weak Christians to see you heavy-hearted under that Gospel of grace, by which they and you have been often awake∣ned; and carnal hearts will be the more apt to slight that spiri∣tuall food which they see you sleep over. 2. Take heed of resting in a form of godlinesse, without power, of taking up with the letter, without the Spi∣rit;
or being contented with a Name to live, without that new Name, and a new heart and life: you may lie dead at the letter, till you die, but the Spirit will quicken you, and put life into your spirit; you may easily slumber under the form of an outward profession, but the con∣stant exercise of the power of godlinesse will effectually awa∣ken you. 3. Dally not with any beloved lust, nor be dandled upon any Dalilahs lap, least you fall asleep upon't, and be be∣trayed; if your hearts go after any strange lovers, you must needs lose your first love, to your first husband, and be left heart∣lesse and spiritlesse; if you in∣dulge any right eye, or right hand, how dark will the right eye be? and how dead the right hand of your inward man? you must watch over your own ini∣quity,
yea, over every sin so, as ever you would be found watch∣full at Gods Word, or chearful in his way. Sensuality in any kind will breed spiritual secu∣rity at first, and bring perplexity of spirit at last. Sin's calm must needs end in a sad storm. 4. Take heed of self-seeking, and seeking great things to your selves. A selfish spirit will be sluggish in spirituals; if you once begin to take your fill of creature-com∣forts, you'l have no stomack to the things of Christ, but even sleep at his breast: The love of the world will eat out your love to God, his Word, his work, his people, &c. If you be all upon't, rising early to eat the bread of sorrows,Psal. 127.2. you'l lose that sweet sleep he gives his beloved, and be cast into a false slumber, feed∣ing your selves with foolish fan∣cies, saying, Soul, take thine ease;
where little ease is to be found, when the heart is drunk with the strong wine of the Worlds cup, or drown'd in the sweet waters of its own Cistern, 'twill certainly fall into a dead sleep; and Christians overloaden with thick clay, we see with sorrow, how heavily they drive. 5. Take heed of slighting any holy du∣ties, and of a slight frame of spi∣rit in them. 'Tis a slighting of God himself, who will lightly esteem such, and leave them to their own slothful spirits. A sluggish indisposition will ever attend sinfull omissions; and such as dare be bold in the omit∣ing of good, are in danger to become base and vile in the committing of evill: if your hearts backslide in secret from humble communion with God in his holy wayes, he will turn his back upon you, and leave you
to eat the fruit of your own wayes; and then, alas, how weak will your hearts be, in, and to, any thing that's good? how wofully evill? 6. Take heed of grieving the good Spi∣rit of God; lest he go away sadly, and leàve you to the heavinesse of your own spirits. Oh, if you quench the heavenly sparks of his holy motions, the fire of your love and zeal will quickly be going out, and you'l grow cold at heart. Oh do not, do not tempt the Holy Ghost, no, not for a world, lest he withdraw his light, life, power, and peace from you; and then how dark and dead, heartlesse and helplesse, will you lie in this hour of Temp∣tations?
These are the broken thoughts of one of your poor heart-friends, when afflicted and ab∣sent in body, yet affected, as pre∣sent in spirit, with the sense of the room he hath had in your hearts, while the hand of the Lord hath touched him; What in mercy he hath brought to my hand and heart, (while I had onely his own Book with mee) I leave to the blessing of his own hand, upon your hearts and mind. Now the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and the patient waiting for of Christ. And I beseech you Brethren for his sake, and the love of the Spirit, that you strive together and asunder in your prayers to God for me, that he would consider my trou∣bles, and know my Soul in
adversity, that I may rejoyce in his mercy; and that I may come unto you with joy by the Will of God, and may with you be re∣freshed, through the gracious presence of Christ, to the praise of his grace, to whose bene∣diction, direction, and domi∣nion, I humbly commit you, and rest, Your much obliged Friend and Servant in the Gospel of Christ, G. S.
Christian Reader, AS 'tis the special Office of some men to be Watch∣men, so 'tis the common duty of all men to Watch. That some men are appointed to watch over others, cannot ex∣cuse any mans neglect of watch∣ing over Himself. All the Ports of the Body, the Eyes, the Ears, the Lips, (at which the Soul is continually issuing out by several acts, or taking in from several Objects) need a continual watch upon them; how much more doth that most important Piece of all, the Heart? We should alwayes watch what God is doing, we should watch what God is speaking, what he speaks to us in his Word, what he speaks to us in his Works; We
should watch what he speaks to move us unto prayer, and what he speaks in answer to the mo∣tions which we have made in prayer. How watchfull should they be, who have all these, and many more, occasions of watch∣ing? We read in Daniel, (Chap. 4. 13.) Of a Watcher and a Holy one that came down from heaven; And surely none on earth can be Holy Ones, unlesse they be Watchers. The carelesse Soul is alwayes a corrupt one; and Security layeth us open to all impurity. Satan watcheth to make us Halt, and evil men watch for our Haltings; we shall never take either eaven or clean steps, unlesse we watch our own goings, and ponder the path of our feet: Watchful∣nesse being so indispensible a Duty, how glad should we be
of any thing either to awaken us, or keep us awake? The Learned and Godly Authour of this ensuing Discourse hath beaten such an Alarm, and shot off such a Warning-Piece in our Quar∣ters, that if the Virgins slumber still, as their security will be inexcusable, so their calamity will be unavoidable. What can they look for, who will not watch to pray, But that God (as he once did, Jer. 31.28.) should watch over them to pluck up, and to break down, and to destroy, and to afflict? What can they look for, who will not watch to do good, but that, God, (as another Prophet saith he once did, Dan. 4.13.) should watch upon the evill, and bring it upon them? They who will not take warning, deserve to be made one. Having perused this Ma∣nuall of Watchfulnesse, I com∣mend
it into the hands and to the hearts of all those, who would find peace, and be found in peace, when their Lord com∣meth. It was sad, that the Disciples eyes were so heavy, that they could not watch with Christ one hour, when he was going out of the world. And it will be more sad with those, whose hearts are so heavy, that they cannot watch for the return of Christ at all houres: who therefore hath not told us, the particular hour of his coming, that we at all hours might be kept watching for it. And Blessed will those Servants be, whom when their Lord cometh, he shall find watching and pray∣ing, or watching unto prayer, that they enter not into tempta∣tion, and that they may be kept in the hour of temptation.
Reader, That his Book may be blessed from above to make thee Watchfull, is his Prayer, who readily Approves it for the Presse, and publick Use of this Slumbring Age, Joseph Caryl.
To the Reader. Reader, THey who keep close to the Lord Christ in holinesse of Life, and purity of Doctrine, are Virgins, whether particular Persons, or Churches: Such being expos'd to many Temptations, and subject to much Slumbring, here is a Warn∣ing-Piece for them. The great Watchman of Israel warn'd his Apostles, yea all to Watch:Mark 13.37. so doth this good Watchman in Israel. Watching is a Duty of grand im∣portance. Noah, Lot, David, Peter, and other Worthies were tempted, slumbred, and suffered much for want of Watchfulnesse. When Kings slumber, they may lose a skirt of their garments;1 Sam. 24.14. and
when Virgins slumber they may lose their whole Garments, all their Ornaments,Rev. 16 15. and the shame of their nakednesse appear. The vigilant Author hath prepar'd and fitted this Treatise to prevent such evils; Its little, but of much worth, being Judicious, Succinct, and Spirituall. Bulky Volume, must give place. It's full of Apples of gold in pictures os silver, choyce Truths in choice ex∣pressions. Reader, wouldst thou be a wise, watchful, and experimental Christian, look seriously into this Treatise, lay the Contents of it close to thy heart, and be sure to have thy desire. William Greenhill. Geo: Griffiths.
Errata. PAge 9. line 3. read Spirit, for, spirits. p. 13. l. 1. r. heart-duty, for hearty-duty. p. 21. l. 8. r. her, for his. l. 12. about, for abou. p. 23. ult. work, for worth. p. 50. l. 3. r. work, for prophecy. p. 55. l. ult. they, for this. p. 65. l. 16. as, for at. p. 71. Gen. 28. for 18. p. 72. l. 4. fear, for hear. p. 79. l 7. you, for these. line 9. your, for their. p. 86 l. 12 fully, for full. p. 87 l. 13 It's, for Jobs. p. 93 l. 1. as, for us. line 9. God, for Gods. p. 115 Prov. 19. for 14. least, for last. p. 138 line 1. tow, for bow. p. 142 l. 11. with, whose lips had, for, with those lips that. p. 143 line ult. and you, for, and put. p. 145 line 4. rest, for coast. p. 152. the better: could, for, the bet∣ter could. p. 153. Prov. 23.34. for, Prov. 7.23. p. 155. l. 8. Can you, for Yea can. p. 164 l. 15. multiformity, for multifariety. p. 165. l. 23. and by swallowing, for, swallowing. p. 172. l. 16. as this, as they waited, for, as thus waited.
A Warning-Piece FOR THE Slumbring Virgins. Matth. 26.41. Watch and Pray, that ye enter not into temptation. IN the 37th verse of this Chapter, we find, Jesus took Peter, and the two Sons of Zebe∣dee, and began to be sorrowfull,Math. 17.1.2. &c: They that had seen his glory in the Mount, when his Counte∣nance shined as the Sun, &c: must now see him under a Cloude, his glory vailed; they beheld him in his Triumph, and must see
him in his trouble. 'Tis Christs familiar way to be before-hand with his suffering Servants, to give them some hearty draughts, of the Cup of consolation, be∣fore he put into their hands the Cup of trembling; And 'tis a sweet heart-taking method, well-becoming our tender-hearted Physitian, who loves to be pre∣venting his poore ones with ten∣der mercies, so preparing them for sufferings for him, by declare∣ing his lovelinesse and love to them. In the 40th verse:Vers. 38 Christ finds his Disciples asleep, when he had newly called upon them to watch (so apt are we to sleep under awakning teachings) when he was heavie and sorrowfull e∣ven to the death, how heavie were their eyes? how heartlesse they at such a time, even as dead men? they cannot watch with
him, or for him,Vers. 40. when his ene∣mies were watching to take him. Ah poore helplesse, Spirit-lesse friends to him, who had so be∣friended them; His own disci∣ples have least care to watch, when greatest cause to watch; now was their time if ever to watch, when he so awakened, and now they let their watchfall What, not watch with me one houre? Is it come to this? no bet∣ter Souldiers under so good a Captain? what, deale so ill with mee, who have dealt so well with you? Yea, not watch with me one houre, who have watched so long over you for good? And now the houre is come too? If not for mee, yet for your selves for when the Shepherd is smitten, the Sheep will be scattered; But no warning will keepe them awake when the heart's asleepe; he comes once, and againe, yea
the third time and finds them sleeping (thus the sleepie evill growes upon us) we are usually most secure, when least safe, and heaviest with sleep, under hea∣viest awakning providences. In the Text, we have Christs faithfull watch-word, or friend∣ly alarme to his slumbring Dis∣ciples; where observe. 1. A double duty com∣manded. 2. A double reason com∣mended. 1. A double duty command∣ed, watch and pray; an excel∣lent present remedie against spi∣rituall security; A word in sea∣son; an happie conjunction, a blessed paire, joyned together by Christ himself, let no man put them asunder: watching with∣out prayer will be helplesse; and prayer without watching will be heartlesse; but both together,
heartfull and helpfull; Prayer without watching will never a∣waken us; and watching with∣out prayer, will never awaken the Lord, to watch over us for good; but both togeather will bring in many awakening, quick∣ning, and comforting visits be∣twixt God and our Souls: watch∣ing in prayer makes it a good watch, and prayer in watching makes all things work for good. 2. A double reason commend∣ed, Lest ye enter into temptation: The Spirit indeed, &c. 1. Ye are exposed to temp∣tation. 2. Ye are indisposed to op∣position. 1. Yee are exposed to temp∣tation, if you do not watch and pray, you tempt the Lord to lead you into temptation, and leave you there; you tempt the tempter to tempt you, if you do
not watch and pray, he'l watch to make a prey of you; And you tempt your selves, you lie neer∣est to and fairest for temptations, when you are farthest from watchfull supplication. 1. You close with temptations, you are in the mid'st of them before you be aware; if you watch not to shut the doore against them, you open the doore to them, there will be temptations upon you within and without, and you will be within them; while you lie sleepie and prayerlesse upon a bed of ease, you even lay a Cushion for Satan to lie down by you; you enter into temptation, and temptations will enter into you. 2. Temptations will en∣close you, you'l not know how to get out, when once in; you are in danger to be lost i'th croud; you may be easily ensnared, but not so easily enlarged; 'tis hard
getting out of the Devills laby∣rinth. 2. Ye are indisposed to oppo∣sition; the flesh is weak, and your temptations strong, here observe, 1. Christs candid concessi∣on; the Spirit, &c. 2. His cleare conviction; the flesh, &c. 1. His Concession; the Spirit is willing; your heart is good, though your hand be short; theres sinceritie in you, though you want abilitie: Christ can∣not find in his heart to break the bruised reed, the broken heart; he owns their willingnesse with a good will, though much weak∣nesse in them; 'tmay do one good at heart to see, how his heart was upon their hearts, when their heads were heavie; how sweetly his Spirit sympathizeth with their Spirits; 'tis like him∣self;
the Spirit is willing (saith he). 2. His Conviction; the flesh is weak; Christ is willing to o∣verlook their infirmities, but will have them look upon them; they must not indulge them∣selves; for his indulgencie to∣wards them; Here's Counsel im∣plyed, to take care of their Spirits, that they may be quick∣ned, cherished, and strengthen∣ed by his Spirit, who helps to will and do of his good pleasure, that to will may be present with them and to perform too. And here's Caution intimated, to take heed to the flesh, to keep them humble, and sensible of their weaknesse, that he might perfect his strength in weak∣nesse. I shall summe up all under this one word, and 'tis Christs own; Watch, Oh
that he would own it, and follow it home to our hearts by his Spirits, that we may own it for his sake. Obs. 'Tis an Evangelical Duty to Watch. This is wisdoms own Counsel, and must be her Childrens care; The Captain of our salvation, gives this word to his Souldiers, to awaken them to work out their salvation, &c: Now Soul∣diers upon pain of death, must be at a word of command: The watchfull Shepherd of Souls calls upon his sheep to watch, and his voyce they most heare; How oft is this hammer lift up, to knock at the everlasting doors of our hearts, even by the King of glory himself? Ten times at the least, we have this word ex∣pressed by the Evangelists, from Christs own Mouth: How apt are we to sleep on both eares,
that he must cry so hard, and call so oft upon us, saying, Watch, watch, watch, &c: how hardly are we awakened; what a dead sleep is upon us; that there must be such crying, jogging, knock∣ing, &c? How dangerous is carnal security, that Christ should so importunately warn us, and affectionatly watch over us, as to this spiritual duty of watch∣ing; there must needs be much in it, when hee's so much upon it; and sure, watching well, will tend greatly to our best wel∣fare and happinesse, seeing our good Lord and Master makes it so much our businesse. But what is this Gospel duty of Watching? First in general; 'tis a busie work, & much goes to the doing of it in a Gospel way: This one work well understood will find us all work enough; The word
is borrowed from the practise of Shepherds watching over their Flocks, as Jacob over Labans; or from Souldiers upon the guard, who keep strict watch; both these must discharge their trust with great diligence and patience; special care and con∣stancie, they must endure the heat by day, and the cold by night; Christs experienced Souldiers do find, 'tis hard duty, this; much must be done and suffered upon this account, ther's no giving over this watch, what ever it costs us, our life lies on't: This spirituall watch presup∣poses an awakened heart out of Naturall Stupiditie, and Formall Security. 1. Out of naturall, Carnall stupiditie; they cannot possibly watch, who were never awaken∣ed; the naturall man is spiritu∣ally
dead, and as uncapable of this spirituall duty, as a man borne blind is to see the Sun, or a dead man to heare the thunder; he must first heare the voyce of the Son of God saying, awake thou that sleepest, &c: before he can watch with him or for him; alas, how can they watch, who have eyes and see not? (like the idols in the psalm). He must be a spirituall man, that discernes spirituall things, that is fit to be a spirituall watch-man, and to wait in the spirit. 2. Out of formal securitie; A sleepie professor is ever crying, a little sleep, a little slumber, &c. he cannot keep his heart awake if he might have all the world, nor his eyes open; sluggish slumbring Christians are in no posture for watching, they are as silly Doves without an heart; they have no heart to this heart∣ty
duty, and no heart in it; they are not spirited for this work, their spirituall senses are bound up, they have let their watch fall, and will never take it up a∣gaine without a sound awaken∣ing. The watchmen must cry a∣loud in the eares and consciences of such, or they'l lie down to sleep againe and againe; swoon∣ing Christians can never watch till the Lord rub them up to pur∣pose; they had need be living and lively men, that are to watch as for life; 'tmust be a raised sinner, and rowsed Saint, that's set about this work. Secondly, more particularly, Evangelical watching implyes these things following. 1. Attention;Isa. 50. a spiritual watchman must have his eare a∣wakened morning by morning (as the prophets) that he may heare what the Spirit saith;Rev. 2. & 3. this
the Spirit calls for, over and over Let him that hath an eare, he are &c: he must have an hearing and harkening eare too, that would here the still voyce, the whisper∣ings of the holy Spirit; he must have an eare to heare from God that keepes his watch, or he will have no eye to see him, no mouth to speak from him or for him; God has much to say to his awakened ones, that are upon his watch, they had need have their eares about them, yea within them; An heavie eare and a sleepie heart,Jer. 6.10. go together; to whom shall we speak and give warning, (sayes Jeremie sadly) they have uncircumcised eares, &c: and cannot heare; alas the speakers may shut up their mouths there,Mach. 13.15. where the people stop their eares; they are no hea∣rers indeed, who have eares and heare not; And may we not take
up that heavie complaint at this day (one of the saddest in all the Book of God) they have made their hearts and eares heavie;Isa. 42.19. least they should heare with their eares, &c: Who so deafe as many of Gods Servant (to bor∣row that expression) much preaching (as great sounds) hath made many deafe, that what they would not heare, they can∣not; And what are the wisest charmings to such deafe Adders? well, Christs watchmen must be swift to heare, for his motions are quick; hee's somtimes, but a word and away; a knock, and he has done. 2. Intention, a watchman must be very intent upon his du∣ty; corporall watching, much more spiritual, should take up our Spirits; God must be much heeded, and his whole work well-minded, even with the
whole heart, especially this work of watching; Hee's no ser∣vant for Christ that would serve him by halves; ther's no being for him almost, but altogether, or not at all: all our spirituall forces must be mustred up, to keepe this watch; we must stir up all our strength, and all too little in the discharge of this du∣ty; 'twill take up the whole man; ther's no halting here, lest evil overtake us: a lame Christian will never stand to it, but must be sitting down ever and anon. He had need be a man of another Spirit (Caleb-like) that would follow the Lord ful∣ly, in this spirituall watch. As naturall things act to the utter∣most, within their Sphear; so in this supernatural work of evan∣gelical watching, we should act all we can for God,Eccles. 9.10. within the Sphear of our spirituall activitie;
what ever we find in our hands to do for him (especially at so weightie and busie a work as this) we should do it with all our might; there must be an holy violence and fervencie, accom∣panying Gospel vigilancie; spi∣rituall force will doe well here, indeed we can never Watch well without it; If it once come to a Spirit of indifferencie, it will not be long, ere we be surprized by a Spirit of securitie: if we care not much (Gallio-like) we shall Watch but little; a slothfull Spirit will be sleepie, do what you can. Oh what sad slumbrings amongst us, since Christians have laid themselves down upon beds of ease! a lazie creature, is never likely to Watch with Christ or for him. Hee's nimble as a Roe; quick in his turnes; No you must stirre up your selves in Christs strength, to quit your
selves like men in his service. 3. Inspection. Christs Watch∣men must be all Seers, and have seeing eyes, as well as hearing eares; our spirituall Watch lies most within, 'tis an inward Watch especially: our eyes must be in our hearts and upon them; 'Tis a very considerable Watch word that,Prov. 42.3 Above all keping keep thy heart; a strong and strict guard must be kept there; and indeed if the Watch be not kept strictly there, all our watching will be invain; 'Twil be to lit∣tle purpose to set a Watch be∣fore our mouths, or make a co∣venant with our eyes; if the plague of the heart be not watch∣ed over, it will be ever breaking forth into putrified sores. Had we an hundred eyes,Jer. 17.9. they had need be all at watch here, for our hearts are deceitfull above measure, who can know them?
And he that is not faithfull in in∣ward watching, will never be good for ought, either as to out∣ward waiting on God, or watch∣ing over others; How many have been looking so much a∣broad, that they are to seeke at home? watching the haltings of others, but not their own, busi∣bodys in other's mattters, and neglecting the businesse of their own Spirits; they are espying motes in the eyes of others, and lay out their eyes at home, or see not the beames in them. How oft does the Spirit knock at their doores, and they not within? when he comes to deale with their hearts, they are not to be found; 'Twas said of old, Fooles will be medling: that is, with o∣thers, not themselves; Oh, how many such fools are every where, whose eyes are in the Corners of the Earth, seldome in the Cor∣ners
of their own hearts; most busie, where they have least to doe, and least, where most; will not the Lord ere long search such as with Candles, who put out their lights within, that they may not see themselves? will he not storme them home, that scatter their wayes abroad: will not the Judge (think you) be at their doores, who are all for judg∣ing others, but not themselves: Well; the Lord is about to find the heavie-headed and hearted Virgins work within their own doores, and to set them upon heart-watching againe by some awakening dispensations; Oh, 'tis one chief businesse in our spi∣rituall watch to try our own Spi∣rits; and much communing with our selves will keep our hearts awake; and indeed since the ser∣vants of Crist have idled it with∣in, and neglected this inward
work of heart-searching, they have left their first works and watchings. 4. Circumspection; In this spiritual watch, as we should have our eyes in our hearts, so in our heads; as to looke within, so without; As the Dove casts his head about, this way and that, before she take her flight; So should Christs Doves look above them and abou, them, yea every way, before they move any way; As the heart must be watched o∣ver, above all watchings; so there must be a watch over the mouth, (as over Davids); over the eye, (as over Iobs): yea over the whole man, and the whole life, As we should be ever upon our Watch-Tower, to Watch at all times (being a work alwayes in season) so to Watch over all things; and to take a view all∣wayes, above and below, at the
right hand and the left; that we be not surprized any where, in any thing, at any time; As the vertuous Woman whose price is above Rubies,Prov. 31.10.27. is said to look well into the ways of her houshold; So must the gracious Watch-man do, he must bee a seer, an over∣seer to his own house; And as the Children of Issachar are said to have understanding of the times,1 Chron. 12.32. and to know what Israel had to do; So should the genera∣tion of spirituall Watchers, have an eye upon generation-work, an heart to it, an hand in it, serving their owne generation (as David did) till they fall asleepe;Act. 13.36 The spirituall Watchman should have a discerning into all things; not be Eagle-eyed only in some things and blind as Bats in other things; but as the four beasts, which were full of eyes within, and full of eyes before and be∣hind too;Rev. 4.6. So should they that
are upon the Lords Watch, be full of eyes within and without; Alas poore silly Creatures that we be, we meet with a snare in every Creature: temptations will be crouding upon us in eve∣ry condition, we are in danger on all hands, to be defiled, or deceived; and therefore we had need watch at every turne, and have our eyes turning every way, (as the flaming sword at the East of the Garden of Eden).Psal. 139. As the Lord who is (all eye as it were) Watches us all over; over all our thoughts, all our words, all our wayes, &c: So should we Watch over our selves, even all over at all times; our goings out and comings in, our down-sitting and uprising; we should beset our selves with a strict VVatch behind and before. 5. Exercitation; There is much worth in this VVatch it is a very
busie imployment, full of duty, a duty in every duty; we should watch at every work; a sloth∣full Servant is not fit for this stir∣ring service, this is no work for lazy-bodies; It's not carryed on by sitting still, or looking about us; 'Tis lively work, and re∣quires a living, active, quickened Spirit; grace in the habit is not sufficient (though in the highest and greatest measure) to keep on foot this spirituall watch, no not in the least and lowest work of it; when grace is not at work, ther's no watch kept, it lies sleeping in the soul, and the soul's asleep too; when bodily exercise is laid a∣side, and there's a cessation from motion and action, we find great propensitie to slumbring and heavinesse. 'Tis even so in spi∣ritualls, when the acts and exer∣cises of grace are suspened, we are easily overtaken with the Spi∣rit
of slumber. Since professors have been idle, and lived at ease in Zion, what a strange Spirit of formal securitie, and sluggish secure formalitie has stolen upon them, and stolen away their hearts too? 'Tis sad, very sad to see, how the Virgins are fallen asleep, since they have been all for easy work; carelesse ones have let their watch fall; they find themselves little to do in spiritu∣als, and sleepe much in spirit; and as they give over working, so they give over watching; as they cease from duty, they are seazed upon by securitie; graces must be exercised, and habits actuated, by the help of the Spi∣rit of grace, that our spirituall watch may be mannaged and maintained. Busie heads and hearts are most watchfull; if we stirre up the grace of Christ in us, it will stirre us up to watch with Christ and for him.
As appeares plainly in new-converts, who are much wrought upon, and work much; they are full of spirituall struglings, wrastlings, searchings, pantings groanings, fighings, &c: Oh how watchfull are these new creatures when new awakened? Christs babes are not like other babes, in this. For they sleepe least when new-borne, and o∣thers most; How watchfull in prayer, and watching unto pra∣yer?Psal. 45. their eyes even failing with looking up; watchfull in meditation, their hearts are ever bubling up, like a quick spring; watchfull in hearing the good word of God, to heare a good word from God; how do they hang about Christs lips (as it were) with both eares, for some drops of sweet smelling myrrhe; how watchfull to enjoy commu∣nion with the Father, amongst
his Children, how much upon thewing after the doves of Christ? no company now, like the com∣panions of Christ, that heare his voyce. Now it is farre other∣wise, with many ancient Chri∣stians, who having un-bent their Bow of holy purposes and pra∣ctises, (which at first seemed to a∣bide in strength like Josephs) grow remisse in Gospel-dutys,Gen. 49. take their hands off from Christs plow and look back, grow loose in Spirit, lose time, let their ta∣lents lie rusting by them, and their graces resting in them; how suddenly and shamefully their watch falls, as their work failes? the longer they live, the lesse life in their Spirits and service, and all things are readie to die in them, before they die: how hea∣vily they drive, when they once give over oyling their wheeles with spirituall exercises.
'Tis an high, hard great work to watch after a spirituall man∣ner; they that are upon this work in good earnest, find a great deale of good work to doe; there's much cut out to their hands; The Lord of the Vine∣yard will not suffer them to be idle upon his watch, hee'l find them awakening work: ther's head-work, hand-work, heart∣work, tongue-work, life-worke; ther's work within and without, at home and abroad, their own and others, for this life and a better, there's work enough to keepe one awake; And the more we work, in these spiritual ex∣ercises of faith, love, desires, &c: the more watchfull we shall be, and the better watchmen, and workmen. And therefore the Lord will find new work for old idle pro∣fessors (if he delight in them)
hee'l bring slumbring Virgins to Soul-travel again, and awaken them to purpose, they'l feele such hard labour therein, as will be hard to sleep upon; And when loitering Servants fall once to la∣bour again heartily in Gods har∣vest, how they'l sweat at it, and do most and best at last; when they see, how much work they have to do in a little time, how they'l work and watch, and watch in work? 6. Expectation. Souldiers upon the watch, wait in expectation, either of an enemie to approach or a friend to appeare, that they may be in a posture of opposition or reception, to resist their ene∣mies and to relieve their friends; so in this spirituall watch, we must be daily in expectation of our enemies, who will be upon us on a sudden; and if they take us at unawares, we are in an ill
taking (as we use to say) 'twill bee to our great prejudice and their advantage; An enemie not looked for, will be beforehand with us, and will hurt us most when we can least help our selves; 'Tis a time he would chuse of all other, when he is least expected; as knowing, he shall be least resisted. Our adversary watches our slumbring times most, that he may take us nap∣ping, and take what he pleases from us; and therefore we must e∣ver watch in expectation of him, that he may never come unlook∣ed for: nothing will more dis∣hearten and disappoint him. Our expectation frustates his; our unwearied watchings will wea∣rie him out; whereas, it is a faire invitation to the envious one, to lay aside our expectation of him, who likes best to come unlooked for, and is most to be
suspected, when he is least ex∣pected. We must be in expectation also of our best spiritual friend, who comes oft skipping like a Roe, and loves somtimes to take us on the suddain, to see how we are provided: He hath given us a faire warning, saying, Behold I come like a thief, that) is, se∣cretly, suddenly) in the night; that we may ever have him upon our hearts, and he may not come in an hour, when we think not of him. Such a blessed guest would not come unlooked for, whose visits are so gracious, his love so precious; we are like to lose much of the sweet and comfort of holy and happie com∣munion with him, if we wait little on him and for him; hee'l not tarry long, where he is not long looked for and longingly; there he comes and goes sudden∣ly,
he thinks himself nothing-well or welcom there, where his company is not looked for; he takes it for a great neglect of him, when we doe not expect him, and hee will not be long or much there, where he is little looked for. What are the speciall times for a Christians Spirituall watch? As all Christians should watch, so at all times; there is a time for all things under the Sun, but no time to lose in spirituall slumber: there's not a spare-minute for sinfull securi∣tie; a Christian must never give over working, watching, War∣ring; his labours in the Lord must end with his life, when he dyes in the Lord; and his watch must not fall, till he fall asleepe in Je∣sus: This in general, but more es∣pecially.
1. In times of spiritual deser∣tion, when the Lord has with∣drawn his spirit and grace, and seemes to be asleepe and silent to us; oh then 'tis high time to call upon our selves, saying Awake, awake; and to cry mightily to the Lord, to awake and keep not silence; When our beloved is going, then 'tis time (as we love him and our own Soules) to stirr up our strength, to take hold of him, and not let him goe for a world; does he begin to estrange himself from us, Oh cry heartily to him in their language, oh thou hope of Israel,Jer. 14.. why should'st thou be a stranger, as a waifaring man that tarryes but for a night, &c? Thou art in the mid'st of us, oh leave us not; Woe unto us, when he shall depart from us: how many evils will come when he goes away? We have all good, in the chiefest Good, and all
evil without him; 'Tis losse un∣speakable to want him, whose absence nothing in Heaven or Earth can make up: if he say, Depart from mee, there will be a corner of Hell in it here, as it will be the very Hell in Hell hereafter, Depart ye cursed, &c. Woe and alas unto us, for we have sadly sinned away his gracious presence as ever any people did, by carelesse slum∣bring, and carnal securitie; how oft hath he found us slugging it upon beds of ease, when his fin∣ger has been put in at the hole of the door? VVe have made him wait, till his head hath been filled with dew,Can. 5.2. and his locks with the drops of the night; and yet we have not opened the door to him, neither for his importuni∣tie, nor because he is our friend. Had it beene an enemie or a
stranger had done thus, he could have borne it; but that his own familiar friends should lift up the heel against him; that ever they should prove so hard-heart∣ed against so tender-hearted a Sa∣viour; this goes to the heart in∣deed. And now our Beloved stands behind the wall, as one highly offended, that will scarce look at those, that have shut their eyes against his light, and their hearts against his love; this glorious Sun covers himself as with a Cloud, because we sleepe out the shinings of his light, and slumber out sweet breathing-times shamefully, e∣ven in the sight of the Sun; and leaves us under thick spirituall darknesse (even such as may be felt) and we are covered as with a Cloud in his anger; And shall we not now awake, and cry after him with open mouth, heart,
eyes, saying as the daughters of Jerusalem, Whither is our beloved gone,Cant. 6.1. whither is he turned aside? Oh return, return, make haste our Beloved, and be thou like a young Har upon the Mountains of spices;Cant. 8.14. Oh why should we be, as they that are vailed, and turn aside, &c? Ah, the longer he is absent from us, the worse it will be with us every day; and the greater distance from him, the greater our unhappinesse: Oh then, as the two Disciples, when the Lord Jesus made as if he would goe further, constrain∣ed him, saying, Abide with us, for 'tis towards evening, &c: So now when he carries strange to us, makes as if he would away, and carry all away with him too; we should even lay hands on him, and hold him by an humble holy force, saying, Abide with us, for 'tis towards evening; &c: The day declines.
2. In times of spiritual de∣clension: When noble Vines prove degenerate Plants, when Stars fall from Heaven; when many begin in the Spirit, and end in the flesh. Oh then we had need be upon our spiritual watch, and take special heed to our spirits; when so many lose first life and love, and leave their first works; we had need have our eyes about us, yea within us, and look into our own hearts, lest we be at a losse there too, and coole within; when so many fall away. Let him that thinketh he stands, take heed least he fall; 'Tis a time of (almost) an uni∣versal consumption in Spirituals; never so great decayes in in∣wards; Christians Spirits faile and fall sadly; Stomack's gone, every where, to the best sood; little spiritual Palate is left in any to rellish the sweet savour
of Christs precious Oyntments, all spiritual senses dull and hea∣vie; And shall we not now a∣wake? feele our own pulses; consult with spirituall Physiti∣ans, and make diligent use of all quickning and strengthning meanes of grace, lest we also be left under the same spiritual lan∣guishings, and have wofull occa∣sion to cry out another day, Our leannesse, our leannesse? 3. When an hour of spiritual Temptation is upon us, when many are led Captive by spiri∣tual wickednesses; Oh then that Counsel is most seasonable, Be vigilant, Pet. 5.8. because your adversary the Devill as a Roaring Lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour; 'Tis not for us to slum∣ber, when Satan Watches; nor to shut our eyes, when hee's running up and down with open mouth; how easily may he
make a prey of us; when we lie sleeping at his, Feet? The De∣vil is come down with great rage, he will be worst at last, and doe much mischief in a lit∣tle time; and if the envious one find us asleep, when he is most awakned, watch∣ing over us for evill, what a world of evil vvill he bring upon us? what havock will he make amongst us, yea within us? what tares will he sow? If Sa∣tan belet loose, hee will be work∣ing with all power and policie; and if he find us at a loose end, sleeping idlely in the Devils shop; hee'l be very busie with us, and set us aworke to our own woe; we may expect, a flood of strong delusions, and strange temptations will be issu∣ing out of his wide mouth, which gapes for us; and if we lie sleep∣ing in his way, we shall be car∣ryed
away in these filthy streames, like dead fish; The Prince of darknesse is broke out, and smoak is broak out of the bottom lesse pit with him; there's great danger of being lost in it, or choked by it, especially if we walk as blind men in a spirituall sleep. Oh what need then to awake (if ever) and to call upon the Lyon of the Tribe of Judah to awake, and rescue his darlings from the mouth of this roaring Lyon, to arise for his prey, to divide the spoil with the mightie, and to lead captivitie captive; If we lie down to sleep now with fold∣ed armes, leaving the guide of our spirits, and he leave us a∣lone to the misguidings of our owne deceitfull hearts, how will the subtle Serpent deceive us at every turn, and turne us out of the way, to the right hand
or to the left; especially now the old experienced deceiver, trans∣forms himself into an Angel of light that he may drive on his Soul∣coosening trade, the more mysteriously and mischievously, putting darknesse for light, and light for darknesse. Why then, 'tis more then time to awake out of sleep, to get our spirits quick∣ned up by the influence of Gods good Spirit, and to muster up all our spirituall forces, speedily and strenuously, putting on the whole armour of God on the right hand, and on the left; that we may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil on all hands, in this evill day, and having done all to stand. 4. In times of great expecta∣tion: When we look for great things from Heaven, when Zion is in travel for glorious Births, when precious promises are nigh
accomplishment,Jool. 3.18 the Mountaines readie to drop new Wine, and the Hills to flow with milk; As, the Spirits powering out like floods, &c: A Spirit of Life i'th wit∣nesses, and a voice out of the Clouds, saying, Come up hither; A Nation to be borne at once! Is it not time to cry, Awake, awake, the glory of the Lord is rising, &c: Oh should we not look with both eyes, and listen with both eares, to heare when it shall be said;Jsai. 66.8. Who hath heard such a thing, who hath seen such things? shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? Were it not great pitty to sleep out the awakening providences that are upon us, making way to fulfill such glori∣ous promises? Is not this the language of awakened Saints, crying, Awake, awake, put on strength thou Arme of the Lord, as in the dayes of Old, &c: and shall
we now cry, A little sleep, a lit∣tle slumber, &c: God forbid; Oh now, now, the Lords remem∣brancers must give him no rest, nor rest day or night under a spirit of slumber, 'till Jerusalem be made a praise in the Earth, and the Rest of his feet be glorious. 'Tis the common cry amongst Gods people (when they are in straits, and at a stand) Awake, O Lord, why sleepest thou? When as alas, 'tis they that are asleep, and must be awakened (or they'l be nonplus'd ever and anon) and assoon as they are awakned, they'l see it and say so; We won∣der, the work goes on no faster, and that the Lord does no more for us; whereas 'tis a wonder, he has wrought so much for us, or does any thing at all for our good, who are grovvn so heed∣lesse,
heartlesse, carelesse under mercies. However, his work goes on in his own way, whether we sleep or wake; for his heart is upon't and he neither slumbers nor sleeps, but is running his coursasa Gyant refreshed with Wine, and will leave his slumbring Servants be∣hind, to follow him with shame and sorrow; The Ancient of dayes, will keep his time, not lose a day, nor misse a minute (howe∣ver we lose time); And hee'l, give a good account one day, what he has been doing for his poore Children, when they will not be able to answer one of a thousand, for their slumbrings and wandrings. 2. When the Lord looks for great things from us, having done great things for us, com∣manded mighty salvations, com∣municated
choise mercies, com∣mended peculiar Gospel-bless∣ings to us, and all by a strong hand through wonders of Provi∣dence; Now when and where the Lord does much, so much; then and there he looks for much very much. He may well call us to an account, at such a time, and say, What doe you more then o∣thers? Special mercy may chal∣lenge singular duty;Math. 5.47 He has been at extraordinary charge and cost with us, and he expects more then ordinary in our spirits and services; Tis not for us to serve him with that which costs us nought; when we have cost him so deare; one would think, the weight of such obligations lying upon us, should effectually awaken us, to look up to Hea∣ven, for such a suitable and sea∣sonable communication of his
Spirit and grace, as may more clearly informe us in that high and heavenly lesson, (most pro∣per for the day) and more fully enable us to take it out; name∣ly, to walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitfull in every good work,Col. 2.10. &c: A low Spirit, and lazie services are most unanswer∣able to high and mighty dispen∣sations, and will be most un∣comfortable; shall we do least for him, when he has done most for us? Has he watched over us, and his eyes been alwayes upon us, from the beginning of the yeare unto the end?Deut. 11.12. and shall we slum∣ber now like slothfull Servants, as if we had neither eyes to see him working for us, nor hands to work for him? shall living mer∣cies lie dead by us, and we dying in the midst of them, offering up the dead in sacrifice to the liv∣ing
God, who has given us our lives for a prey? shall we thus requite the Lord like a foolish people and unwise? will it not be ill ta∣ken at our hands that we should be worst to him, when hee's best to us? No wonder, if he withhold his Spirit, when we thus grieve, tempt, and quench it by a Spirit of securitie; how can we look for other, but that he should be taking away his Golden Candlestick,Deut. 32.6 and the light too, when so many do little else, but play or sleep by it? We must not think to lie alwaies sleeping with the breast i'th mouth: he will be covering the blessed paps, girt about with a Golden Girdle.
Application by way of Information. 1. Is it a Gospel-duty to watch? then see the necessitie of an awa∣kening Ministrie; in such a sleepie age as this; there was ne∣ver more need of awakened and awakening overseers to watch o∣ver us, to lift up their voyce like a Trumpet, cry to aloud and spare not,Eccl. 12.11 saying, Awake; oh what need of goads and nailes to be fastened in our sides, and upon our hearts by the masters of the assemblies from that one Shepherd? 'Tis time for wisdome to cry in the Streets,Prov. 1.20 8.4. to utter her voyce in the chief places of concourse, saying, unto you, O men, I call, &c: When the Vir∣gins slumber thus, both the wise and foolish; 'twill be a great mercy to have the Word of the Lord, as a hammer at our doores yea as a fire within us; and to
feele the sword of the Spirit pricking us to the very heart, o keep us awake in Spirit, when so many are heavie with sleep there: There was never more work, then now, for the Sons of thunder; Ah, that Spirit of slumber that is fallen upon this generation, will make work e∣nough, for all the faithfull watch∣men, throughout the Nation; And me-thinks, the strong slum∣brings, of so many sleepie pro∣fessors, should exceedingly star∣tle and awaken those that watch for Souls; 'Tis not for them to slumber of all others, especial∣ly at such a time, when so many lie sleeping round about them: Oh woe, woe to the blind Watch∣men, the dumb Dogs that cannot bark sleeping, lying down,Isa. 56.10. loving to slum∣ber; who make beds of ease for bedrid spirits, and sow Pillows to sluggards arm-holes, who pro∣phesie,
smooth things, to a peo∣ple that love to have it so, that are all for easie prophesie, or none at all; Oh then let all the watchmen of the house of Israel, whom the Lord hath set upon the Watch-Tower, Watch and Pray, and preach in season and out of season, and give the peo∣ple warning of this hour of temp∣tation, whether they will heare, or whether they will forbear, that they may deliver their own Souls, and happily recover others also from the snare of the Devil, who are (asleep in his armes and) taken captive by him at his will; And let all the Lords peo∣ple highly prize and heartily af∣fect an heart-awakening, search∣ing, quickening Ministrie, and welcome that word most, which comes most stirringly home, and is most soundly set on by the po∣wer of the Spirit.
2. Is it a Gospel-Duty to Watch? then what a special mercy is it at this day, to have an awakened heart. The Keeper of Israel Watches very graciously over those, he keeps watchfull; 'Tis no common favour to be kept alive at such a dead time; sure the Father of mercies looks most sweetly to those Children, and will smile most lovingly upon them, whom he causes to lie broad-waken, looking after him; Oh blessed be his name, that he reserves a little remnant by him, waiting on him, and for him; What would become of us all, if a few were not upon their watch, would not the Lord a∣wake to judgment, were all a∣sleep about him, and none a∣waked to cry for mercy? would not he lay about to purpose, did not some hold his hands, by lift∣ing up their hands and hearts to
Heaven? Is he not readie to say, Let me alone, that I may con∣sume them? and is he not let a∣lone by all, but an handfull of wrastling Saints that have got within him? would he not be gone, (think you) but that his deare ones watch him, cry migh∣tily after him, and will not let him goe? Nay, is he not going about to take his glory, Spirit, grace, Gospel, and all away with him? 'Tis well for us there are some watching, waiting, weep∣ing, about the bed of Solomon, (loath to let him goe) valiant men,Cant. 3.7. even the valiant of Israel; Oh happie Souls, that lie ever upon this heavenly watch, who watch the more, the rather, be∣cause so many slumber; It will goe well with them, how ill soe∣ver things go, for, 1. They are neerest mercy of all other; if any sweet influences fall from Heaven, they are waiting
with mouths wide open,Job. 29.23. as for the lat∣ter rain (as of old they waited for Job.) If the Sun of righteousnesse arise, they are like to see him first; if his light shine, their eyes are open; and if his love breathe, their hearts are open; if good reports come, to make the bones fat, who but they will heare, who are ever hearke∣ning? When ever the Lord shall open the door of hope, they are next hand; when the day breaks and the shadows flee away, they'l be the blessed spectators, who watch more then they that watch for the morn∣ing; If the Spirit be powred forth as floods, who'l drink so deep as these gaping thirstie Souls? When ever the King sits at table, and causes the spikenard to send forth a sweet smell, they must needs feele the savour of his oyntments, who wait as Olive-Plants
round about his table, when ever blessings are handed out, they are within reach; Oh 'tis a rich mercy to be heerest mercy. 2. They are fittest for Duty. Is there any work to do for God, his Cause, his People, they are neer hand, waiting for it, saying, What wilt thou have us do Lord? If a word of Command come, 'tis welcome, they are up∣on their Watch: If the Lord say, Come, they come; and if he say, Go, they go; their loyns are girt. If the King of glory look out, and cry, Who is on my side? who? they are ready to look out of the window towards him,Isa. 41.2 saying, Here are we, Lord. They are called to his foot (as the man of the East) onely wait∣ing for a word from his mouth: they set themselves in a posture on purpose, to follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goeth. Yea, awakened hearts, whose eyes have seen the King in his beauty have and holy ambition in them to do as much, and as well in their Masters service, as he shall give them power to do, of his good pleasure: Whereas the slothful servant is ever to seeke both in will and power, when his Master has work for him; he will either slip out of the way or sleep at work. If Jesus Christ call oth' sudden, and have any haste of work, hee's all ungirt, and will be so long a getting ready, till the businesse might be half done: But the vigilant diligent servant, is at an houres warning; he is the vessel unto honour, meet for the Masters use and prepared for every good work. 3. They are like to be richest in experience; this must needs
be men of great observation, whose eyes are ever open to be∣hold the gracious and glorious goings of God in Providences and Ordinances; He will make most of his glory and goodnesse to passe before those, that watch and wait according to his ap∣pointment,Exod. 3 3.19.22. (as Moses upon the Rock.) They'l meet with many choise pledges of divine love, many drops of myrrhe from Christs fingers, and Kisses from his lips, that watch at his feet; his steps will drop fatnesse upon such as lie in his way, waiting for him; Hee'l lay up much of his Heavenly treasure in holy a∣wakned hearts, and reveale most of his secrets to his hearkening, hidden ones;Math. 13.52. The watchfull, faithfull Stewards will have out of thier treasure to bring forth, new and old; they'l have all manner of pleasant fruits laid up at their
gates for the Beloved;Cant. 7.13. they will be able to give the best account, what God does for their Souls, who watch their own hearts best and wait most for him there; He will be much with them, whom he finds much at home, and make out much of himself to them; Watchfull Israelites will be the best provided of hidden Mannah, they'l be before-hand with all others, in respect of the most experience, and best intel∣ligence, from Heaven. 4. They are readiest for the appearance of Christ. If he come, at morning, or even∣ing, mid-day or mid-night, at what watch soever he comes, they are watching; yea when they sleep, their heart waketh;Cant. 5.2. they are readie to goe forth to meet the bridgroome,Math. 25.6 should he call at midnight; and his salva∣tion will be most welcom, where
it has been most waited for; What an happie and heavenly posture was good old Simeon in,Luk. 2.25.26.27.28. to meet Christ in the Temple, who had so long waited in the Spirit for the consolation of Isra∣el, how ready was he, to re∣ceive that blessed Child with o∣pen armes and heart too? where was Christ more welcom, then to little Zachaeus,Luk 19.3.4 5. who was got upon this Watch-Tower (the Sycamor-Tree) desiring to see him, how sweetly was Christs heart affected towards this poore waiting Soul? he looks up with a loving eye, to satisfie his long∣ing looks; and how happie doth this good man think himself in so blessed a guest; he received him joyfully.Math. 24.28 Oh how readie will the quick-sighted Eagles be to gather about him, whose eyes are ever looking towards this rising Sun? Behold I come quickly,
saith he: Amen; say they,Rev. 22.20. Even so, come Lord Jesus. Observe, how sweetly that lovely word (Amen) is couched betwixt them, and their hearts together in it! Use of Examination. Let us give our Souls a visit in the Name of the Lord, and com∣mune secretly and seriously with our own hearts about our Spiri∣tual Watch. Discoveries of Spiritual Slumber. 1. Is the Lord silent to thee, who hath used to speak much to thy heart, to bespeak it? Dost thou heare seldom from him? will he scarce give thee a word? why then thou mayest be jealous of thy self, that thy heart is asleep; for he will have
a mouth to speak, where there is an ear to hear. Canst thou not remember the moneths of old, when he gave in many words in season? has he not oft spoke to thy heart, when man spoke to thy ear? And does he now keep silence? Dost thou onely hear the voyce of a man now; and so runnes to Ely, (as Samuel did)? Dost thou hear much without, and little or nothing within? Does not thine ear affect thy heart? Is not the Word as a fire within thee? dost thou hang upon the bare outward admini∣stration, and art thou a stranger to the glorious ministration of the Spirit? Why, sure thy Watch is down, and he seems to slumber. And now he hides his ear from thy breathing: thou cryest, and he will not answer thee. Ask thy soul solemnly, What's the matter? is his ear
heavy? Is there not a cause within? is not thy heart heavy? Has not he called, and thou hast not heard? has not he knocked, and thou not opened? Is it not thus, O slumbring Soul? speak out, and tell the Lord how it is within. 2. Art not thou silent before the Lord, who usedst to cry migh∣tily after him? Is not thine heart shut up now, which thou was wont to pour forth? thy sighings come not before the Lord, as they have done, and thy groanings are hid from him. Art not thou a stranger to thy own closet, where thou hast much sought him in secret? Surely thy heart is fallen into a dead sleep; 'tis a sad swooning-time with thy sluggish spirit: how hast thou lost thy heart in point of love to prayer, and life in it? Oh wer'st thou throughly awakened, thou
wouldst not for a world give over this thriving Trade of spi∣ritual begging: thou couldst not keep so long out of his presence, who hath given thee so many sweet visits in prayer:Job 27.10. the hypo∣crite will not pray alwaies: and 'tis no wonder, for he cannot pray at all in Gods account: But that a true Israelite, who has had power with God in prayer, should cease to pour out a prayer before him; this is strange, and yet no more strange then true amongst slumbring Christians, who cannot chuse but give over praying, when they give over watching: the Spirit of prayer must needs be silent under a spi∣rit of slumber. 3. Is not thy Spiritual warfare maintained? dost not thou wra∣stle against spiritual wickedness, &c? Dost thou not feel the Law of the mind warring against the
Law in thy members? Art thou not at odds with thy own heart every day, and quarrelling with it for heart-sins? Why then the heart is asleep, whilest thy lusts lie sleeping within thee; thou dost not watch, whilest thou dost not war. How shamefully wilt thou be foiled by the lusts thou fightest not against? Sin will get head and heart too, whiles thy heart is asleep: thy lusts like so many flies will swarm about thy sleepie soul. Thou dost not reckon with thy self about thy dying to sin, self, &c. Alas, how dead is thy heart in the mean time? thou hast given over thy complaining of the body of death, and yet thy lusts are more lively; and thou livelesse: they strong, and thou art weak: sure, they are awake, and thou sleep∣est.
4. Art not thou sensible of the subtile insinuations, and secret suggestions of Satan, in this bu∣sie day of his? Dost thou meet with none of his buffettings, now he layes so about him? dost thou feel none of his fiery darts, now Hell is broke loose? Mayst thou not be very suspitious, that a spirit of slumber is upon thee, and the evill spirit rocks thee? Art not thou pleasing thy self with smooth things, lying quiet∣ly upon a pillow of carnal secu∣rity, and Satan pleasing of thee too, and loath to disquiet thee? Art thou at ease in Zion, singing a Requiem to thy Soul? why thou mayst sleep on for him, and take thy rest. 'Tis not for his purpose to awaken us out of false dreams: this cunning Fowler is most busie with awakened spi∣rits that are struggling from him, that would be ever upon the
wing Christward; but he stirs little, when men lie asleep at his feet, onely watches over them: he makes least noyse there, but does most hurt. Oh the myste∣ry of iniquitie works most and worst, amongst idle souls, that work not, watch not. 5. Dost not thou sympathize with the suffering servants of Jesus Christ? Is not thy heart affected with the afflictions of Jo∣seph? Hast thou little or no fel∣low-feeling of thy brethrens ca∣lamities? Canst not bleed in their wounds as thine own heart, whose blood has been spilt like water upon the ground, for the testimony of of Jesus? Sure, then thy spirit within thee is benum∣med under a spirit of security; and almost past feeling. Did not the sad cryes of the distres∣sed Protestants, in the Valleys of Piedmont and in Germany, say∣ing,
Have pity upon us, O our Friends, have pity upon us, for the hand of the Lord hath touch∣ed us: Did not (I say) their doleful complaints come to thine ears, and did not this go to thine heart? do not thy bowels sound within thee towards them who are sighing it out, Our bowels, our bowels? dost thou not make lamentation over them, crying, Alas, alas? Is it nothing to thee, there are so many mourn∣ers in Zion at this day hanging their harps upon the Willowes? and dost thou put no tears i'th bottle for them? And further, how stands thy heart affected towards such as are afflicted in spirit? Does not thy soul bleed within thee to∣wards poor wounded souls, who are even ready to bleed to death for want of the gracious pre∣sence of the Lord of life? Canst
thou not mourn in secret, for such as walk mournfully without the Sun? Time was, when thine head was as water, and thy eyes as fountains of tears, that thou couldst not but weep with those that wept, and mourn (as the Doves of the valleys) with them that mourned: but now thy eyes are dry, thy bowels strait, and thy heart hard. Oh what strong stupidity is upon thee? if all the members should suffer, when but one suffers? how stu∣pid and senselesse is that one, that suffers not when so many suffer? I cannot but pity such slumbring Christians, who want yearning bowels of pitty, when I consider, what sharp medicines must be applyed to their insen∣sible stupified spirits, to cut them to the quick, and fetch up their spiritual senses, to sympathize with Christ in his members.
6. Is not thy Soul vexed at the filthy conversation of the ungodly,2 Pet. 2.7, 8. as Lots righteous Soul was? Dost thou not bear the backslidings of Gods own peo∣ple, was a burthen upon thine heart before the Lord? Dost thou not inwardly tremble at the dishonour put upon that Name which hath been proclai∣med amongst us, in so loud lan∣guages as glorious in holinesse, &c? Are not the abominations of the Times the very abomina∣tion of thy soul? Canst thou not mourn in secret, for the open Pride, prophanenesse, profuse∣nesse of so many thousands in our Israel at this day? Why then, (believe it) thy heart is asleep indeed, when the crying sins of this adulterous generation do not awaken it. Oh how many, who have ap∣peared as Children of the day, have
fellowship now with the unfruitfull works of darknesse? who once seemed white as snow, and are now black as a coal; who some years since would not have tou∣ched the garment spotted with the flesh, have now put on the Aethiopian skin again, and the Leopards spots; having once escaped the pollutions of the flesh, and are again entangled therewith. Hovv are the honourable things of the Law, and Gospel too, become contemptible in the eyes of many, who seemed to prize them above thousands of gold and silver? how are the precious pearls of Jesus Christ, which are worth more then a world, and of which the World is not worthy, trampled under foot, as if they were nothing worth. Oh what loathing of Manna, even amongst Israelites?
what turning of grace into wan∣tonnesse? Horrible things are done in our Israel, and that in the sight of the Sun, published in the streets of Ashkelon, so that the daughters of the uncircumcised tri∣umph? And shall not the daugh∣ters of Zion sigh and mourn for these abominations, which are more then enough to break ones sleep, and heart too, which break the Lords own heart: And if thou lay them not to heart,Ezek. 6.9. thy heart's asleep. Directions for Watchfulnesse. 1. Even set before thee; the All-seeing eye of Jehovah, which is ever upon thee; His eyes, which are ten thousand times brighter then the Sun, daily looked upon by an eye of Faith, will be very awakening; Think much upon those heart-stirring
meditations,Psa. 139.1.2, 3, 4. of Gods glorious presence, which were so much upon Davids heart; as, Gods en∣compassing thy path and thy bed, besetting thee behind and before looking thee thorough in all places, at all times; watching over every thought of thy heart, every word of thy tongue, &c: Oh say oft within thy self in the goings out and comings in Whi∣ther shall I goe from thy presence &c? The keeper of Israel, who neither slumbers nor sleepes, looks upon thee in all thy slum∣brings, with a broad eye; thou art never out of his sight, sleep∣ing or waking; hee never looks off of thee; How soundly was Jacob rowsed out of sleep, upon the apprehension of Gods dread∣full presence;Gen. 18.16 17. He awaked out of sleep, and said, The Lord is in this place, and I knew it not, &c: Had I been aware of him, I had been
awake. Serious thoughts of ap∣proaching glory, will put one beside their sleep, and startle one to purpose;Jer. 5.21.22. Heare yee not mee (saith the Lord) and will you not tremble at my presence? Why then, 'tis because you have eyes, and see not; eares and heare not; holy tremblings will prevent heavie slumbrings; Oh that our drowsie Spirits, were continu∣ally over-awed with the deep meditations of the omniscience and omnipresence of the Father of Spirits, how effectually would they be awakened out of carnall and formal securitie? The eyes of Gods glory looking full upon us, will keep open the eyes of our heads, and hearts too; vi∣sions of God will cleare up our spiritual sight, and quicken it. Well, his eyes are alwaies upon ours, and his heart goes along with ours, what need have
we of Watchfull eyes and hearts. 2. Wait for the glorious mi∣nistration of the Spirit, under e∣very outward administration; This charge is given to the se∣ven Churches,Rev. 2.3. by him which had the seven Spirits of God, walking in the midst of the Gol∣den Candlesticks, when he would earnestly provoke them to watchfullnesse, threatning to come upon them as a thief, if they did not watch: Let him that hath an eare, heare what the Spirit saith unto the Churches; This blessed Counsel is recommended seven times, in two Chapters, to adde the greater weight to it, and to make deeper impression. Oh set that stone with seven eyes, before thine eyes, to a∣waken them and spirit them:Zech. 3.9. All the workings of the eternal Spirit upon our spirits are awa∣kening;
when ever the word comes with life, in the power of the Spirit, it will raise us out of spiritual slumbers: Indeed a lower or lesse dispensation will not doe it; Oh how dead we lie at pray∣er, hearing, reading, &c: till the Spirit of life breathe upon us; we are little moved, when the Spirit moves not; All's but as Elisha's staffe upon the Child, there was neither voyce nor hear∣ing;2 Kings 4.31. but if the holy Spirit stretch himself upon us, his eyes upon ours, (as it were), then our eyes will be opened; How easie a thing is it, to lie sleeping and slumbring in and under any Forme, where there is no power; how dead we lie by the letter and it by us, without the Spirit?Ezek. 1.37.1.2. Oh how heartlesse and Spirit∣lesse are most professors at this day, as the very dry bones in the open valley, resting and rusting
in outward forms, not feeling inward povver; and there they may rest till they rot, and lie till they die, if the Spirit do not breathe upon them, as upon those dry bones. How many of Christs witnesses are spiritually dead, taking up in the letter without life? and in this un∣suitable, uncomfortable posture will they lie languishing under spirituall Lethargies and Con∣sumptions, till the spirit of life from God enter into them. That blessed resurrection of the spirits of the Saints, out of the grave of formality and security, which is more to be desired a thousand times then their raising up in po∣wer and glory it'h world, with∣out a plentiful effusion, and pow∣erfull operation of the holy Spirit, may not be expected, cannot be effected; If the Spirit of judgment and burning fall up∣on
their hearts, it will fire them out of formalitie, and startle them out of securitie; when he shall come down, with a sound from Heaven, as with a mighty rushing wind, upon the sluggish Spirits of the Slumbring Virgins, how will they be awakened to a∣stonishment, as the Apostles were, when the Holy Ghost rested as fire upon them, &c? 3. Be diligent, frequent, and fervent in spiritual Exercises, if you would keep up your spiri∣tuall Watch. Constant, consci∣entious discharge of duty, will be a special remedy against cu∣stomary formality, and carnall security; pure Religion is no idle Trade; 'twill find us work enough (can we but find in our hearts to fall to it) and that full of variety and excellency, to keep us awake and at work all our dayes. 'Tis not for want of
work that any stand idle in the Lords vineyard, but for want of will to it. 'Tis a very busie time with Jesus Christ, his heart is upon his work; and 'tis so with his waiting-servants too, for his work is upon their hearts: and they that are lazie and sleepy-headed now, are like the Slug∣gard that sleeps in harvest, find∣ing least to do, where there is most work: And they are sloth∣full servants above all other, who are most sleepie, when they should do the most and best ser∣vice. How busie will the Devil be with such drousie ones, and hardest at work with them, while they are at easie work, to cast them into a dead sleep? His work goes on, where ours ceases: how much Work have we found Satan in these dayes, by neglect∣ing Gods work? Since we have left our first Work, we have left
our first Watch: and we find it now vvork more then enough to keep our souls awake. Omission of spirituall duties hath brought upon us an habitual indisposition to duties, that we find no heart to them, feel little heart or heat in them; Since Christians have un∣girt their loyns, and ceased from spirituall motions and actions, their vessels are empty, their lamps going out, and themselves laid down to sleep. How dull and heavy are their spirituall senses grown for want of holy exerci∣ses? how listlesse and livelesse are their Spirits? Oh then, 'tis high time, that all the faithfull servants of Jesus Christ, should fall afresh upon their Masters work with double diligence; to redeem that time which stole away while they slept, and can never be recalled. And indeed Christians, of all
the men i'th world, should not lose time, who have the best and most imployment. Oh then, out of hand, take up that old thri∣ving trade, of the practice of Piety in all Gospel-duties, from a pure principle; as ever these would be found vvatching, at the coming of their Lord. 4. Converse much with lively Saints, who are much upon their Spiritual Watch; their compa∣ny will be very awakening, who are well avvakened. They will be knocking at the door of thy heart, feeling thy spiritual pulse, and asking thee, if all be well within; they cannot but be jog∣ging at thy elbow, if thou keep thy hands in thy bosome, and lie slumbring with folded arms: As iron sharpneth iron, so doth the face of a man his friend. Watchful servants will be call∣ing off the slumbring ones from
beds of security; they will be whetting up the dull and lazie spirits of others, who have a good edge upon their own. Amongst sluggish Christians, 'tis a thou∣sand to one, you'l grow sleepy too for company; Sluggards will infect one another with the slee∣py Evill; they'l lay a Cushion for you to sit dovvn by them, and take your fill of this false rest: There's no spiritual noyse amongst them, nor heavenly nevves; no heart-awakening words: All's either finfull si∣lence, or smooth words, hushing one another asleep with their soft language: Livelesse Chri∣stians are like dying coals, which deadden one another, till there be never a coal to warm at. Oh then, if thou wouldst have a Watchfull spirit, in this slum∣bring age, look after communion in spirit with the most quick, and
lively-spirited Saints; heavenly sparks, that are ever flying up∣ward, as to their proper Region; they will be warm, avvakening, enlivening company, (being well heated by the fire of the Spirit) for luke-warm, drowsie, livelesse Christians. 5. Be ever setting on work avvakening Graces, by the assi∣stance of the Spirit of Grace. Stir up the Graces of Christ that are most stirring;2 Tim. 1.6. and they'l stir up thee, quicken thee, and set thee on fire, as sparks blown up, &c, As, 1. Lively Faith. This is the new Creatures eye, quicker then the Eagles, excellent at Watching. 'Tis the spiritual mans Secr, and the overseer of his watchings and workings; If this active grace be at work, it will keep the heart awake: the Watch cannot fall down, whilest
Faith is up. It's a very busie grace, which will keep us from sleeping, if it sleep not. Faith will be daily improving avvake∣ning Providences, quickening ordinances, melting mercies, searching tryals; It will be ever taking in, awakening considera∣tions of the majestie of the Crea∣tour, the mutabilitie of the Creature, of Mortalitie, Eterni∣tie, &c: It will be presenting awakening manifestations of the unconceiveable love of God, the incomparable lovelinesse of Christ, the admirable beauty of holinesse, the unspeakable bless∣ednesse of Heaven; It will be looking out at the eye, to see the King in his beauty, listning at care, to heare that voyce, which his companions heare, waiting at heart to welcome his Spirit there: Faith is all life, full of Spirit, a quick Spring, which
will set all on motion; 'Twill set the whole man on work, and actuate every habit of grace; Its operations are full of effica∣cie and varietie; upward, in∣ward, outward, it has a large sphere of activitie; Oh could we live the life of Faith at a high∣er rate, how lively should we be, how watchfull? 2. Warme Love; It's all heart and heat, there's a flame in it, which will enliven and awaken the most drowsie and heavie heart; There's much life in love, much action in this affection; it's activitie will keepe thee from securitie: Love is good at watching, it will sit up long for the Beloved; It cannot rest, till he rest in his love upon it;Zeph. 3.17. it would not sleepe (with its good will) till it may lie in his bosom,Psa. 127.2. and there it may rest safely and
sweetly, when he gives his Be∣loved sleep. Love will wait and watch long, endure much; hard duty is easie to it, as Jacob's ser∣vice for Rachel: Love lyes with eyes and heart open too, as loath to shut out Christ at either. It will wait long and longingly, for a look of his eye, a kisse from his mouth, the breathings of his love. An heart toucht with Christs love, cannot rest (as the needle touched with the Load∣stone) but when and where it should. Love has a single eye, and will watch well; 'tis clear, and quick as the Doves; it will spie out its Beloved,Cant. 4.9. and pierce his heart. Oh could we but love much, we should watch much; and wait to meet our Beloved at eve∣ry turn,Cant. 7.12. in his garden, in his ban∣queting-house, in his vineyards, to give up our loves to him; Ear∣nest
love will be early and late at work and watch for Jesus Christ. 3. Holy Fear. It will keep strict watch and strong guard, for fear of surprisall: It is a wa∣ry and watchful grace, and can∣not endure to be taken at un∣awares. It's ever attended with a godly jealousie, which will marvellously prevent carnal se∣curity. Indeed, they that have not this fear of God before their eyes, and upon their hearts, they'l cloze their eyes, stop their ears, harden their hearts, and grow carelesse and secure, as the men of Laish, even till fearfulnesse and trembling come upon them; and they (of all others) are in greatest danger of the fear and the snare, who fear least; the deepest fear-lesse security, will bring on the heaviest fearful ca∣lamity. Oh then let all the ser∣vants
of the Lord watch over their own hearts, lest they for∣sake the fear of the Almighty, and he leave them to a common, carelesse, fearlesse spirit, and they be insensibly overtaken with spiritual security:Isa. 8.12, 13. Oh Sanctifie the Lord of hosts himself, let him be your fear, let him be your dread, that you may neither fear their fear, nor be afraid. And indeed, the more full thine heart is possessed with a filial, reverential fear of that glorious and fearful Name, The Lord thy God,Deut. 28.58. the lesse wilt thou be disquieted with false heart-tormenting Feares and Cares; Blessed is he that feareth alwayes; he will be alwayes up∣on his Watch, to the preventing of much sin and sorrow, slum∣bring and wandring, sensuality and security. 4. Heavenly Joy; 'Tis very enlivening and heart-awaken∣ing;
Like that of the best wine,Cant. 7.9. which goes down sweetly, causing the lips of those that are asleep to speak. Where the spirit can rejoyce comfortably in the Lord, there his work will go on merrily; his Watch will be kept chearfully; such a soul can sing in the wayes of the Lord, and upon his watch even at midnight (as Paul and Silas);Act. 16.25. Whereas an heavy heart drives heavily in all its watchings and workings. Job's soon out of heart, and cryes, What a wearinesse? and, Why should I wait on the Lord any longer? Every Command is grievous, to one that is grieved in spirit; and every word and work (though easie) seems a burthen to one that is a burthen to himself: Now Spiritual Joy, is like aqua coelestis, it will recover a languish∣ing, swooning spirit. This refi∣ned wine, drunk out of the cup
of salvation, is full of quicken∣ing spirits, and will make a Christian hearty, spiritfull and watchful: They that suck, and are satisfied with the breasts of consolation, as they are cast in∣to a sweet and sound sleep in the arms of Christ, so they will cast off sinful, sluggish security. 6. Let Watching and Prayer go hand in hand; and they will lend an helping hand to one ano∣ther; they are lively, lovely companions joyned together by Christs own hand, and would be linked together as with a chain of gold in every Christians heart: Watching and prayer are mutually helpful and successe∣ful.
First, Watchfulnesse helps to lift up, and keep up Prayer, as Aaron and Hur held up the hands of Moses, Exod. 17.12. 1. It helps us to opportunities of Prayer. A slumbring spirit loses many seasons of Prayer, sleeps out sweet breathing-times of supplication. Where there is deep spiritual sleep, there's deep silence, a dumb spirit is there: The Sluggard is folding his hands to rest, when he should be lifting up his heart with his hands unto God in the Heavens: If we watch not, Satan will make a prey of our praying-times; the World will be steal∣ing away our time and hearts too; Our praying times are pre∣cious times, our enemies envy them; and, of all times, will be
interposing, when we are any thing disposed this way; they'l lose no time, to make us lose our best times; and if they can but take us off the duty of the day, they get the day; Now a watchfull Spirit will keep time with God, (in whose hands all our time is) who ever sayes Nay; It thinks much to lose one meeting with him, he must not be put off, what ever is put by. Vigilancie helps much, as to constancie and frequencie in prayer; an awa∣kened heart will cry with David morning, evening, and at noon; It will prevent the dawning of the Morning; and the Night watches: such a Soul, only, can continue in prayer,Psal. 55.17. Psa. 119.147.148. and pray continually, that is continually upon its Watch. Besides, as watchfulnesse helps to find out time for prayer; so, to chuse out the fittest; when we are most at leasure for Hea∣ven,
in the best posture for prayer; As Jesus Christ was much at fasting and prayer, (and best at it) so he watched seasons and se∣crecie for prayer;Mark. 1.25. Hee's early at it, and solitarie; And as he counsels us to pray daily, so he cautions us to pray duly, solemn∣ly, and secretly;Math. 6.6. But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which seeth in secret, &c: We should have nothing else to doe, when we have to do with God in prayer, Tis work enough alone; and he loves to have us much alone at this work; A man that is wise for his Soul, will watch a finding time, in all his seekings; and speak most to the Lord, when ther's most hopes, he will be spoke with,Psal. 32.6. and he shall speed best. Now a sleepie heart is for any time, or no time; 'Tis apt to put
God off with the least and last; when it's Spirit's low, strength spent, affections earthly; when all out of frame, no help at it, no heart to it, no time for it; He nei∣ther looks for Gods Spirit in pra∣yer, nor at his own; And thus the Lord of all must be served with a∣nything, or nothing by a sloathful servant; whereas a vigilant soul watches Golden-Gospel-seasons, when it may offer up incense in Golden censers. When the heart's ful (as the Clouds) then to be pou∣ring it out; when 'tis as a bottle of new Wine wanting vent; then to speak that it may be refreshed (as Elihu did) when the Spirit moves,Job. 32.18, 19, 20. when the heart is fixed, when the affections are warme, when most retired and inward. These are the heavenly breathe∣ing times with the awakened Virgins, for this holy exercise. These are the living lively Saints
dayes for pure Spiritual recre∣ation; these are their extraordi∣nary times on earth, upon which they pray down more then ordi∣nary blessings from Heaven. 2. Watchfullnesse helps us to Im∣portunitie in prayer: A watchfull Soul is good at holding out with Gods, sits up with him & for him. It will not keepe silence, while God is silent; It can take no rest, and will give the Lord no rest, till he heare in Heaven, and speak to its heart; Take an awakened heart upon deep con∣viction, and how mightily will it cry unto the Lord, saying, A∣wake, awake, heare me speedi∣ly, and, How long Lord! 'Tis in great haste now,Psa. 40.1. Hebr. for an answer from Heaven; and the more haste the better speed in this sense: Now it cannot but wait in wait∣ing, pray with a prayer;Jam. 5.14.17. Gr. cry all the day: While its watch is up,
its soul is lift up, that God would rejoyce the soul of his servant:Psa. 86.3.4. Its hard at work within at this heart-duty. Now a slumbring spirit has soon done; shortest prayers are sweetest to it. It cares not for awakening the Lord, lest he should awaken it; It would be let alone, and therefore 'twill let him alone; it likes well to give the Lord rest and it self too: A sleepy heart cannot lift up the hands that hang down,Heb. 12.12. and the fee∣ble knees. 'Tis the awakened Soul which stretcheth forth the hand towards God, whose eyes fail with looking up; that wra∣stles with him, as for life, (Jacob-like) and will not let him go without a blessing. Now im∣portunity does much with God in prayer;Luk. 18.1.7.8.82. Gr. Will not God avenge his Elect, that cry unto him day and night; I tell you, sayes Christ,
(who knevv his Fathers heart, coming from his bosome) he will Speedily; assoon as may be: Fer∣vent prayer, though long at it, loses no time; life and length in this duty will carry it at last: It will not be put off, not away till it has got an alms; it has got the skill on't, and will not leave knocking, till the door be open∣ed; It will have its will of God, (as one may say) because it would have nothing but what God will. What a great word was that from Christ to great faith and fervency in prayer: Be it unto thee, as thou wilt:Mat. 15 28. Gr. Shee could wish no more, and she must have no lesse. 3. Watchfullness helps to idoneitie in prayer; Awakened hearts are readiest to cry to the Lord, and to heare him speak: 'Its an instrument in tune to pray with; such an heart God himself has
prepared for himself, and he will cause his eare to heare, and prepare of his goodnesse for it too; A Christian upon his spi∣rituall watch may say, My heart is readie, O God, my heart is readie;Psa. 10.17.'Tis an excellent frame of spirit for any spiritual duty, at any time. A slumbring Spirit is most un∣fit for holy strivings and strug∣lings with God; none more in∣disposed to this stirring duty, or lesse affected at it; When the heart is asleep, prayer is but a dream; 'Tis phansie works then, not faith; there's onely a sound of words, no sound words; All's but as sounding brasse, or as a tink∣ling Cymball; it makes no musick in Gods eare; All's to seeke in such a heart, faith, desires, hope &c, it's ever at a losse; All's dead in a manner here, there's no breathing almost; Oh what a
distempered, distracted spirit in prayer, where no watch is kept? what aversions from it, what di∣versions in it? How will the heart wander up and down, and give us the slip, if not watched? What strange withdrawings, & misgivings of spirit, when we draw nigh to give up our hearts to the Lord? what a croud of confused thoughts in a sleepie heart? weak and low graces are soon lost in it; 'Tis such a tho∣row-fare for Sctans suggestions, that Christ has little or no room there; Now a watchfull Spirit will be sure to shut the door a∣gainst all these: that Christ may have all to himself, the heart must be kept, as a closet for him and the Soul to meet in. 4. In point of Receptivitie; watchfullnesse puts a Soul into a capacitie to take in much from God by prayer: as to be much
at it, and to do much in it, so to get much by it; God will be e∣ver giving to that Soul, that gives it self unto prayer. A man that is all prayer (to allude to the expression in the original) whose heart is all upon it,Psa. 109 4. Heb. as Davids, must needs be a getting growing man; hee, drives so thriving a trade thoroughly; Now there's none better at it, then awakened hearts, and so none fitter to wait. 1. For supply and support in pray∣er; Spiritual supplications can∣not be carryed on but by the sup∣ply of the Spirit of Jesus-Christ, which Paul reckoned so comfor∣tably on;Phil. 1.19. these sweet spices will not flow without the breathings of the holy Ghost; It's well known to an awakened Soul, that we cannot think a good thought of our selves; 'Tis onely Gods good Spirit, that can teach us
to indite good matter;Psa. 45.1. Hebr. his quick∣nings make our Spirits as a living Spring, to buble up and boyle over in fervent prayer;Isa. 6.6. when he touches the lips with a living coale (as one of the Seraphims did the Prophet Isaiah) then our tongues will be like the pens of a rea∣die writer.Rom. 8.26. Gr. An experienced Christian, when awake, feeles at his heart; he cannot help up him∣self in prayer, and therefore he waites for the Spirit to help his infirmities, he knows not how to turn his hand or heart to the work, without an helping hand from Heaven at every turn; and therefore he waits and weeps for the Spirit to help him out, with sighs and groans that cannot be uttered: and though he have no strength of his own, yet he has power with God, having power from God.
2. For successe and satisfaction after Prayer. He that watches unto prayer and in it, will wait for the return of prayer, day after day, as Noah did for the Dove, till it returned with an Olive leaf in its mouth: when he has sowen in tears, he waits for the precious fruits of a spi∣ritual harvest, till he reap in joy: he looks long and longingly af∣ter his prayers and tears with an open eye and heart; hee's ever and anon hearkening what the Lord will say, after all his speak∣ing to him, and pleading with him by a spirit of supplication; he must hear and feel at his heart, that God hears in heaven: when he has done praying, his faith is as busie with God at his promises, as the Bee at flowers, and will not have done, till pray∣er comes home laden with ho∣ney. Thus poor beggars, that
have the skill of waiting in prayer, and after it, get a good living by it; 'tis a good stock, that brings in great store of new and old; Now a slothfull spirit has no heart at all, to look after his prayers, that had no heart in them; they die in the birth, and are still-born; how can he ex∣pect God should hear those prayers, which he scarce hears himself? They make no noyse in heaven, and there can be no good newes of them on earth; they'l find Gods ear heavy, who find their hearts so; whereas a watchfull heart may reckon much of the incoms of pray∣ers, and shall have a good ac∣count of them one day.
Secondly, Prayer helps to keep up our Watch; it cannot fall down, while Prayer is up with faith and ferven∣cy. 1. It helps up a Christians Watch, and keeps it up, as it brings in the Keeper of Israel, who neither slumbers nor sleeps, to help us to watch. The prayer of faith crys loud in his ears, and awakens him, to a waken us; it fol∣lowes him (as for life) to quicken up our spirits to this spirituall Watch; It has power with God, and fetches power from him, to strengthen weak hands and fee∣ble knees,Isa. 40.31. in this holy duty. Pray∣er upon the wings of faith, will fetch down Eagles wings in a promise, to mount up with, in this high and heavenly exercise, of waiting on the Lord, and
watching for him; Watching is hard work, and long duty; and alas, we are soon tyred out in any thing of spiritual duty; espe∣cially if any thing of difficulty in it, we are ready at every turn to lie down to rest. Now lively prayer stirres up the Lord to stirre us up; It will set him awork at our hearts; and his heart-workings are heart∣awakenings; while we are knocking at the gates of Heaven, and jogging (as it were) of Christs elbow, by stirring and strong cryes; his spirit will be knock∣ing at the door of our hearts; and jogging our spirits, to keep them awake: Let a poor heart but cry in the Ears of the Lord, and it shall hear a voyce from heaven behind it, yea within it, saying, Arise my Love and come away, &c.
2. Prayer helps in watching,Psal. 121. as it engages the Lord to watch over our watchings, without whom all our watchings would be in vain; he keeps a strict watch over his waiting servants day and night, for he neither slumbers nor sleeps. Alas, we cannot keep our souls alive, nor our heart awake; but prayer takes the Lord into the Watch∣tower with us, and he sets a guard upon our hearts, a watch before our lips, &c. Hee's a tower of salvation to his people, and keeps them as in a garrison by his own power,1 Pet. 1.5. while they are upon his Watch, and at his Work. The Watch must needs be safely and sweetly kept, where Jesus Christ is Captain of the Guard; we should be certainly surprized even upon our spiri∣tual Watch by those spiritual wickednesses in high places,
who are too high and too many for us. Were we not set upon the Rock that is higher then we,Psal. 61.2. that is higher then they, the Rock Christ: we should be ta∣ken as naked men, even at our arms, did not the Captain of our Salvation watch with us, and over us; now Christs waiting-servants are ever calling him in, by the prayer of Faith, to keep up their Watch for them, by wat∣ching over them;1 Sam. 28.2. Achish to David. their effectual prayers lay strong hands upon him, to keep him with them, as the Keeper of their heads and hearts for ever. 3. Prayer helps a Christian to Watch, as it brings him in to commune with God, who is glorious in holinesse, fearful in praises, doing wonders. When a poor silly, sinful Wretch comes to present himself before the Holy One, who is of purer eyes then
to behold iniquity. How will the serious thoughts of the transcen∣dent majesty, and resplendent purity of Jehovah awaken him? Will not his excellency make him afraid,Job 13.11. and his dread fall upon him? When Abraham drew near to commune with the Lord, what awakened posture does he appear in?Gen. 18 27. Behold (sayes he) I have taken upon me to speak to the Lord, who am but dust and ashes. Oh let not the Lord be angry, &c. When a Child of God finds in his heart to plead with his Fa∣ther in Heaven, he first pleades with himself in these or the like words;Mic. 6.6. Wherewithall shall I appear before the Lord, or bow my self to the mighty God of Jacob? Awake, O my soul, awake, and offer not the dead, the lame and the sick in sacrifice to the living God: Hee's a great King,Mal. 1.14. and his Name is dreadfull: And as a gracious
spirit communes with its own heart, before it commune with him that tryes the heart; so the Lord communes with it in and after prayer: now the voyce of the Lord is a glorious voyce, which shakes the Cedars; and will it not then shake a bruised reed, and make it tremble at his Word? A broken heart that can speak its mind freely and feel∣ingly to the Lord, and hears him speaking home to his heart, must needs be effectually awakened; such heavenly entercourse main∣tained by a spirit of prayer, will keep up a Christians spirit in a watchful frame, till it go up to God that gave it. 4. Prayer helps exceedingly at this heart-watch, as it is mar∣vellously heart-affecting: In fer∣vent prayer, how does the soft∣ned heart melt in godly sorrow, (as snow before the Sun, or wax
by the fire?) mourning over the Lord and after him? how does the thirsting soul pant and breathe, and break with longings after the living God, as a thirsty land? how are the affections carried up towards heaven, in a pure flame of Divine life and love, ascending as pillars of per∣fumed smoke? And will not such unconceiveable Soul-stirrings & strugglings as these awaken the heart? Sure there is a mighty spirit of activity goes forth in this Saints-exercise, when performed in the power of the holy Spirit, which will prevent heart-be∣numming security; when a man of God wrastles with the All∣mighty in his might as a Gyant refreshed with Wine; what heart-raising and rowsing work must there needs be (think ye)? 'Tis too busie a time this, to sleep in, when an immortal soul
is working, as for life, with the ever-living God, about the things of Eternity. A double ground in the Text, why we should double our duty in Watching and Praying. First, Because we are exposed to temptation, if we do not Watch and Pray; For, 1. We provoke the Lord to tempt us, while we tempt him by neglect of these Gospel-Du∣ties, of his own appointment; as, 1. To lead us into temptation, when we will not follow the leading and guidance of his Ho∣ly Spirit and Word: 'Tis that which Jesus Christ, in tender∣nesse to our weak, wandring spi∣rits, would have daily upon our hearts in prayer, to beseech our
Father, not to lead us into tem∣ptation. 'Tis true, as the Spirit of truth testifies, that God cannot be tempt∣ed to evill, neither tempteth he any man. He is infinitely holy and righteous, and cannot tempt any to sin and unrighteousnesse: He is the chief good, and cannot lead any into any evil temptati∣on, or temptation to evil: And he is unchangeably and eternal∣ly holy, and cannot possibly be tempted to unholinesse: the just Lord will, can do, nothing that is unjust, no iniquity. Yet the Lord may be said in his own sense, to lead us into temptation, for himself hath said it. As, 1. By way of Probation. When he tryes us like gold i'th fire, as he did Job. When he leads us into the Wildernesse, to prove us, as he did Israel of old; when
we fall into the hands of God, as David and his Servants did:Jam. 1.2 And though we are to account it all joy when we fall into manifold temptati∣ons; for as the temptations and suf∣ferings of Christ abound in us,2 Cor. 1.5. so our consolations also will abound by Christ; 'tis his peculiar method (with which his secret ones are well acquainted) to bring good out of evill, and sweet out of bitter, yet it is upon the account of his sym∣pathy with us in sufferings, and sanctifying them to us, by keep∣ing up the spirituall exercise of watching and prayer, while we are exercised therewith; other∣wise, as afflictions are never joyous in themselves, so they will be ever grievous to those, who have grieved the Holy Spi∣rit; by laying aside their spiri∣tual watchfulnesse and prayer: Those sufferings must needes be∣full of vexation, and perplexitie,
which find us under presumpti∣on and securitie; for, First, what bitternesse will it be to the soul, when awakened in a day of adversity, that it slept and slumbred out it's dayes of prosperitie; that which was then a bed of ease to the flesh, will be now a bed of thorns to the Spirit. There cannot chuse but be much heart-aking, un∣der heart-awakening tryals, to all slumbring Virgins; and that is the pain of all paines, the sharpest sting in sufferings; sad thoughts of sinfull slumbrings will break ones sleep; false rests will fearfully disquiet us, when we find them out, or they us in, the day of calamity. Affliction will be a root of bitternesse bear∣ing gall and wormwood at such a time; oh what an heavie bur∣then has the carelesse neglect of watching and praying been, to
some slumbring Christians in our dayes, who have lived at ease in Zion, while she has been in pain travelling to be deliver∣ed? How have they mourned like Doves, and chattered as a Crane, or Swallow, for want of that Spi∣rit of grace and supplication, which they had so long restrai∣ned, and so much extinguished, under a spirituall Lethargie? how have their hearts been rea∣dy to dye within them, like Na∣bals, for want of life in, and love to, those holy duties, wherein sometimes they had been lively and full of affection? How will the hearts of all the slumbring Virgins smite them one day, when distresse shall come upon them, as sorrow upon a woman in travell? will they not then weep out their sleepy eyes, and sigh out their sluggish spirits, crying, Ah we fools, that had
a price in our hands, and no hearts to use it? We have lost many a good day, trifling out choyce breathing times, in the sight of the Sun; and now the night is come upon us, and we cannot work: Alas, alas, for those daies of the Son of Man;Job 29.2, 3. Oh that it were with us as in the moneths of old, when the candle of the Lord shined upon our heads, &c. What slothful servants have we been, hiding our Masters Talents in a napkin, when we should have ministred one to another,1 Pet. 4.10. as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God? And now the rust of them witnesses against us, as the worldlings gold and silver. We have shut our ears and hearts against the Lord and his good Word, and now the Word of the Lord is against us. We have slighted the sweet counsell and comforts of the holy Spirit,
and now we feel its sharp Con∣victions: We would not hear the checks of Conscience, and now we must hear its chidings. Oh the sting and the smart of a self-condemning Conseience, when it is once awakened out of self-pleasing, and self-easing se∣curity, by the scourging rod of the Almighty. Secondly, what Aversenesse and frowardnesse, will fill thy Spirit in sad houres, who hast sin∣fully slipt and slept out so many good ones? When thou feelest thy sufferings weightie, and thy shoulders weake; thy pressures great and thy patience small, thy body languishing, thy soul faint∣ing, thy faith failing; How will thy Spirit be distempered; thy peace disturbed, thy heart will be readie to fret against the Lord;Pro. 14.3. thou'l be angrie as Jonah, even to the death; to see death looking
thee in the face, when thou last looked for it, and the evill day, neerest, when thou puts it far∣thest from thee; And now thy slumbrings and wandrings will be set in order before thee, and thou hast neither set thy house or heart in order before the Lord; and now the Judge standeth at the door, to call thee to an account and thou hast not made up thy reckonings for many a day; thy time misspent, thy stock spent; thy experiences lost, thy evidence to seek; Oh how discontented will thy disappointed heart be at such a day? Thou hast long neglected the ruling of thy own spirit, and now 'twill be too unruly for thee, as a wild bull in a net; how apt wilt thou be to kick against the pricks (Ephraim-like) as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke. An heart not watcht over, will be much out of frame
for doing well, much more for suffering. When the weight of affliction falls upon a lazy, lame spirit; what haltings will be discovered, and uneaven car∣riage under the rod? 2. By way of Permission. As the Lord may be said to lead us into temptation by way of Pro∣bation, when he takes us into his own hand; so by way of Concession, when he takes off his own hand; and suffers Satan to put forth his hand against us. 'Tis true, the evil one is alwaies limited by the Holy One, that he cannot do his worst; or else he would play the devil indeed: he's under Divine restraint (and in a prison, as it were) when most at liberty; this strong man armed is reserved in chains, by a stronger then he; Yet his heart is set upon the servants of God,Job 1.8. Hebr. (as 'twas upon Job) with as much
ill will, as it can hold, (though through mercy, he cannot have his will on them) The roaring Lyon gapes with open mouth to swallow them up. How earnest∣ly did he desire to sift the Disci∣ples of Christ?Luk. 22.31. Gr. he was greedy of such a prey as this: and if the Lord did not put an hook in the nostrils of this Leviathan, what a piercing Serpent would he be? How ready was the evil spirit to offer his service,Isa. 27.1. to be a lying spirit in the mouth of the Pro∣phets? he would fain be de∣ceiving,1 King. 22.22. that he might be de∣stroying. Now if we neglect our spiritual Watch, we grieve the Spirit, and tempt him to leave us to the temptations of the evil spirit, who will be ever grieving and vexing our spirits, and doing us all the mischief he can, and 'tis much he can do with Gods leave: if the Lord
take away the hedge, this wild Boor will be in upon us, and root up all. 2. We tempt the Lord to tempt us, when we give over watching and praying, by lea∣ving us in temptation, as by leading us into it; and that's a very Sad Case. As, 1. By withdrawing him∣self and his holy Spirit from us, when we are under tryals: And this must needs be a dark time, when God covers us with a cloud in his anger, and covers himself as with a cloud too. What a terrible Eclipse will that be, when the light of his Counte∣nance is withheld, in a day of darknesse and gloominesse? This indeed is the burthen of all af∣flictions, and lyes heaviest upon honest hearts: This is plain to see in the severall perplexed ca∣ses and distressed conditions of
Job,Job 13.21. Psa. 88.14. Psa. 13.1. & 30.7. Heman, David, &c. under variety of afflictions and temp∣tations. The hiding of Gods face was the forest trouble, the saddest tryal; this struck deepest into their hearts, and made their faces gather palenesse: how were their spirits drunk up with the terrours of the Almighty? Now 'tis most righteous with the Lord, to leave us in a day of adversity, when we leave him in dayes of prosperity; to leave us at a losse in our straits, when we leave and lose him in liber∣ty. He will withdraw from us, when evill drawes near, if we have withdrawn and wandred from him, when he drew near to do us good: He will turn his back upon them in times of ca∣lamity, who have given him the back and not the face in times of tranquillity.
2.Psa. 81.11, 12. By delivering us up to our selves and our own spirits. When Gods people would have none of Him, He gave them up to their own hearts lusts; they would not own the Lord, and be his ser∣vants; and he leaves them to be slaves to their own lusts, lord∣ing it over them. Ah, when a people grow weary of God, have done with him as to Watching in prayer, and let him alone, coming seldom at him; hee'l be a stranger to them, and leave them alone, as he did Ephraim: Hee's joyned to Idols,Hos. 4.17, 18. let him alone, (sayes God) he will not joyn himself to the Lord, and the Lord will have nothing to do with him, but leave him to himself, and to his Idols; and now all goes ill with poor Ephraim: his drink is sowr, or is gone, (as in the Hebrew) all is gone, when God is gone; and
he commits whoredome conti∣nually; all sowres on his hands, and in his heart too. Ah, when we slight the Lord, and slumber in his sight; he will let us slip out of his hands, and then (as a bowl falling out of the hand, down a steep hill) we follow the Byasse of our own corrupt hearts, and run headlong without stop or stay Hell-ward. 'Tis not to say, How fearfully and shame∣fully the best of men will leave the Lord and lose themselves, when left to themselves? We have remarkable proofs of this in those precious servants of the Lord of old, David, Solomon, Pe∣ter, &c: they made themselves vile; yea even as beasts before him, when they were left to themselves? And we have many lamentable instances in our dayes, of such, who looked like the sheep coming up from the
washing, clean escaped from the pollutions of the world, yet have turned like the dogge to the vomit,2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. and as the sow that was washed to the wallowing in the mire; Would it ever have entred into their own hearts that they should ever have so fowlie defiled their gar∣ments, which seemed to have been washed so saire in the blood of the Lamb?2 King. 8.13. would they not have said (with Hazael) Are we as dogs, that we should do such things? Oh yes, when a people are deli∣vered up to themselves, they will be readie to say with those, (of whom the Lord complaines) We are delivered up to do all these abominations;Jer. 7.10. If we leave the Lord and his watch and work; we tempt him to leave us in temptation to our own hearts; and then that plague will be up∣on them,xod. 9.14. (which fell upon the heart of Pharoah) which was
worse to him then all the plagues of Egypt; and we shall even harden our selves against the Lord. 2. We tempt the Divell, that tempter, to tempt us, when we give over watching and praying; He watches our slumbrings, and lyes at catch for us, when he may take us napping; when we have a mind to fall asleepe upon a bed of carnal securitie, the De∣vil will make our bed for us, and lie down softly by us too: when we give over Gods work, we are out of his way; and lie sleeping in Satans walks, and that as drie Tinder to his fierie darts: And there come but a spark from Hell, and fall upon our hearts, it takes presently: when we put out the light and fall to sleep, we give him roome and time for his works of darknesse; he drives his wicked trade most and best
i'th dark;Job 24.14, 15. The eye of this Arch-thiefe waiteth for the twilight, when no eyes may see him, he looks at us most with his envious eyes, when our eyes are shut, and the sha∣dows of spiritual darknesse are upon us; and how easily may he steale away our hearts, and the heavenly treasure out of them, at such a time as David did Sauls speare from his bolster,1 Sam. 26.12. when a deep sleep was upon him. And indeed this thief in the night (to allude still to that place in Job) would rob us of all our Jewels, when a dead sleep is upon us, did not our faithfull keeper watch him, and watch over us: Oh what danger are we in every houre, to become a prey to this roaring Lyon, while we lie sleeping at his feet? the fowles of the ayr have the greatest ad∣vantage against us that may be, whilst we lie as silly doves,
heartlesse and spiritlesse before them. And is not this a very foule businesse, to set the Divel on work to do us mischief, who will hurt us and hinder us all he can, and that by neglecting our Masters businesse, who has done us good and no evill, all our dayes. 3. We tempt our own lusts to tempt us, when we lay aside our spiritual watch; we entice them to entice and allure us; And indeed here lies the great temptation within our own hearts,Jam. 1.14, 15. Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and entised, and sin when conceived bringeth forth death: The privy sore in the heart, the deadiy wound; the womb that con∣ceives lust, sin, death. Here the Devil layes his train ef powder, and were there no fire of lust there, he could never blow us
up; temptations without could take no hold, if there were no corruption within; Satan set up on Jesus Christ with varietie of temptations,Joh. 14.30. but could find no∣thing in him, and so could do nothing against him: The Prince of this world, was ever warring against the Prince of peace, but had no power against him, be∣cause he had no party within him. Nay the subtle Serpent with all his power and policie could not prevaile at all, no not, once against the weakest, simp∣lest Saint, if sin did not take his part. Tis the partie within be∣trayes us; Tis the worst enemy, that within; it opens the door to our enemies without, yea to the worst of them, or they could not get within us; Now when we are fallen into a dead sleep, and have lost the life of prayer; our lusts will swarme about us, as
flies about a dead carcase: Sinnes not watched over, will get head and heart whilst we indulge our selves saying, Soul, take thine ease; we pamper our sins and make provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof! Spiritu∣al watching and prayer will starve our lusts, ease out their very hearts, but carnal slum∣brings and sleepings feed them. While prayer is kept up in power, sin is kept down and o∣verpowered; if our sinnes do not stop our mouths, nor straiten our hearts in prayer; our prayers will cry them down, and stob them at heart, when our hearts are lift up powerfully in prayer; our heart-sinnes, as pride, passi∣on, unbeliefe, &c: will come down wonderfully (as the Ama∣lekites fell, while Moses lift up his hands) oh while we continue wrestling with God by fervent
prayer; we may wrestle with spirituall wickednesses in high pla∣ces, and that to victory; our souls shall tread down strength (to use Deborahs expression in her try∣umphant Song),Judg. 5.21. while they are lift up, and poured out in prayer, for the Help that is laid upon that One that is mighty. Where∣as, if our hands be let down, and our hearts fall, our corruptions will get up and carry it against us with a strong hand: if we be not watchful and prayerful, sin will grow exceeding sinful:Job 15. If we restrain prayer before God, our mouths will utter iniquity; (as Eliphaz said to Job) who seems to plead thus with him; How comest thou to be so distempered in spirit, so vain and distracted in speech; if prayer were not restrained? Fervent, constant prayer would bring the heart
into a good tune and temper, and keep it so. 4. When we neglect our Spi∣ritual Watch, we lie naked to temptations without, as to cor∣ruptions within; the creatures are full of snares, and we shall be catched in them at every turn, if a spirit of slumber be upon us. The love of the world is connatural to us, bred i'th bone, most suitable to flesh and blood; our hearts hang down∣ward, and move towards earth and earthly things, as a stone to the Center; and 'tis impossible to keep them up without watch∣ing and prayer. Indeed, while we keep close to God by faith in prayer, we keep him close to us; and then the world may not interpose, must not be closed with,1 Joh. 4.4. upon any terms; For grea∣ter is he that is in us, then he that
is in the world. And while we Watch and Pray, our spirituall weapons will be mighty through God, to bring down all the strong holds of the god of this world. Luther was one of the most watchfull spirits in prayer, (we read of) and he speaks of one of the highest experiences that we shall meet with; That he was never tempted to Covetous∣nesse; there was no fishing for his spirit with golden baits, which was carried so high above the world in Faith and Prayer. But alas, Christians now a∣dayes find the world a very great temptation, a world of tempta∣tions in it. How is the Moon got up to the heart; in this our age, that used to be under foot,Rev. 12.2. to such as are clothed with the Sun? Oh what hoarding up trea∣sure on earth, by such as seemed to be heires of Heaven, as if their
Heaven were upon earth, and their hearts too. How unbecoming is this to those that are born from above, to live beneath themselves: that ever so noble spirits of the blood-Royall, should be so embased; & precious Sons and Daughters of Zion, who were comparable to fine Gold, should (in this sense) become as earthen pitchers? How contrary is this to those heavenly principles of faith and love, which should carry us as up∣on Eagles wings above the world towards heaven? Oh where is the love of the Father, where there is so much love of the World? Have you ever tasted of the powers of the World to come, who are thus brought under the power of the Creature? What, shall the Children of the Kingdom look no further, live no higher then the Kingdoms of this World?
What, called out of the World, and at the Worlds call too? These things could never be, if watching and prayer had been kept up all this while, with life and power; 'Twere not possible the World should steale upon the hearts of Gods people thus, and steale them away too, were they not asleep: Now when prayer's down, and the World up, what a downfall will there bee? They fall into temptation and asnare, and into many hurtfull and foolish lusts, which drown men in perdition, Oh what a root of e∣vil springs up, where the World takes deep root; how do they pierce themselves thorough with ma∣ny sorrowes,1 Tim. 6 9, 10. and choak the pre∣cious seeds of grace with these thornes: and when the heart is overcharged with the inordinate love of this present World; This soul-benumming Lethargie of
carnal securitie will overspread it, that we shall not feele this sin within us, when it is even all over us; what sense can we have of our living by Sense, whiles Faith lies dead? The love of the World will grow insensibly up∣on us, if it can but lull us asleep in its Armes. Secondly, because we shall be indisposed to make any opposi∣tion, in an hour of temptation, if we do not Watch and Pray; our temptations will grow stronger, and we weaker in Spirit every day then other; they will be as Gyants, and we as Grashoppers, (to use the expression of the Spies). And alas, as we are so is our strength (as Gideon said of Je∣ther), at the best but weaknesse; and our spirituall enemies will gather up their strength to take the advantage of us, when and
where we are weakest; How ea∣sily may they make a prey of us, coming upon us vvhen vve are sore, as Simeon and Levi did up∣on the Males?Gen. 34.25. especially if vve consider. 10. That the Strength of Is∣rael has secretly vvithdravvn himself from his people, vvhile their hearts have been asleep,Num. 14 9. and novv their defence is departed from them, and they are as bread to the devouring mouth of the hungry Lyon, vvho never had a better stomack to them. Samp∣son,Judg. 16 19.20. vvho vvas so strong in the strength of God, vvas as vveak as another man, vvhen the Lord departed from him; the Phili∣stines may novv bind him as they please, put out his eyes, and make him grind it'h Prison∣house! Ah, since the Lord has turned his back upon a backslid∣ing generation; hovv are the
strong become as bow, and they that had the excellencie of dig∣nitie and strength are as unsta∣ble as the water; how misera∣bly are they swallowed up of temptations on every side? how easily lead captive by their cor∣ruptions at every turne; And though they shake themselves somtimes (as Sampson did) and think to resist them as at other times; alas, they cannot do it, for their strength is departed from them. 2. That the Lord hath left them to themselves, who have laid him aside and left off watch∣ing and prayer; Now what can such naked men do in an hour of Temptation, when they meet with the strong man armed? must they not needs be spirit∣lesse, like Saul in the day of di∣stresse, when he was left to his own Spirit,1 Sam. 28.20. and had no strength
in him? What a pittifull for∣lorn creature is that man whom God has given over, and given up to himself; even like a lamb in a large place,Hos. 4.16. as back-sliding Israel; what more destitute, and distressed, where no Shepherd, no flock? how will it wander and lose it self? The best of men in such a case are exposed to the worst of evills; when David a man after Gods own heart, was trusted but a while with his own heart, how shamfully it deceived him and defiled him? who would ever have thought that murthers and adulteries should have proceeded out of such a heart as his? When Solomon,Neh. 13 26. who was so beloved of his God, was given up to himself; how strangely was his heart changed within him, and turned from the Lord God of Israel, who had ap∣peared
to him twice, even to strange gods,1 King. 11.8. and strange wives. The wisest of men, when left to his own wisdom, appears as one of the fools in Israel, and whi∣ther does his shame go? And good Hezekiah,2 Chron. 32.31. when the Lord left him, to try him, to know all that was in his heart; what pride of heart does he discover; (though he had been so lately and so deeply humbled)? And though the Lord had newly emptied all worldly glory before his eyes;2 King. 20.13. Yet he could not keep his eyes and heart off of the house of his precious things, &c. but glories in shewing all the treasures were faund there: when he should have glorified God, and shewed forth his wonders, in bringing the Sun of his life back,Isa. 38. and the shadow upon the dyal of Ahaz, &c.
Yea blessed Peter, an holy Apo∣stle of Jesus Christ, when he trusted to his own strength, and boldly professed above the rate of the rest of the Disciples,Mat. 26 33, 35. say∣ing, Though all men shall be offended because of thee, yet will I never be offended; and though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee. When Christ trusts him with himself and his own strength, (but for a little season) how fow∣ly he shews his weaknesse, and shames himself; and very sin∣fully offends him more then they all, by being so shamefully of∣fended because of him; denying before them all, that he knew his Master, upon the word of a damsel that said, Thou wast with Jesus. And the Holy Ghost sets a brand of Cowardize upon this self-confiding Champion; lea∣ving this upon record to all Ages (to shake and shame all the
Lords people out of themselves), that when another Maid said, This fellow was with Jesus, he denyed with an oath,Ver. 71. I know not the man. Would any of the Disciples have ever believed such a thing as this of Peter? or he, of himself? that a cursed oath should have ever been found within his bles∣sed lips, and that to deny his Lord and Master with those lips that had so oft blessed him; that he should so desperately disown him with his mouth, whom he owned, honoured, and loved so dearly at his heart. Oh how have the mighty fal∣len, how have the mighty fal∣len! when they have been left to themselves, and have fallen into their own hands. Such remarkable examples as these taken into our serious considera∣tion, may happily (if the Lord strike in with them) awaken
some sleepy hearts from a pre∣sumptuous self-full security, to a religious watchfull jealousie; that they who think they stand, may take heed lest they fall; as certainly they shall, (though they seem to be pillars, as Peter did) if they stand upon their own leggs, and not upon his, that are as Pillars of Marble set upon sockets of fine gold.Cant. 5.15. Upon this double Account, that they are so exposed to Temptation, and so indisposed to Opposition, who do no Watch and Pray: Let me call for double diligence in the Name of the Lord, to this double Duty. First, Double your Watch; Oh watch, watch, 1. Over your own Hearts;Jer. 17.9. for they are most deceitfull, and
the Deceiver lyes most at catch there: the subtle Serpent he knowes where our guile lyes, which he would willingly make use of, to beguile us with. 'Tis his Commission, onely to bruise the heel;Gen. 3.15. but 'tis his covetous ambition to break into the heart. How he watches day and night, works without wearinesse, and windes about every way, to sur∣prize this Royall Fort of the King of Glory? if he carry that, he commands all, and will lead us captive at his will; if he can but get his head into our hearts, and keep his hand upon this great wheel, he has his hearts desire, and will turn all about with it. Oh therefore lay to heart that blessed Counsell of our great heart-keeper;Prov. 4.23. Keep thy heart above all keeping, (so the Hebrew has it) for out of it are the issues of life. 'Tis matter of
life and death, this; 'Tis as much as thy life is worth, to watch the heart well; and not to watch it, is death. The De∣vill knowes, if there be any good treasure within thee, it is laid up in thine heart; and he would fain have the key of this Cab∣binet, to rob thee of thy Jewels: If he can but corrupt this foun∣tain, all the streams will be fil∣thy, out of it will proceed the worst of Evils; when it becomes the worst part, which should be the best. The Father of spirits doubles his Charge upon our spirits; The Lord God of Israel saith, Take heed to your spirit,Mal. 2.15, 16. take heed to your spirit. Here the unclean spirits muster up their Forces, and therefore here must our main Guard be; Watch but the heart so, as to keep him out there, and put the Devil out of
heart, hee'l despair of you. 2. Watch the good Spirit of God, in all its motions, impres∣sions, convictions, allurings, comfortings, &c. as ever you would escape the temptations and delusions of the evil spirit: and therefore, First, Watch the good Spirit, to welcome him; make much of his sweet breathings, ther's much life and love in them. If the Spirit come to Convince you, saying, (as Nathan did to David) Thou art the man; say, Speak Lord, for thy servant heareth. Be ready to hear of that ear, though he speak such things as make it tingle, as you love the peace of your own spirits. If he come as a Spirit of glory and power to subdue your iniquities, to cut off your right hand, &c. with his two edged sword: Oh say, Let him go on and prosper,
till he have slain his thousands, &c: and made all his enemies become his footstool; If he come to coast as a Dove upon you, to meeken and sweeten your Spi∣rits; Oh put forth your hands to take him in (as Noah did the Dove with the Olive-leafe); make both much of, and set much by the good Spirit and Word of God, and the evill Spirit will not be able to do you much hurt. Oh prize the gracious manudu∣ctions of this faithfull guide at an high rate, and be as glad of his heavenly conduct, as the wise men were to see the starre that pointed out Christ to them,Math. 2.10. they rejoyced with exceeding great joy; Lie as even as you can under his celestial influences, and sweet distillings of the precious dews of grace and peace; At∣tend his glorious ministration all along, let him have his whole
will upon you, and do his work wholly and fully within you, say him not Nay in any thing; & he will work mightily within you, and witnesse manifestly to you. 2. Watch the workings and witnessings of the Holy Spirit, so as you may not hinder him, when he comes to help you, nor grieve him, when he comes to com∣fort you, take heed of tempting him, who only can help you a∣gainst the Tempter, oh shut not out his glorious light for all the glory of the World; imprison not any of his precious truths for all the specious libertyes under the Sun; resist not the stirring po∣wer of his grace upon you, when hee's shaking the powers of dark∣nesse within you; refuse not the free and familiar tenders of his heart-renewing and reviving love, for thousands of Gold and
Silver; Lose not willingly one syllable of the secret whisper∣ings of this messenger of peace, lest he with draw his light, love, power, and peace, and leave you to the power of Satan, and he lead you into Prison, and keep you in darknesse; Alas, alas, we have given the greatest occasion and advantage, to spi∣ritual wickednesse in high places to tempt, vex, disturb and di∣vide us; by tempting, vexing, and quenching the Holy Spirit; as ever any in the World have done; And; are not now the sha∣dowes of the evening upon us, for slighting his goings forth as the morning? How strangely have the lying Spirits deceived us; since the Spirit of truth has been rejected, and the truths of the Spirit? What a thick, black, dark hour of temptation is come upon us since we have re∣fused
the cleare counsel and pure comforts of the Holy-Ghost, in the day of his gracious visitati∣on; what strong delusions and strange declinings to the right hand or the left, since we have forsaken the guide of our spirits? 3. Watch your spiritual ene∣mies; they watch us,Luk. 4.13. as Satan did Christ; when the Tempter is gone, and his temptation, seemes to be quite over, he does but watch another season, and therefore we must watch in sea∣son and out of season; As Nehe∣miah and the people of God with him, did with Sanballat and the enemies of God,Neh. 4.7.8.9. they prayed and set a watch day and night; the enemie was very wroth, and they were very watchfull; a sword in one hand, when at work with the other: So should we at this day; watch at the Lords work; Watch and Pray,
watch and heare, watch and speak, &c: 'Tis very seasona∣ble that counsell of the mightie Counsellour? Take heed no man deceive you, for many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ & deceive many. Oh how much are we concerned in that blessed caution, upon whom the ends of the World are come?Math. 24.4, 5, 11, 24, 25. How affectionate and importu∣nate was Paul the aged and ex∣perienced, in warning the peo∣ple night and day, and that with teares to beware of such as should seeke to withdraw them from the Gospel of Christ. Do not spiritual dangers multiply upon us every day, whiles we are under a Spirit of slumbring se∣curitie from our soul-enemies, and that on every side; Oh what need of the whole Armour of God, on the right hand and on the left; what need of a diligent
spiritual watch, over our heads and hearts, words and wayes, teachings and hearings! Oh ga∣ther up your spiritual forces e∣very day, and call in auxiliaries from Heaven, and follow the Captain of your salvation, Watching and Praying (as the armour-bearer did Jonathan climbing upon heads and feet) contend eamestly for the faith which was once given to the Saints; and as you're fighting the good fight of faith, be ever look∣ing up to Jesus,1 Pet. 1.5. and you shall be kept as in a Garrison (so the word imports) by his power, through faith unto salvation. 4. Watch over, and for one another, for good, in an evil time; 'tis very seasonable to be knock∣ing at one anothers doores, and jogging at each others elbowes in the Spirit of meeknesse, to keep as many awake as you can, in
this slumbring time, through the good hand of God upon you; and surely they, whose hearts are a∣wakened in such a day as this, by the Lords speaking from heaven to them, cannot keep silence, but must be speaking to their brethren in the name of the Lord saying, awake, awake; As our hearts should dwell much upon awakening meditations, so our mouths should be filled with a∣wakening salutations and exhor∣tations, when we meet with the servants of Christ (as it was with the lively Christians in the primitive times) saying behold he comes like a thief; and, The Judge standeth at the door, and the like: When so many watch one anothers haltings; let us watch to be helpers of one ano∣thers faith and joy, by provok∣ing one another to Watching and Prayer; when many fellow-servants
are smiting one another with words of violence and veru∣lency, let us smite one another with words of truth & soberness; and the deeper they pierce the heart in the Spirit of Love, the bet∣ter could we hit one another o'th heart-vein, 'twould be a mercy: Oh that the righteous would thus smite one another, with gracious words of reproof, to restore one another, and all in much mutual soul-love what a kindness would this be? Such precious oyntments would not break the head but mollifie and meeken the heart: Such wounds would be welcome from the hand of a friend. Alas, we complain every where of the Saints slumbring, wandring, and wantonnesse; 'twere better we turned our complaints inward, and left them upon our selves, that we do not stir up one another to Watching and Prayer; we do but bear one another as bur∣thens
upon our spirits, when we should beare one anothers bur∣thens, and help at a dead lift, as with one shoulder; we see poore Christians in a dead sleep on e∣very hand, and we lie dying by them, but who calls upon them, to be watchfull, and strengthen the things that are readie to die?Rev. 3.2. How many have our eyes beheld lying as a man asleep upon the top of a Mast, and floods of temp∣tation under them too,prov. 7.23.34. readie to swallow them up; but how few have we laboured to awaken to this day?2 Sam. 16.17. may we not reflect upon our selves in the words of Absalom to Hushai: Is this our kindnesse to our friends? Is this nothing to you, all ye that passe by, do you not take notice how many foolish Virgins lie slum-bring and languishing upon beds of sensualitie and securitie, and the house readie to be set on fire
over their heads; and do you take no care to awaken them; would it not pitty your very heart; to see the flames seize up∣on them, while they are asleep? How long has the keeper of Is∣rael watched over them, and kept them as the apple of his eye, notwithstanding all their slum∣brings and wandrings; and does he not expect (think you) that you should be your brethrens keeper for his sake, and cry unto them in all haste to prepare to meet him, least he withdraw the wing of his protection from them, and leave them naked; if you see your brethren sleeping, starving, dying, and shut up the bowels of your compassions from them in such a case, how dwels the love of God in you? And if you say, 'tis not in mans power to awaken anothers heart, who cannot awaken his own; can a
man raise the dead? Tis true, the low voyce of a weak man can never make those hearts heare, which can sleep under the loud thundrings of Heaven; why but can you weep over them, as the Jewes did over Lazarus in his grave? yea can feelingly sigh o∣ver them, saying, Can these drie bones live? Who shall roul a∣way the stone, and open their graves; why he that is the re∣surrection and the life, can a∣waken them out of the deepest sleep, and quicken them with a word of his mouth; If Jesus will but groan in Spirit with you, and say, awake, arise, come forth, the dead shall heare his voyce and live. You cannot lift up their sleepie hearts, no alas, they are too heavie for you; but cannot you lift up a prayer for them? If any man see his bro∣ther sin a sin not unto death, he
shall ask,1 Ioh. 5.16. and he shall give him life; what high encouragement is here to praying-souls to lift up their voice on high, for such as are sinning and sleeping in sin al∣most to death; oh then if the Spirit of prayer were raised a∣gain from the dead (as one may say) what blessed hopes would there be of a spiritual resurrecti∣on, to many poor hearts, that are even dead and buried in the grave of securitie. Secondly double your duty of Prayer; Pray, Pray. 1. For a plentifull and powerful effusion of the Holy Spirit to coun∣sel & comfort our foolish faint∣ing Spirit in this hour of tempta∣tion; Tis sad to behold, since we have caused the good Spirit to withdraw his gracious influences how the glory is departed in a great measure from Churches,
ordinances, communions, &c: in most places; may we not sadly sigh out that heart-breaking word Ichabob, and say, Where is the glory; how many choyse Gardens of the Saints are wi∣thered, since the Lord has with∣held the spiritual dewes of Hea∣ven? How thin and lean is Ja∣cob become, and waxen pale, since a famine of the Spirit has been amongst us? How spirit∣lesse, faithlesse, heartlesse, fruit∣lesse, lovelesse are most Christi∣ans grown, since we have slum∣bred and sinn'd away, the spirit of faith, life, love, power &c: How is the Gold become dimme the fine Gold changed, now he that has the seven Spirits is turn∣ed aside from the Golden Can∣dlesticks? Oh it is high time then, to begge as for life, that the Spirit would come down as floods upon the drie ground, that
the Churches may be as watred Gardens, and the Saints may grow up as willowes by the wa∣ter courses; oh let all the awa∣kened Servants of Christ, cry as with one heart and mouth,Cant. 4.16. A∣wake O North-wind, and come thou South, blow upon the Gar∣dens, that the spices thereof may flow out; that our beloved may come into his Garden, and eate his pleasant fruits; oh when, when shall a precious box of oyntments be broken over us, to fill our hearts with its savour? Oh when will the spirit come down amongst us as a refiners fire or fullers sope,Mal. 3.3 4. to purifie us as Gold and Silver, that we may offer up pure offerings of righte∣ousnesse, which may be pleasant to the Lord, as in the dayes of old? Oh that we could wait in the Spirit (as old Simeon did for the consolation of Israel) for that
power from on high, that so strengthens weak hearts & hands that the feeble may be as David; for such an anointing with fresh oyle, as may cause us to move swiftly and sweetly after Jesus Christ? And we have many precious cords of love let down to pull at, for this gracious Gospel-pro∣mise;Joh. 14. & 15 16 As the special promise of the Father of mercies to send the comforter, oft repeated for our better assurance; and he is faith∣full that hath promised; he will not deny his people long, nor alwaies, for he cannot de∣ny himself. And the effectual prayer of our Lord Jesus, who never prayes amisse, but is heard alwaies of his Father; This was that sweetest myrrhe which dropt from the lips of Christ, as he was ascending up to Hea∣ven
his greatest last Testament-promise of a double portion of his Spirit: Now, is it so much upon the Lords heart to bestow this peculiar blessing, and should it not be much upon our heart to aske it; especially being that glorious ministration, which is to continue, for the support, supply, and solace of the Saints, till the appearance of Jesus Christ, without which no out∣ward administration can be effe∣ctuall. 2. Oh Pray,Psa. 2.6.8. Pray, that Jeho∣vah would set his King upon his holy hill of Zion, that the Heathen may be his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth his possession: that the government may be upon his shoulder,Isa. 9.6. who is clothed with a vesture dipt in blood,Rev. 19.13.16.14. and hath on his thigh a Name written, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; that
all things may be opened and shut by the Key of David.Isa. 2.11, 17. The Lord is arising to shake terribly the Earth, the loftinesse of man must be bowed down, and the haughtinesse of men made low, that the Lord alone may be exalted in his day. Oh that the Sun of righteousnesse were at this height once, there would be a glorious Sun-shine day indeed. The God of heaven and earth has promised,Heb. 12 26, 27, 28. he will once more shake heaven and earth, to bring in that Kingdom that cannot be shaken, and the things that shall remain; and Heaven and Earth shall passe away, rather then one tittle of his good promise shall fall to the ground. The Fathers heart is all upon his be∣loved Son, in whom his Soul delighteth, to exalt Him highly,Phil. 2.9. give Him a Name above every Name. And shall not the hearts of his Children go in with him,
and work strongly that way? It was for their sakes he humbled himself so low, even to the death of the Crosse. Oh how should their hearts break with longings, that he may be extolled, and be very high, crowned with maje∣sty and glory? Why then let all the Lords Remembrancers make mention of this good thing promised,Jer. 33.14. (of which he loves to be put in remembrance) before him night and day, that Jesus Christ may take to him∣self his great power and reign. On when shall the sounding of the seventh Angel be heard, as the great voyces in Heaven, all the world over, saying; The Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdomes of our Lord and of his Christ,Rev. 11.15. and he shall reign for ever and ever.Cant. 3.10. Oh that King So∣lomon would send his Chariot, that is paved with love, for the
Sonnes and Daughters of Zion, that they may enter with joy and gladnesse into the Kings Palace; how would their spirits revive within them? and they would say, It is enough. 3. Improve the Spirit of grace to the utmost; for the chaining up the unclean spirit. Oh try what power you have with the Father of Lights, to set his power on work to shake the powers of darknesse. If Fervent Prayer, lift up by the hand of faith, bind Gods hand, and put him to say, Let me alone; will it not over∣come him, to bind up Satan, and to bruise him under the feet of his Saints shortly. The Devill is come down with great wrath, because he knoweth he hath but a short time. He followes his Kingdom with greatest violence towards its period; hee's hot upon't, throwing with fury his
fiery darts round about. The Adder's poyson is boyling up to the height. This enemy is com∣ming upon us like a flood: Oh 'tis high time to set upon the gates of Heaven with an humble and ho∣ly violence, knocking day and night, till the holy Spirit come down with prayer, and lift up a Standard against him. The old Serpent has now above 5000. years experience upon his back; hee's now master indeed of his black Art. Oh what multifariety and Variety in his methods? what Subtletie and secrecy in his snares? how de∣structive and obstructive are his devices and depths? Oh when will the Angel come down from Heaven with that great chain, and lay hold on the Dragon and bind him?Rev. 20.1, 2, 3. Ah, what a world of mischief will he do, if he be let loose awhile? For now this
Prince of darknesse transforms himself into an Angel of light, to bring in the greatest dark∣nesse; and the Devil in white, or the white Devil, is most dange∣rous and deceitful; now, like the adulterer mentioned Job 24.15. he disguiseth himself, or sets his face in secret, (so the Original) that he may beguile and defile us, and we never know it; and be most and best at his wicked work, when least in sight. He has put on a vizard of profession, and now playes the thief in grain, stealing away the power and heart of pure Religion. He has oyl in his mouth, and truth in his tongue; but warre and a lie in his heart. And how many are betrayed with his flat∣tering kisses, killed with his false kindnesse, and by swallow∣ing down his sugred, poysonous pills greedily? How many are
taken with the fine hair of the Locusts that ascend out of the bottomlesse pit,Rev. 9.8, 10, who sting them with their tailes as Scorpions. Oh then if ever you pitied poor silly soules, laden with sin, and led Captive by Satan; now pity and pray for them much more: Oh cry out (as the be∣trothed Damsel fearing ravish∣ment) to the Captain of your Salvation, to lead Captivity Cap∣tive, to rescue his darlings from the Lions, and to shorten this hour of temptation. 4. Oh Pray, Pray, for a glori∣ous spiritual resurrection of the hearts and lives of the Saints, after so great a death has past upon them; that times of re∣newing and reviving may come from the presence of the Lord, to the decaying and desponding Spirits of his people; Oh what a blessed, beautifull sight,
would such an heavenly Spring bee,Can. 2.11.12. c. 7.12.13. after this heart-withering winter season? Would the flowers of the spouses Garden flourish once, the Pome-granats bud forth, and the tender grape send forth a good smell: then would the sing∣ing of birds, and the voyce of the turtle be heard in our land, and we might chearfully, get up early to the Vineyards. Oh be earnest with the Father of Spirits to send down a speciall anointing from on high, for the new-spiriting of his people, for the work of their generation; A common Spirit will not carry them thorough special service; no, it must be that other Spirit that Caleb had; or they'l never follow the Lord, fully; The Sonnes and Daughters of Zion must be awaked, to put on beau∣tifull garments, and shake them∣selves from the dust, as they
that are redeemed from the earth, and from men, as ever they would appeare in a good Gospel-posture to follow the Lamb, witherfoever he goeth; they must be putting on that new Man, which after God, is created in righteousnesse and true holinesse, and be renewed in the Spirit of their minds, or they'l have no heart, to think of the New Heaven and new Earth, wherein righteousnesse shall dwell. That work which the Lord is carrying on in the world, is high and heavenly, much above the world. A low-spiri∣ted & earthly-minded Generation can never reach it, their poor flat spirits must needs shrink from it, or sinck under it, at one time or other. Oh they had need of gracious, excellent spi∣rits, changing from glory to glory, by the Spirit of glory
resting on them; who looke to keep pace or hold any considera∣ble, comfortable corresponden∣cy and compliance, with those glorious Works which the Lord will bring forth in the latter dayes, who is Wonderfull in Coun∣sell, and excellent in Working. Why then, 5. let us look up∣on it as one main work of the day, to set saith on work at the promises by prayer, for Judges as at the first, and Counsellours as at the beginning; men of choise spirits answerable to Je∣thro's choyce: able men,Exo. 18.21. fearing God, men of truth, hating cove∣tousnesse; And while I am stirring you up, to make suppli∣cations to the Lord our righte∣ousnesse, that he would graci∣ously vouch-safe, a peculiar unction and qualification, to such as are in authoritie; let me set before your eyes, one of the first
and fairest patterns, deserving to be set in letters of Gold, and en∣graven upon our hearts, as with the point of a Diamond; the purest Primitive mould of Mer∣cy and Justice, sweetly meeting together in the righteous breast of Job, and striving (as it were) for super-eminency and victory: As for righteousnesse; he clothed himself with it;Job. 29.11.12. and judgment was to him as a diadem; he brake the Jawes of the oppressors, and pluckt the spoile out of his teeth; and deli∣vered the poor that cryed, and the Fatherlesse, and him that had none to help him. As for mercy, his condescention and compassion is very remarkable; when he sate chief, and dwelt as a King in the Army; hee was as one that comforteth the mourners; A Father to the Poor and Fatherlesse; eyes to the blind, and feet to the tame, who caused the heart of the
widdow to sing, and the blessing of such as were readie to perish came upon him; Oh that Jesus Christ, that blessed and only potentate, would make all our Governours and Magistrates willing in the day of his power, to kisse the Son, in humble sub∣jection & heartie affection to his righteous Scepter; and to lay down both sword and Scepter at his feet (as the Elders did with their Crownes): Oh that there were in them such an heart; as to say with the inhabitants of Ju∣dah, in their hearts? The inhabi∣tants of Jerusalem shall be our strength, in the Lord of Hosts their God. That they may be as nursing Fathers to the Saints, the Children of the most high, yea the least of Christs bretheren; accounting it their greatest glory and praise, to promote the glory of the King immortal and eternal, the only
wise God; to be a praise to those that doe well, and a terrour to evil doers, putting sinners to shame: oh that the Rock of Israel that spake it, would make it good; That they that rule over men, must be just,2 Sam. 23.3.4, ruling in the feare of God: And they shall be as the light of the morning, when the Sun ariseth, e∣ven a morning without Clouds, as the tender grasse springing out of the earth, by cleare shining after rain. Why let us open our hearts and mouths wide (by the help of the Spirit) for such a blessing, as thus waited for Job, even as for the latter rain. And spread those good old pro∣mises before the Lord, which are as fresh upon his heart as ever, to renew them in these latter daies; That Saviours shall come upon Mount-Zion, to judge the mount of Esau, and the Kingdom shall be the
Lords;Obad. v. 21. That he will raise up Carpen∣ters to break the horns, that scatter Judah,Zech. 1.20.21. so that no man can lift up his head; That he will put that ho∣nour upon his Saints, To execute the Judgment that is written,Psal. 149.6.9. with a two-edged sword in their hands, and the high praises of God in their mouthes. That the faithful chosen and true, clothed in fine and white linnen, shall give blood to drink,Rev, 18.6.14. to the woman, which is drunken with the blood of the Saints, and the Martyrs of Jesus, and shall destroy that great City which reigneth over the Kings of the Earth; and shall overcome all his and their enemies in the blood of the Lamb; for he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings. Oh then let the prayers of all the Saints meet upon the golden Al∣tar,Rev. 8.3.4. that the smoke of the incense may ascend up before God day and night; and let them cry with a loud voyce, saying, How long,
O Lord, holy and true, &c? Lastly, Pray, pray, for the fulnesse of the blessing of the Go∣spel of Christ, upon all pure Evangelicall administrations;Rev. 1.13.16. That Jesus Christ would walk in the midst of the golden Candlesticks; hold the stars in his right hand, that the golden pipes may empty the golden oyl out of themselves from the Olive tree;Zech. 4.11.12. and his servants be anointed with the oyl of gladnesse,Jer. 3.15. who desire to keep the Commandments of God, and the testimony of Jesus. And that he would send Pastours according to his own heart, that may feed the people with know∣ledge and understanding; able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spi∣rit; and send them forth in the power and spirit of Elijah, to turn many to the Lord.Joh. 10.3, 4, 9. And that the good Shepherd would
call his own sheep by name, lead them out and go before them; that they may know his voyce, and follow him, and go in and out and find pasture. That his little flock receiving the Gospel not in word onely, but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost,1 Thess. 1.5. and in much assu∣rance; may have that glorious Character of the Church of Phi∣ladelphia, as a Crown of twelve Stars upon their heads; that they have kept the Word of his patience, and have not denyed his Name;Rev. 3.8.10. who will keep them in this hour of Temptation. FINIS.
