t2409b 99899247 152749
A TRUE ACCOUNT, Set up out the informations, in∣tercepted Letters, and others authentiq Instruments, concerning the horrid Conspiracy, against the Life of his Sacred Majesty, WILLIAM the III. King of England, Scotland, France & Yreland, &c. set∣ting forth by whom it was contrived, how it was to bee carryed on, & the manner of its Discovery, Trial, Sentence, and Execution. Printed ad the HAGHE, By JACOBUS SCHELTUS, Ordinary Printer of the Kings Majesty. 1692.
A TRUE ACCOUNT, Set up out the informations, intercepted Letters, and others authentiqs Instruments, concerning the horrid Conspi∣racy, against the Life of his Sacred Majesty WILLIAM the III. King of England, Scotland, France & Yreland, &c. set∣ting forth by whom it was contrivid, how it was to bee car∣ryedon, & the manner of its Discouvery, Trial, Sentence, and Execution. SOme of the Ministers in the highest Employments, & of the greatest credit in the French Court, having formed a Designe to assas∣sinate His Maj. of Great Britaine, they made choiçe of one Bartholomew de Liniere, Knight, Sieur de Grandvall, as their instrument to manage the enterpri∣ze, to find out Persons fitt to bee employed in it, to engage them by promises of great rewards, as also to bee ayding & assi∣sting in his owne person. The said Grandvall being informed that one Anthony Du Mont had been already engaged in this designe, in the life time of the late Marquis of Louvois, hee proposed it to him again, to Execute the same, by order of the Marquis of Barbesieux & some others, wher upon severall Projects were drawn up, sever∣all petitions deliver'd, and many Conferences were held, and at last the Resolution was taken to bring it to effect the last Cam∣pagne 1691. But the providence of God having disappointed them, yet not withstanding they did not lett fall the prosecution of their horrid Designe. But Grandvall was employed to write frequently to Du Mont (who was retired to Hanover) to stirr him up to another attempt this Campagne, which at last they agreed upon. One Leefdale coming to Paris about that time, Grandvall
making an acquaintance with him, discoverd to him the said de∣signe, which Leefdale shewed a willingnes to bee concernd in. But soone after gave notice of it by Letters to his Relations in Holland, that they might inform his Majesty. And the like Disco∣very was made by Du Mont to his Highness the Duke of Cell, who acquainted his Maj. with it, about the same time, that hee re∣ceived the other account. In the mean time Grandvall having appointed Du Mont a rendezvous at Uden, in the country of Ravesteyn, in order to speak with him and Leefdale, to communicate him the mesures, taken about the designe, and afterwards to goe to the execution. Hee sett out from Paris, in company with Leefdale, passing through Bruxells, where hee communicated his Designe to one John d'Amours, who was formerly a Domestick Servant to Leefdales Father, from thence they went to Antwerp, & so to Eyndhoven, where Grandval was seized & carryed to Boisle Duc. His Maj. directing the examination to bee taken there, Leef∣dale was first examin'd, who declared with great Exactnes all the circumstances of the Designe, but it is not necessary to mention more of them here, then that Grandvall told him, the King of Great Britaine was look'd upon as the onely obstacle to the French Kings Designs. That Grandvall had sent to Du Mont last Winter above 200. Pistoles to keep him firme to the business. That whilst they were at Mons, a report being spread of some disorders in Schotland, which would oblige his Maj. to cross the sea again, Grandvall fearing it might happen before hee could Execute his Designe, spoke to Leefdale in these words, Dear Friend, wee are like to loose our Fortunes, I beg of you, that wee may go away immediately. John d'Amours being next Examind, deposed that Grandvall told him att Bruxells, he had a Great business to do, which had miscarryed the last year. And they two falling into a discourse
about his Maj., John d'Amours asked Grandvall, if hee had any thing to say to the King, yes, answerd hee, to break his neck. John d'Amours representing to him the difficultys that might attend such an attempt, Grandval replyed, I have gi∣ven my word to Monsr Barbesieux, & I'le do it. D'Amours adds further that going one day with Grandval & Leefdale by the Jesuits Church att Bruxells; Grandvall said, lett Us go in, & say a Pater noster or two, that God would bles our undertaking, and accordingly, they went into the Church Du Mont having been Examined since, has owned the fact in all its circumstances, adding severall other particulars (viʐt.) that Madame Maintenon was acquainted with the Designe, and that Grandvall in one of his Letters send to him, used this ex∣pression, that hee would accommodate the matter by the means of Madame Maintenon. That Grandvall told him, the busi∣ness succeeding, hee (speaking of him selfs) should have an ample recompense, even to bee a Duke. That whilst hee was at Hanavor, hee imparted the Designe to Monsr. Bidal (alias Hasfelt) who was at that time the French Kings Minister in that Court, that hee shewd to the said Monsr. Bidall all the Letters, hee writt to Monsr. Barbesieux & Grandvall, as also the answers hee received from them, that the said Bidall approved the Designe, saying it would bee a very good business, if it could bee brougt to passe; and that Biddall lent him 50 Crowns at Hanover. Du Mont adds further, that hee was intimately acquainted with one Muller an Agent for Bidall, that the said Muller told him as a great Secret, that Bidall had sent him several times to Holland with dispatches, that came from France, for Monsr. Moreau, Envoy to the King of Poland; That hee always gave those Packetts, in to Mr. Moreaus owne hand, & Monsr. Mo∣reau gave him the answers to them in like manner, and that thus by the help of Monsr. Bidall & Monsr. Moreau, the Court of France manag'd their choiçest correspondence in Holland.
At last Grandval was examind who perceiving that to matter was discover'd, and that his owne Letters could bee produced to convict him, he Ingenuously confessed all the circumstances of the Designe, as they are particularized in the Sentence. After which Grandvall being brought to the Army, hee was putt upon his tryall before a Grand Court Martiall consisting of Generall Officiers, wher hee appear'd severall times, together with the Wittnesses above mention'd, who not onely persisted in what they had already deposed, but added many other particulars and circumstances, of which ther were very few, that Grandval did not agree to, and that freely, without putting him upon, or so much as naming the Rack to him, either before, or after Sentence. Grandvall during his Imprisonnement drew up two petitions to bee presented to his Majesty, all written with his owne hand, in which hee says, that as to the before mention'd Designe, hee acted in it, but in obedience to the ordres hee had received from Monsr. Barbesieux & Monsr. Chanlais, that du Mont was guilty, that Leefdale was guilty, & that hee (Grandvall) was guilty, since every one that conspires against a Cowned Head, is worthy of death, acknowledging his owne fault. The Judges after this having mett severall times, at last gave their Sentence the 11 of August, in persuance of which Sentence Grandvall being acqainted that he was to dye the 13 of August. He did give all the marks of a true repentance of his crimes, and the same morning before he went to execution he writt in the presence of the Fiscal, the Ministers and two other Persons this following Letter. From the Camp at Hall 13 August 1692. Madam, I Pray you to goo to the Arch Bishop of Rheims, with Monsr. Tourduil, and to let the said Arch Bishop know that it kosts
me my life, for haveing obeyd the orders of Monsieur de Barbe∣sieux, which is the favour desired of you by. Your Servant, DE GRANDVALL. Speak to the Marquis d'Arsy, that he take care y be prayd for. To Madam Juré, in the Trenelle Street, over against the Street of the two Crowns, near the Hotell of Soissons, Att Paris. Upon the occasion of this Letter it wil not be improper, to take notice of a passage that happened some dayes before Grand∣vals condemnation vitz:; one discoursing with the Chevallier Grandvall in Prison, and observing he sought to justify himselfe upon the orders he had received from the Marquis of Barbesieux, he told him, tho that was in itselfe a very weak excuse for being en∣gaged in so base an action, yet still it might prove so much the wor∣se, as that it was like enough, Monsieur Barbesieux would disow∣ne that he gave any such orders, or that he was any way concern'd with him in a Business of this nature: to which Grandvall replyed, let him deny what he pleases; yet if I were put upon it, I would make it appear very plaine, for I have an original Paper under Monsieur Barbesieux owne hand, which I have lodged whith a Friend of mine, who wil not part with it, to anyone but my selfe and nobody else knows, with whom I have entrusted it. About el∣leven of the clock in the morningh was the said Grandval drawn on a hedge to the place of execution, where the Sentence was read, and the prayer done in the Frensch Tongue, which he liked to hear very earnstly, and afterwards did the executors their work, in order to the Sentence. God bless King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
SENTENCE Of the CHEVALLIER the GRANDVAL. WHereas Bartholomew de Liniere, Knight, Sieur de Grandvall, Borne at Liniere in Picardy, aged about 43 years, & now a prison∣ner, hath confessed before the Grand Court Mar∣tiall without any constraints by pain or being in irons. And it further appearing to the said Court Martiall, that the late Marquis de Louvois in his Lifeti∣me Secretary of State to the French King in the year 1691 enter'd into an agreement with one Anthony du Mont, about the mur∣ther of his Majesty William the III. King of Great Britaine, &c. And that the said du Mont had framed a project setting forth in wat manner that designe might bee executed. That hee delivered the said project, to the said Marquis of Louvois. That the Pri∣soner some time before the Marquis of Louvois death, asking his leave to go some where else, was order'd by the said Marquis not to go away, for that hee had some business of consequence to em∣ploy him in, which the prisoner supposes to have some relation to the said Design, but the Marquis of Louvois dying some time af∣ter, ther was no further progress then made in the said Designe. That the Marquis of Barbesieux son to the said Marquis of Lou∣vois, as also Secretary of State to the French King having five days after his Fathers death, found the said project together with a warrant for 30 Pistoles to bee payd to the said du Mont among his Fathers Papers, the said Designe was revived again, & the 30 Pistoles were payd accodingly; that the Prisoner contracted an acquaintance with du Mont at Monsieur Rebenacs House, where Monsieur Paparel, Pay-master General to the French
Kings Armyes, saying one day to Monsieur Rebenac (the Priso∣ner being present) that if they had a mind to seize the King of Eng∣land, du Mont would bee a fitt Person for it, du Mont replyed with execrations, that hee would carry of his Majesty alive, or dead, as hee had promised to Monsieur de Louvois. That du Mont having delivred the same, or the like project to Monsieur de Barbesieux, the Prisoner to promote the said Designe had se∣veral conferences with Monsieur Barbesieux & Monsieur Paparel, in one of which, Monsieur Barbesieux told the Prisoner, that hee suspected, his Father was poyson'd, by order of the P. of Orange (meaning his present Majesty of Great Britaine) and ther∣fore hee would be reveng'd on him. That Monsr. Barbesieux told the Prisoner in another conference, that hee should give du Mont notice, that his Majesty of Great Britaine wore a Coat of Maile, which the prisoner acquainting du Mont with, hee ans∣werd ther upon, it is no matter, I'le kill him for all that. That Barbesieux had said further, hee would not speak himself with du Mont, fearing hee might bee taken Prisoner, and if hee should happen then to name him, it might make a great breach in his fortune. That the Prisoner was engaged wit one Parker a Colonel belonging to the late King James, to put the said Designe in execu∣tion, and that Parker had thold him, hee had formed the said De∣sign with the late Marquis of Louvois. That at last the Prisoner with the said Barbesieux, Paparel, Parker & du Mont agreed upon the manner of executing the said designe: viʐt: that the Prisoner & Parker should meet att the Grand Guard of the Duke of Lux∣embourgs Army, where they were to have 1500. Horse, that Du Mont should go to the King of Englands Army, & watch the time, when his Majesty went to visitt the Grand Guard, and att the same time hee was to shoot His Majesty; that the Prisoner & Parker with 1500. Horse were to rescue & bring him of, the said Du Mont geving timely notice to the Prisoner of the Inten∣ded Execution. That Monsr. Barbesieux giving the Prisoner
orders to accompany Du Mont to Menin, hee gave him at the same time an order to the Duke of Luxemburg, for furnishing the Prisoner with such a Detachment of Horse, as hee should re∣quire & think necessary for Executing the Designe. That the Prisoner by Monsr. Barbesieux order received of Monsr. Paparell 80. Lewis d'Or. And in pursuance of Mr. Barbesieux directions he gave to Du Mont 55. Lewis d'Or, out of that sum, viʐt 15. Pistolls in specie & à Bill of Enchange for 460. Livres French Mony, to bee payd at Ghent: That the Prisoner accordingly left Paris, the 11. of Sept. 1691. & went post with Du Mont to Menin, that hee defrayd the whole charge of the Journy, that Du Mont acquainted him on the way that Monsr. Barbesieux had promised him an annuall revenue of 20000. livres, & to make him a Knight of the Order of St. Lazarus, in case the design took effect. That the Prisoner, coming to Menin, went to the Governor Monsr Pertuis, as hee had been directed by Monsr. Barbesieux, and obtaind of him a Passeport for Du Mont, who parted im∣mediately for Ghent, promiting the Prisoner, that according to their agreement, hee would send to him att the Grand Guard. That the Prisoner ther upon went to the Duke of Luxemburgs Army, and hee and Parker continued att the head of the Grand Guard till the day before the rencontre at Leuze without hearing from Du Mont. That Du Mont going to Hanover, the Priso∣ner had kept a constant correspondence with him, about Execu∣ting the same designe at some other opportunity, that the Pri∣soner communicated what Letters hee received from Du Mont, to Mr. Barbesieux, who gave him directions wat answers hee should returne. That the Prisoner resolved with Monsieur Barbesieux, that the Designe should bee Executed this Campagne Anno 1692. which had failed the last, that the Prisoner had ta∣ken some measures concerning the same with Monsr Chanlais Quarter-master Generall to the French King. In the mean time one Frederick Aelbregt Leefdael, heretofore Cap. Lt. of a troop
of Dragoons in the service of the High & Mighty States General of the United Provinces coming to Paris, was brought acquain∣ted with the Prisoner by the means of one Sterck. That the Pri∣soner having contracted an intimate familiarity with the said Leef∣dale, discover'd the said Designe to him towards the latter end of March last 1692, telling him that an Officer who woul ingratiate himself in the Kings favour must venture at something of conse∣quence. That hee the Prisoner had concerted the execution of a Designe upon which his fortune depended, that it was indeed a matter not without hazard, but the greater the difficultys were, the more would bee the Honour, encouraging Leefdale to bee concern'd in it. And the said Leefdale shewing a readyness to com∣ply with him, the prisoner open'd himself with greater freedome, & told him that hee was engaged last Campagne with one Du Mont to assassinate the King of great Britain, but it had no effect by reason of his Majest. leaving the Army so Soone, but it was resolved again to putt the same in execution this year. That Du Mont by many repeated Oaths had sworne hee would do it, & hee the prisoner feared, that if hee were not present, Du Mont would not so exactly observe his orders, and therfore hee was re∣solved to go along with Du Mont, asking Leefdale. If hee would bee of the party, who answering that hee would the prisoner dis∣coursd to him at large of all particulars concerning the designe, and afterwards brought him to Mr. Barbesieux & Chanlais. That Chanlais in one of the conferences held upon that subject, told Leefdale, the Prisoner being by, that a great reward should bee given him, the business succeeding, that Barbesieux & Paparell had both of them knowledge of the promised reward. That hee the Prisoner with the said Leefdale, & Colonell Parker went to St Germain on the 16 of April 1692, to speak with the late King James about the said Designe, who had knowledge of it, & to take leave of him, before they began their Journy, that the Pri∣soner had Audience at the same time of the said King James, the
late Queen being present King James telling him, Parker has gi∣ven me an account of the business, if you, & the other Officers do me this service, you sal never want. And Parker, the priso∣ner & Leefdale enterd into a discourse about this Designe. That du Monts Wife deliverd to Mr. Barbesieux several Letters, which she received from her Husband whilst hee was at Hanover, and the Prisoner continuing his correspondence with him at the said time, hee engaged du Mont by Letters, & specialy those dated the 20 & 25 of April & the 12 of May last, to kome from Hanover to a Rendevous at Uden, in the Country of Ravesteyn, in order to take a finall resolution with the said Prisoner & Leefdale, concer∣ning the manner of executing the Designe, the Prisoner pres∣sing du Mont to hasten his journy for fear the King of Engeland should have occasion to repass the sea, the prisoner adding withall, that hee should bee mad, if hee fail'd in his business. That the Prisoner with Chanlais & Leefdale were agreed in what manner the Assassinate should bee committed on the Person, of his Maj: viʐt: that when the King should ride along the Lines, or should go out to take any vieuw, or when the Army should de∣camp, that du Mont shouldly in ambuscade, and when his Maj: should pas within 100 paces of him, he should rhen fire upon the King, that Chanlais (to whom notice was to bee given before of the time) should bee with 3000 Horse at the D. of Luxemburgs Grand guard, that the Prisoner had told Leefdale their would bee no danger for hem since, du Mont had a secret to charme peoples eyes, and at all adventures they two would keep with those, who followed the King, and when every body was pursuing after du Mont, they should have time to escape & save them selves, & carry the account to Mr. Chanlais, and it little concernd them, whither du Mont should bee taken or not, provided they could escape them selves. That the Prisoner & Leefdale received their last orders from Chanlais, who told them hee was going
to Mons, & that they should stay for him there. That the Prisoner & Leefdale went from Paris the 17 of Apr: last and arrived a few days after att Mons, having wayted some time for Mr. Chanlais arrivall and finding hee did not come, they re∣solved to go forward to the rendevouz by the Way of Bruxells: That the Prisoner as they were travelling on the way told Leefda∣le, that their designe taking Place, the alliance among the Confoederate Princes would bee broken, that the Princes con∣cern'd would each of them recall their Troopes and the Country being thereby left without Soldiers, the King of France would easely make himself Master of it. And K: James would bee re∣stored again: That the Prisoner with Leefdale went to the Maye∣ry of Boisleduc, & was apprehended att Eyndhoven. And whe∣reas this horrid design is contrary to the Laws of God, of Nature, and of all Nations, and ought for the deterring of others, from the like machinations to be punished with the greatest rigour. The said Court Martial, having with mature deliberation, exa∣min'd & considered the whole matter, have thought fit to Judge & declare, as they doe hereby declare, the Prisoner to bee guilty of high treason, and doe condemn him to be drawn on a Hedge to the Place of Execution, there to be hangd en a Gallows, to be cut donn before he be dead, his Body to be opened, and his Bo∣wells to be taken out, and burnt; his head to be set upon a Pole, his Body to be quarterd, and the four quarters to be hung up where his Maj: shall think fit; and doe further declare all his Estate to be confiscated, and condemn him to bear the Charges and Costs of this Tryall. Given and pronounced in the Head-Quarters of the Army, under the Command of his Maj: of Great Brittain, by the Earl of Athlone, Gen: of the Horse, Praesident; the Lt: Gen: van Scravenmoere, and Lt: Gener: Talmash, the Marquis de la Forest, the Heer van Weede, Comte Noyells, and the Heer Zobel, Majors Gen:, and the Brigadiers Churchill & Ram∣sey,
Cornelius van Wouw, and Richard Uthwayt, Judges Advo∣cates. Assisting at Lembeek the 11 of Aug: 1692. Signed, Athlone. And lower, By Ord: of the Court Martial. Thomas du Val.
