D2706 99887045 183662
A PROPER NEVV BALLAD, Entituled, The Granadeers Rant. To its own proper New Tune, Hy the brave Granadeers, Ho. CAptain Hume is bound to Sea, Hey boyes, to boyes: Captain Hume is bound to Sea, Ho: Captain Hume is bound to Sea, And his brave companie; Hey the brave Granadeers Ho. We'le drink no more Irish Beer Hey boyes, ho boyes: We'le drink no more Irish Beer Ho: drink no more Irish Beer, For we're all bound for Tangier, Hey the brave Granadeers Ho. We'le drink the Spanish Wine, Hey boyes, ho boyes: We'le drink the Spanish Wine Ho: We'le drink the Spanish Wine, And Court their Ladies fine, Hey the brave Granadeers Ho. Now we're upon the Sounds, Hey boyes, ho boyes; Now we're upon the Sounds Ho: Now we're upon the Sounds, Every mans health goes round, Hey the brave Granadeers Ho. When we came to Calls on Shore, Hey boyes, ho boyes; When we came to Calls on Shore Ho: When we came to Calls on Shore, We made the Guns to roar, Hey the brave Granadeers Ho. Now we drink the Spanish Wine, Hey boyes, ho boyes: Now we drink the Spanish Wine Ho: Now we drink the Spanish Wine; And kiss their Ladies fine, Hey the brave Scottish boyes Ho. When we do view Tangier, Hey boyes, ho boyes: When we do view Tangier, Ho Now we do see Tangier, We'le make these proud Morest fear: Hey the brave Granadeers Ho. When we come to Tangier shore, Hey boyes, ho boyes; When we come to Tangier shore Ho: When we Land on Tangier shore, We'le make our Granads to roar; Hey the brave Granadeers Ho. When we come upon the Mould, Hey boyes, ho boyes; When we come upon the Mould Ho: When we come upon the Mould. We'le make these proud Mores to yeeld, Hey the brave Scottish boyes Ho. When we come upon the Wall, Hey boyes, ho boyes; When we come upon the Wall Ho: When we come upon the Wall; We'le make these proud Mores to fall; Hey the brave Granadeers Ho. There's Hacket, Hume and Hodge, hey boyes, ho boyes; There's Hacket, Hume and Hodge, ho: There's Hacket, Hume and Hodge, In Charles's Fort shall lodge, hey the brave Granadeers ho. Hacket led on the Van. hey boyes, ho boyes; Hacket led on the Van, ho: Hacket led on the Van, Where was kill'd many a man; hey the brave Scottish boyes ho. Sixty brave Granadeers, hey boyes, ho boyes; Sixty brave Granadeers ho: Sixty brave Granadeers, Beat the Mores from Tangiers, hey the brave Scottish boyes ho. FINIS. A CARROUSE To The Emperor, the Royal Pole, And the much-wrong'd DUKE of LORRAIN. TO a new Tune, at the PLAY-HOUSE. HArk I bear the Cannons roar, Ecchoing from the German Shore, And the joyful news comes ore, that the Turks are all confounded; Lorrain comes they run they run, Charge with your Horse through the grand Half-moon And give Quarter unto none, since Starenberg is Wounded. Close your Ranks and each brave Soul Fill a lu flowing Bowl, A grand Carrouse to the Royal Pole, the Emperors brave defender: Let no man leave his Post by stealth, Plunder the Barbarous Viers Wealth: Well drink a Helmet full, the Health. of Second Alexander. Fill the Helmet once again, To the Emperors happy Reign, And the much wrong'd Duke Lorrain. but when the ve beat the Turks home, Not a Soul the Field will leave, Till they do again retrieve. What the Moonster does detrieve, and fix him in his Dukedom Then will be the Schen of war, When such drinking Crowns prepare, Those that love the Monsieurs fear, their Courage will be shrinking; Loyal hearts insyir'd with Hock, Who can from a better Rock; The French will never stand the Shock, for all their Claret drinking, Mahomet was a senseless Dogg, A Coffee-drinking drowsie Rogue, The use of the Grave so much in vogue, to deny to those adore him: Had he allow'd the fruits of the vine, And gave them leave to carrouse in wine, They had freely past the Rhine. and conquer'd all before them, Coffee Rallies no retreat, Vind can only do the fear, Had their force been twice as great, and all of Ianazaries. Tho he had drank the Danube dry, And all their profit could supply, By his interest from the Skie, brisk Lang4on ne'r miscarry'd. Infidels are now ore, come, The most Christian Turk at home, Watched the Fate of Christendom, but all his hopes are shallow: Since the Poles have led the Dance. If Englands Monarch will advance. And If he'l send a Fleet to Fr he's a Whig that will not follow. FINIS.
