K281CA R179189 51617609 175270
THREE HYMNS, BY THE BISHOP OF BATH and WELLS. Author of the Manual of Prayers for the Use of the Schollars of Winche∣ster Colledge. London, Printed for Ch: Broome, at the Gun, at the West End of St. Paul's Church, 1700. And are to be Sold by John Ramsay at his House within the Foot of Con's Closs.
Three HYMNS for Morning, Even∣ing, and Midnight; By Mr. Tho: Cane. D. D. AWake my Soul, and with the Sun▪ Thy dayly Stage of Duty run: Shake of dull Sloth and early rise, To pay thy Morning Sacrifice. Redeem thy mispent Time that's past, Live this Day as if 'twere thy last: T'improve thy Talent take due care, 'Gainst the Great Day thy self prepare. Let all thy Converse be sincere, Thy Conscience as the Noon-Day clear; Think how All-seing GOD thy Ways, And all thy secret Thoughts surveys. Influenc'd by the Light Divine, Let thy own Light in good works shine: Reflect all Heavens propitious ways, In ardent love and chearful Praise. Wake and lift up thy self, my Heart, And with the Angels bear thy part, Who all Night long unwearied sing, Glory to the Eternal King.
I wake, I wake, ye Heavenly Choire, May your Devotion me inspire, That I like you my Age may spend, Like you may on my GOD attend. May I like you in GOD delight, Have all day long my God in sight, Perform like you my Maker's Will, O may I never more do ill. Had I your Wings, to Heaven I'd fly, But GOD shall that defect supply, And my Soul wing'd with warm desire Shall all day long to Heav'naspire. Glory to thee who safe hast keept, And hast refresht me whilst I sleept. Grant Lord, when I from Death shall wake, I may of endless Light partake. I would not wake, nor rise a gain, Ev'n Heaven it self I would disdain, Wer't not thou there to be enjoy'd And I in Hymns to be imploy'd. Heav'n is dear Lord where e'r thou art O! never then from me depart; For to my Soul, 'tis Hell to be But for one Moment without Thee.
Lord! I my Vows to the renew: Scatter my Sins as Morning-Dew, Guard my first springs of thought & wi▪ And with thy self my Spirit fill. Direct control, suggest this day, All I design, or do or say; That all my Powers, with all their migh▪ In thy sole Glory may unite. Praise GOD, from whom all Blessings flow▪ Praise him all creatures here below; Praise him above y' Anglick host: Praise Father, Son,and Holy-Ghost: An Evening HYMN. GLory to Thee, my God this Nigh▪ For all the Blessings of the Light▪ Keep me, O keep me! King of Kings▪ Under thy own Almighty Wings, Forgive me Lord, for thy dear Son, The ill that I this day have done, That with the World, my self and Thee▪ I, e'r I sleep, at peace may be. Teach me to live, that I may dread The Grave as little as my Bed.
Teach me to die, that so I may Triumphing rise at the last day. O may my Soul on the repose, And with sweet sleep mine eye lids close Sleep that may me more vig'rous make To serve my GOD when I awake. When in the Night I sleepless ly, My Soul with Heav'nly thoughts supply Let no ill Dreams disturb my rest, No powers of darkness me molest. Dull sleep of sense me to deprive, I am but half my days alive; Thy faithful Lovers, Lord, are griev'd, To ly so long of the bereav'd, But tho sleep o'r my frailty reigns, Let it not hold me long in Chains, And now and then let loose my Heart, Till it an Hallelujah dart. The faster sleep the sense doth bind, The more unfetter'd is the Mind; O may my Soul, from matter free, Thy unvail'd Goodness waking see, O! when shall I in endless day, For ever chase dark sleep away, And endless Praise with th' Heavenly Choire
Incessant sing and never tire? You my blest Guardians whilst I sleep▪ Close to my Bed your Vigils keep, Divine Love into me instill, Stop all the Avenues of ill. Thought to thought with my Soul co¦ver▪ Celestial Joyes to me rehearse.; And in my stead, all the Night long, Sing to my GOD a gratefull Song. Praise God, from whom all Blessings flow▪ Praise him all creatures here below▪ Praise him above, y' Angelick host: Praise Father, Son, and Holy-Ghost. A Mid-Night HYMN. LOrd, now my sleep does me forsak▪ The sole Possession of me take, Let no vain fancy me illude, No one impure desire intrude. Blest Angels while we silent ly, You Hallelujahs sing on high; You, ever wakeful near the Throne, Prostrate adore the Three in One, I now awake do with you joyn To praise our God in Hymns Divine:
With you in Heaven I hope to dwell, and bid the Night & World Farewell. My Soul when I shake off this dust Lord in thy Arms I will entrust: O make me thy peculiar care? Some Heav'nly Mansion me prepare! Give me a place at thy Saints feet, Or some fall'n Angel's vacant seat; I'll strive to sing as loud as they. Who sit above in brighter day. O may I always ready stand With my Lamp burning in my hand, May I in sight of Heav'n rejoyce, When e're I hear the Bridegrooms voice Glory to thee in light aray'd, Who light thy dwelling place hast made An immense Occean of bright beams, From thy All-glorious Godhead streams The Sun in its Meridian height, Is very darkness in thy sight▪ My Soul, O lighten, and enflame, With thought & love of thy great Name Blest Jesus thou on Heav'n intent, Whole Nights hast in Devotion spent
But I frail creature, soon am tir'd And all my Zeal is soon expir'd. My Soul how canst thou wearie grow, Of Antedating Heav'n below, In sacred Hyms, and Divine Love, Which will eternal be above? Shine on me Lord new Life impart, Fresh ardours kindle in my heart; One ray of thy All-quickning light, Dispels the sloth and clouds of night. Lord, lest the tempter me surprize, Watch over thine own Sacrifice. All loose, all idle thoughts cast out, And make my very Dreams devout. Praise God from whom all blessings flow, Praise him all Creatures here below, Praise him above y' Angelick Host, Praise Father, Son and Holy Ghost. FINIS.
