L2205 99884980 182787
LILLIES Invitation. ose that have had no Coughs, nor Colds, this Winter, to dine with him on Christmas day. Admire ye Mortalls! strange newes does appear! You'r welcome All to Lillies Christmas cheer. Such cheer indeed, as is not to be found, At any Wake or Faire, on English Ground. The Good chear. ALl the varieties that can be got, Plumb-pottage boyled in a Silver pot! Roast-beef well stuff'd with rosemary: that done, Mince-pies by wholesale- for digestion. And now the first course being well ended Large bouls of wine are presently extended; Your free Host then begins a health t'y' all, And swears your welcome: with a conjuring call Commands more wine that you may pledge him, Then Sit down to'th second course, and too't agen And after this the liquors run, and they Strongly begin t'appear in Battail ray The brisk (anary, French both white and red The brave Strongwaters Hartsease Anniseed; Nay and to make each Genius run the quicker, Nants Brandy will not be a failing liquor. Musick enough with various instrument To give an encrease to your merryment, So taking approbation of the cheer, Considering all things, I think 'tis not dear! The Persons invited. But now the persons that invited are To this good chear I kindly shall declare. Least by mistake there should a difference bee, By takeing all for every body, All are not wisemen, yet all are not fools, Some have sufficient, some insufficient tools So some of all may be approv'd, as guests, And welcome to partake of Lilles feast. But such they needs must be, as must be sure To have not one kind of distemperature All those who have no Coughs, nor Colds nor Ptissick That never had, nor still have need of Physick, May not be call'd or appear to be Partakers of the said variety. So that, free Lilly. (as I dare express) Though's good chear, will have but little Guesse. The Authors advice. Let those that take my Advice, stay behind Least they wish after they'd been of my minde. For Lilly may perhaps to encrease his praise, With a Cramp Conjuring word the Divel raise, And Hee'l so tumble and tosse you all: That then You may swear you'l ne're Dine with Lilly agen. With Allowance. London, Printed in the Year 1668.
