O298 99890559 182697
On the ANSWER to Dr. WILDS POEM; UPON Mr. CALAMY's Imprisonment. GLancing (as I pass'd) aside Upon a Ballad-Stall, I spy'd A Sheet, with Poem sprinckled o're; At Sight, it seem'd like Lawyers Lore, With Lines that stood so thin and wide, As though they rated were by th' side; (And sure the Printer, that gave more Then Clerks pay for them, will be poor;) By this I thought, and by his Wit, I had the Squint-ey'd Author hit; 'Guest it the Pettyfoggers Rhime: But that it came forth in Term time; When the Green Bag, his Pia Mater Is better fraught; John Taylor's Water Is now converted into Wine; Tht Poet now, can drink and dine On Dishes of more solid fare, Then the Camelion Sisters are; Or yet Cook Lorrells; no need steal Ben Johnson's Sweapings for a Meal: But I'm mistaken in the man, There is another in the Van Of Libellers, Heroick Leader, And (to the Sense of Female Reader) A Champion stout; his name let pass, It Rhimes to Madam Baltinglasse, Wich whom he Cheek by Jole doth walk, And can do more with her than talk; This is the Bishops trusty Roger, That bites with Teethy Quill like Badger; He that with help of Hatbert Blade, Ned Bagshaw by the Heels hath laid; When all his Troops of Verse and Prose, With all their dry and down-right Blowes Upon his sides, could make no dint, Nor more leave on them, then the print Of his foul Pen; This, this is he Tramples on Wild and Calamy With saucy Feet of Ballad Meetre, Than which, the stinking Souls are sweeter Of Ballad Singers, or the Train Of Match Girls out of Rosemary Lane: Some write of Poets licking Spit From Homers Lips the nasty wit That from his squalid Nib doth fome, Speaks him of some such Sire to come; Jack Pudding's Chaps with Custard smear'd, And mix'd with Candle smutted Beard, Not half so loathsom looks as thine; There's not one Muse of all the Nine So sluttish, but abhors to be Accounted Patronesse to thee. But oh! bold Bard with brazen Front, That durst put Hudebras upon't! And filch away that Authors Fame, By counterfeiting of his Name; Not as Bathillus did, who put His Name to Virgill's Verses; but With far more impudence and shame, Thou hast to thine put Virgill's Name; Thus Vagabonds get Bread and Cheese In Country Towns, by Shifts like these, And by a counterfeited Passe Oft whipping scape; but Hudebras Shall not secure thee from my Scourge; For though thy Wit can little urge A Poets Rage, yet who can see The foame of base scurrility On such men thrown by soul-mouth'd Muse, And not a little Whipcord use? Which to a Halter I could twist, And make thy Wreath on't (if I list) But such grosse Lines for Muse to weave, Is much beyond Poetick Leave; A Satyrist may lash (no doubt) But not beyond his Whip Lash out; Thus to invade the Hangmans place With Sledge and Halter; foul disgrace Of Poets Pen to treat of these, Which only Reader, Rout can please; Nay, (which the Muses more detest) To talk of Halters not in jest; A Poets Wit though ne're so keen, May be endur'd if without Spleen: But when the Bard once angry grows, His Wit outmatch'd, at best he shows. Then take thy swing I'le give thee Rope; Tangle thy self, I do not hope, Nor shall my wish extend to see, That Bishop lay his hands on thee, Which thou for Calamy and Wild Provided hast, in Verse so vil'd; That 'twere lesse Torture to be hung Out right, then thus be Ballad Sung By Sluttish Muse; let those that cry Kitchin-Stuffe to thy next reply; If more thou writest at this Rate, May'st thou be match'd at Billings gate; Where with thy Hawkers on thy side, Thy prowesse will be better try'd; No Regiment of Red-Coats Stout, But of Red-petty-Coats the Rout, For thy Encounter fittest are; So Farewell Womans Man of War. FINIS. LONDON, Printed for R. B. 1663.
