p2909 99884188 182938
THE Catholick BALLAD: OR, AN INVITATION TO POPERY, Upon Considerable Grounds and Reasons. To the Tune of, Eighty eight. SInce Pop'ry of late is so much in debate, And great strivings have been to restore it, I cannot forbear openly to declare, That the Ballad-makers are for it. We'll dispute no more then, these Heretical Men, Have exposed out Books unto laughter, So that many do say, 'twill be the best way, To sing for the Cause hereafter. O the Catholic Cause! now assist me my Muse, How earnestly do I desire thee! Neither will I pray to St. Bridget to Day, But only to thee to inspire me. Whence should Purity come, but from Catholic Rome? I wonder much at your folly? For St. Peter was there, and left an old Chair, Enough to make all the World holy. For this facted old wood, is so excellent good, If our Doctors may be believd, That whoever fits there, needs never more fear, The danger of being deceived. If the Devil himself should (God bless us) get up, Though his Nature we know to be Evil, Yet whilst he sat there, as divers will swear, He would be an infallible Devil. Now who sits in the Seat, but our Father the Pope? Which is a plain Demonstration As clear as Neon-day, we are in a right way, And all others are doom'd to Damnation. If this will not suffice, yet to open your Eyes, Which are blinded with bad Education; We have Arguments plenty, and Miracles twenty, Enough to convince a whole Nation. If you give but good heed, you shall see the Host bleed. And if any thing can persuade ye, An Image shall speak, or at least it shall squeak In the honour of our Lady. You shall see without doubt, the Devil cast out, As of old by Erra Pater; He shall skip about and tear like a dancing Bear, When he feels the Holy Water. If yet doubtful you are, we have Reliques most rare, We can shew you the sacred Manger; Several loads of the Cross, is good as e're was, To preserve your Souls from danger. Should I tell you of all it would move a Stone-wall, But I spare you a te for pity, That each one may prepare, and  up his For the Second Pr of my Ditty.
The Second Part. To the same Tune. NOw listen again to those things that remain, They are matters of weight, I assure you; And the first thing I say, throw your Bibles away, 'Tis impossible else for to cure you. O that pestilent Book! never on it more look, I wish I could sing it out louder: It has done Men more harm, I dare boldly ffrm Than th' Invention of Guns and Powder. As for matters of faith, believe what the Church saith, But for Scripture, leave that to the learned; For these are Edge-tools, & you Laymen are Fools, If you touch them y'are sure to be harmed. But pray what is it for, that you make all this stir? You must read, you must hear and be learned: If you'll be on our part, we will teach you an Art, That you need not be so much concerned. Be the Churches good Son, and your work is half done, After that you may do your own pleasure: If your Beads you can tell, and say Ave Mary well, Never doubt of the heavenly treasure. For the Pope keeps the Keys, and can do what he please, And without all peradventure, If you cannot at the Fore, yet at the back-Door Of Indulgence you may enter. But first by the way, you must make a short stay At a place railed Purgatory, Which the Learned us tell, in the builings of Hell, Is about the middlemost Story. 'Tis a monstrous hot place and a Mark of disgrace, In the Torment on't long to endure: None are kpt there but fools, and poor pitiful souls Who can no ready Money procure. And a handsum round Sum you may quickly begon, To the Church has wisely ordein'd, And they who build Crosses and pay well for Masses, Would not there be too long detein'd. And that 'tis a plain cse, as the Nose on ones Face, They are in the surest condition, Since none but poor Fools, & some niggardly Owls, And can call into utter perdit on. And they faileth you then O ye great and rich Men, For that you will not hearken to reason, And as long as y have pence, y'need scruple no of sence For Murther, Antey, Treason. And ye sweet natar'd Women, who hold all things common, My addresses to you are most hearty, And to give you your due, you are to us most true, And we hope we shall gain the whole party. If you happen to fall, your Pennance is small, And although you cannot forg it, We have for you a cure, if of this you be sure, To coness before you go to it. There is one reason yet, which I cannot omit, To those who affect the French Nation, Hereby we advance the Religion of France, The Religion that's only in fashion. If these reasons prevail, (as how can they fail?) To have Popery entertain'd, You cannot conceive, and will hardly believe, What benefits hence may be gain'd. For the Pope shall us bless (that's no small happi∣ness) And again we shall see restored The Italian Trade, which formerly made This Land to be so much adored. O the Pictures and Rings, the Beads and fine things, The good Words as sweet as Honey, All this and much more, shall be brought to our Door For a little dull English Money. Then shall Iustice and Love, and whatever can move, He restored again to our Britain: And Learning so common, that every old Woman Shall say her Prayecs in Latin. Then the Church shall bear sway, and the State shall obey, Which is now lookt upon as a wonder, And the proudest of Kings, with all Temporal things, Shall submit and trickle under. And the Parliament too, who have tak'n us to do, And have handled us with so much Terror; May chance on that score ('tis no time to say more) They may chance to acknowledge their Error. If any Man yet, shall have so little Wit, As still to lie Refratory; I swear by the Mass, he is a meer Ass, And so there's an end of the Story. FINIS.
