p48 99887655 183280
The Coy Shepherdess OR, Phillis and Amintas. Fair Phillis in a wanton posture lyes Not thinking to be seen by mortall eyes Till accidentally, Amintas came, And see her lie, which made her blush for shame He cast himself down by her on the Hay And won her love, before he went away. Tune of, Phillis on the new made Hay, or, Amarillis. PHillis on the new made hay On a pleasant Summers day, She in a wanton posture lay thinking no Shephard nigh her Till Amintas came that way and threw himself down by her. At the first she was amaz'd And with blushes on him gaz'd Hr beauy bright, did him invite her shape he did admire. Her wanton dress, could do no lese, then set his heart on fire. Then Amintas mildly said Phillis be not now afraid But entertain, thy shepherd swain. now we are met together, Then I shall prize thy sparkling eyes. that did invite me hither. I have rang'd the Plains about For to find my Phillis out My flocks I left of joys bereft Whilst I for thée did languish Tis in thy will my heart to fill with joy, or else with anguish Then fair Phillis frowning said, My privacy thou hast betraid Therefore be gone, let me alone do not disturb my pleasure, Nor do not move thy sute of love, but leave me to my leasure. Never yet did Shepheards Swain On this smooth Scicilian plain Once dare to move my déep disdain by such like bold intrusion. Then cease thy suit 'tis but in vain I scorn such fond delusion. When Amintas sée her frown Hoping still his joys to crown Quoth he my dear, as I am here I like not this behavior, Tis Lovers bliss, to toy and kiss it wins a Maidens favor. Let us like the Ivy twine. And our loves in one combine Grim Pluto loved Proserpine her beauty did him fetter; When thou art mine, & I am thine, I'l please thée ten times better Fye for shame fond Boy she said Im reolv'd to live a Maid Thou at too young, to do me wrong be not so bld to venture, Whilst he oor youth, to speak the truth still aimed at the centre Phillis blusht as red as blood When his mind she understood His bold intent for to prevent she us'd her best endeavor, His resolution it was bent for he was loath to leave her. Hotly he persued the Game. Whilst his heart was on a flame She cry'd pish nay fye for shame in faith you shall not do it But the youth her overcame and eagerly fell to t. Thus she strived all in vain Whilst she felt a pleasing pain, Yet he, by no means would refrain but kindly did imbrace her, He kist his love and told her plain he never would disgrace her. In great rage she flung away Tumbling ore the new made hay Whilst he asham'd & breathless lay although he then displeas'd her He rally'd and renew'd the fray. and manfully appeas'd her. Thus they spent this christal day in such wanton sports and play, Amintias there, imbrac't his Dear. And bid her be light-hearted But night being come they hasted home. and kindly kist and parted▪ Printed for R. Burton at the Horse-shoe in West-smith field.
