S1898 52528986 179087
A PROCLAMATION For Re-establishing the Staple-port at Camphire. WILLIAM By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ire∣land, Defender of the Faith; To Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that Part, conjunctly and se∣verally specially Constitute, Greeting; Forasmuch, as by a Treaty betwixt Our Commissioners appointed by Us, as Marquess of Camphire, and the Commissioners of Our Town of Camphire, and the Royal Borrows of this Our ancient King∣dom, concerning the Continuation and Re-establishment of the Staple-Port of this Kingdom, within the foresaid Town. The Staple-port of this Kingdom, for the NetherIands is Re establish∣ed by Contract, and settled at the said Town of Camphire, and the same Contract Ratified and Approven by the States of Zeland, & the Convention of Our Royal Borrows, on the one and other Parts. And We being satisfied, that the said Contract is for the Advantage of the Trade and Commerce of this Our Ancient Kingdom, and that by long Experience, it hath been found that the Town of Camphire, is the most Convenient and Fit Place to be the Staple-port for this Our Kingdom, Have therefore, by a Signature under Our Royal Hand, of the date, the twentieth day of March currant, Ratified, Approved and Confirmed the said Contract, in its whole Heads, Clauses and Articles: And We being further Resolved, that the same be duely Observed, by all the Subjects of this Our Ancient Kingdom, Trading to the United Provinces of the Netherlands, And that all the standing Laws, and Acts of Parliament, with all other Acts of Our Council, or Exchequer, Relating to the said Staple, and Acts of Convention of Our Royal Borrows be put to full and vigorous Execution, for the due and exact Observance of the said Staple-port for the fu∣ture: Therefore, We, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Do hereby Require, and Command all Our Subjects, to give due and punctual Obedience to the Laws and Acts of Parliament, with all other Acts of Our Council or Exchequer, Relating to the said Staple, and Acts of the Convention of Our Royal Borrows made for the Observing the Staple-port, which are all hereby declared to be in full Force. And seing now the foresaid Scots Staple-Port is Re∣established, and continued at the said Town of Camphire, Therefore We, with Advice foresaid, Prohibite and Discharge all Merchants and Skippers, or any other of Our Subjects to Export, furth of this Our Kingdom, any Goods, Ware or Commodities, which are, or shall be declared to be Staple Commodities, to any other Port or Place of the United Provinces of the Netherlands but only to the said Staple-port, and Town of Camphire in Zeland, under the Pains and Certifica∣tions contained in the saids Act of Parliament, with all other Acts of Our Council or Exchequer, Relating to the said Staple, and Acts of Convention of Borrows, which Pains and Penalties We Ordain to be Exacted from the Transgressors, with all rigour. And that they be furder proceeded against, as Our Privy council shall find Cause. And We with Advice foresaid, do hereby require the Farmers, Tacksmen or Collectors of Our Customs, and their Sub-collectors, and Survyers for the time being, that they make Exact Search and Tryall for all Staple Goods, and Commodities that shall be hereafter Exported forth of this Kingdom to any Part or Port of the United Provin∣ces in the Netherlands, and that they, and their Clerks, and all Clerks of Coquets, take sufficient Security from the Merchants, or Skipper, Sailers and Transporters of Goods to the said Nether∣lands, that they shall Carry and Liver the same at the said Staple-port of Camphire, and at no other place, nor Port within the said United Provinces, and that they shall not break Bulk before their Arrival thereat, conform to the Acts of Parliament, oblidging the Exporters to Report Certificats from the Conservator, or his Deputs at Camphire. Bearing, That the said Staple Commodities were Livered there, without breaking Bulk, as they will be Answerable to the Lords of Our Privy Council thereanent. And We do Ordain the saids Certificats to be delivered in Quarterly by the Collectors, and their Clerks, at the several Ports, to the Agent of Our Royal Borrows for the time. To the End, exact Diligence may be done by him, against all the Transgressors of the said Staple, Conform to the Laws and Acts made thereanent, OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, And we Charge you Strictly, and Command, that in continent thir Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and whole Remanent Royal Burrows of this Kingdom, and other Places needful, and thereat, in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation make Publication of the Pre∣misses, to the Effect, Our Royal Burrows, and all Merchants, and other Persons may have timous Notice hereof, and give due and punctual Obedience, as they will be Answerable at their outmost Perril, and Appoints Copies to be affixed at the several Custom-Houses, and Sea ports of this Kingdom, that none pretend Ignorance And Ordains these Presents to be Printed. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the 30th day of March, And of Our Reign the tenth year, 1699. Per Actum Dominorum Sti. Concilij. GILB. ELIOT. GOD save the KING. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM, 1699. Staple Commodities are, All Sorts of Wooll. Woollen and Linen Yarn. All Woollen and Linen Manufactories. Hydes and Skins of all sorts. Playding. Kerseys, Scots Cloath, Stockins, Salmond, Yallow, Oyl. All sorts of Barrel Flesh. Pork, Butter, Leather dressed. and Undressed.
