S1798 52528970 179048
Scottish thistle, fleur-de-lis, Tudor rose PROCLAMATION For a Solemn National Fast. WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great-Britain France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, To  Macers of Our Privy-Coun∣cil, Messengers at Arms, our Sheriffs in that Part, Conjunct∣ly and Severally, Specially Constitute, Greeting; Forasmuch as the Commis∣sion of the General Assembly of this Church in Consideration of the Judge∣ments of Almighty GOD already inflicted, and more and more threatned upon this Our Kingdom, for Our manifold and hainous Sins and Provocati∣ons, still continued in, and encreasing, notwithstanding of the foresaids Judgments, and Our professed Repentances for the same, Have addressed to the Lords of Our Privy-Council, that a Day be set apart for Solemn Fasting and Humiliation, for the Reasons and Causes contained in their Act and Addresses thereanent. Therefore, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Pri∣vy Council, have Commanded and hereby Command and Appoint the Twenty ninth Day of this Moneth of August Instant, being the last Thursday thereof, to be keeped and observed in all the Churches of this Kingdom, as a Day of solemn Fasting and Humiliation before GOD, by all Persons with seri∣ous and unseigned Repentance of Sins, & Resolution of Amendment, & earnest and fervent Prayers and Supplications for the obtaining of GODS Mercy, Grace and Peace, as it is more fully contained in the foresaid Act and Ad∣dress of the Commission hereto subjoyned, and which Act, together with this Proclamation, We hereby ordain to be publickly Read by all Ministers in all Churches the LORDS Day immediatly preceeding the said Thursday. And We do again Require and Command all Ministers and People to be careful of the observation of the Premisses, as they will be answerable to GOD and Us on the Pains formerly Ordained and Statute against the not due observing of the like Days of Fasting. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and to the remanent Mercat-Crosses of the haill Head Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within this Our anci∣ent Kingdom, and thereat in Our Name and Authority by open Proclama∣tion make Intimation of the Premisses, that none pretend Ignorance. And appoints Our Solicitor to transmit Copies of this Proclamation, and of the a∣bove Act and Address of the General Assembly to the Clerks of the several Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom, to be by them transmitted to the Ministers of the several Paroch Churches, and by these Ministers intimate upon the Sabbath-Day immediatly preceeding the Day appointed for keeping thereof. And Ordains these presents to be Printed. Given under Our Signet at  Edinburgh the second Day of August, and of Our Reign the Twelfth Year, 1700. Per Actum Daminorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT: Cls. Sti. Concilii GOD save the King. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty.
