S1839 52529301 179069
A PROCLAMATION, For Apprehending the Lord Bellendine. Edinburgh, the fourth day of July, 1689. THe Lord high Commissioner, and Lords of His Ma∣jesties Privy Council being well Informed of the hor∣rid Murder, Committed by Iohn Lord Bellen∣dine, on the third of this Instant Iuly, upon one of His Majesties Souldiers, under the Command of Major General Mccay, without any occasion or provocation: Therefore the Lords of His Majesties Privy Council, in His Majesties Name and Authority, Have thought fit, by open Proclamation, to Certifie the Leidges of this Inhumane Murder, and do Require all Magistrats, Souldiers, and other Leidges, to do their outmost Indeavour and Diligence, to Apprehend the said Lord Bellendine, that he may be brought to condign Punishment, especially such of the Leidges as lives at Passes, or Ferries; and in case any of the Leidges may have seen the said Lord Bellendine before they were certified of his Crime, and Required to Apprehend him, that immediatly up∣on Intimation of this Proclamation, these persons give notice to the next Magistrats, Justices of Peace, Officers of the Army, or Con∣stables, where they did see the said Lord Bellendine, since the committing of the said Murder, to the effect he may be Pursued, and Seised. Indemnifying hereby any Person from the hazard of Slaughter, Mutilation, or any other Acts of Violence, which they may commit against the said Lord Bellendine, or any persons with him, in Apprehending of him: And for the further Incou∣ragement of this Service, The Lords of His Majesties Privy Coun∣cil, Do Promise and Assure the Sum of Two thousand Merks Scots to any person or Persons, who shall seize the said Lord Bellendine, and Deliver him to any of His Majesties Magistrats or Officers of his Army; Discharging hereby any of His Majesties Leidges to Shel∣ter, Harbour, or any ways Assist or Supply the said Lord Bellen∣dine upon their highest peril. And Ordains these Presents to be Print∣ed and Published by Macers, Pursevants, or Messengers, at the Mercat Crosse of Edinburgh, or any other places necessary. Extracted by me, GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, by Order of the Privy Council, Anno Dom. 1689.
