S3866B 47012653 174618
The Sinners Redemption ; Wherein is described the Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ, Together with his Life on the Earth, and precious Death on the Cross for Mankind. To the Tune of, My Bleeding Heart. All you that are to Mirth inclin'd, Consider well and hear in mind, What our good God for us hath done, In sending his beloved Son. Let all one Song and Praises be, Unto his Heavenly Majesty ; And evermore amongst our mirth, Remember Christ our Saviours Birth. The five and twentieth of December, Good cause have we for to remember, In Bethelem upon this morn, There was our blest Messias born. The night before that happy Tyde, The spotless Virgin and her Guide, Were long time seeking up and down, To find them Lodging in the Town. And mark how all things came to pass, The Inns and Lodgings so fill'd was, That they could have no Room at all, But in a silly Oxe's Stall. This night the Virgin Mary mild, Was safe deliver'd of a Child, According unto Heavens decrée, Mans sweet Salvation for to be. Near Bethelem did Shepherds keep Their herds and flocks of feeding Sheep, To whom Gods Angel did appear, Which put the Shepherds in great fear. Prepare and go the Angel said; To Bethelem, he not afraid, There shall you see this blessed morn, The Princely Babe sweet Iesus born. With thankful hearts and joyful mind, The Shepherds went this Babe to find ; And as the Heavenly Angel told, They did our Saviour Christ behold. Within a Manger was he laid, The Virgin Mary by him staid, Attending on the Lord of Life. Being both Mother, Maid, and Wife. Three Eastern Wise men from afar, Directed by a glorious Star, Come boldly on and made no stay, Until thay came where Jesus lay. And being come unto the place Whereas the bless Messias was, They humbly laid before his féet, Their gifts of Gold and Odour swéet. See how the Lord of Heaven and Earth, Shew'd himself so lowly in his Birth, A sweet Example for Mankind, To learn to bear a humble mind. No costly Robes nor rich Attire, Did Jesus Christ our Lord desire, No Musick nor sweet Harmony, Till Glorious Angels from on high. Did in Melodious manner Sing, Praises unto our Heavenly King, All Honour, Glory, Might and Power, Be unto Christ our Saviour. If Quires of Angels did rejoyce, VVell may Mankind with heart and voice, Sing Praises to the God of Heaven, That unto us his Son hath given. Moreover let us every one, Call unto mind, and think upon, His righteous life and how he dy'd, To have poor Siners, justify'd. Suppose D Man, that thou should'st lye, In Prison strong conemn'd to dye, And that no Friend upon the Earth, Could Ransom thee from cruel Death. Except you can some party find, That for thy sake will be so kind, His own hearts blood for to dispence, And lose his life in thy defence, Such was the love of Christ when we VVere lost to Hell perpetually, To save them from the Gfulph of woe, Himself much pain did under go. VVhilst in this world he did remain, He never spent one hour in vain, In Fasting and in Prayer Divine, He daily spent away the time, He in the Temple daily taught, And many wonders strange he wrought, He gave the Blind their perfect sight, And made the lame to walk upright. He cured the Lepers of their Evils, And by his power he cast out Devils; He raised Lzarus from the Grave, And to the sick their Health he gave. but yet for all these wonders wrought, The Jews his dire destruction sought: The Traytor Judas was the Man, That with a kiss betray'd him then. Then was he lead to Justice-Hall, Like one despis'd amongst them all; And had the sentence given that he, Should suffer Death upon a Trée, Vnto the Execution place, They brought him on with much disgrace; With vile reproachful taunts and scorns, They crown'd him with a wreath of Thorns. Then to the Cross through hands and féet, They Nail'd out blest Redéemer sweet ; And further to augment his smart, VVith bloody Spear they piece'd his Heart. Thus have you seen and heard aright, The Love of Christ the Lord of might, And how he shed his precious Blood, Only to do us Sinners good▪
