T1506 99885418 182400
DIEV ET MON DROIT TO THE Kings most Excellent Majesty, THE HUMBLE ADDRESS OF THE Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London, in Common Council Assembled. SHEWETH, THat we Your most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, having with Astonishment received the Discovery of a most: Traiterous and Horrid Conspiracy, of divers Ill-affected and Desperate Per∣sons, to compass the Death and Destruction of Your Royal Person, and of Your Dearest Brother James Duke of York; and that to effect the same, they have held several Treasonable Con∣sultations, to Levy Men, and to make an Insurrection, and made great Provision of Arms; A Design notoriously tend∣ing to the present Destruction, not onely of Your best Sub∣jects, but of the Sacred Person of Your Majesty, the best of Princes, and to Involve this and the future Generation in Confusion, Bloud, and Misery; carried on, notwithstanding their specious Pretences, by known Dissenting Conventiclers, and Atheistical Persons. And having in the first place Offered up our solemn Thanks to Almighty God, for His watchful Providence in bringing to Light this Impious and Execrable Machination, We do in the next place humbly Offer to Your Majesty the Deep Resentments of our Loyal Hearts concerning the same, and beg Your Majesty to Rest fully Assured, That as no Interest in this World is valuable to us in comparison of Your Majesties Service and Safety; So we are Determined readily to Expose our Lives and Fortunes in De∣fence of Your Majesties Person, Your Heirs and Successors, and Your Government Established in Church and State, and particularly, for Discovering, Defeating, and Destroying all such Conspiracies, Associations, and Attempts whatsoever. All which Resolutions are accompanied with our Daily and Fervent Prayers, That Your Majesty may Vanquish and Overcome all Your Enemies; And that the Years of Your Happy Reign over us, may be Many, and Prosperous. 2 July 1683. It is His Majesties Pleasure that this Humble Address be forthwith Printed and Published. L. JENKINS. London, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill Deceas'd: And by Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1683.
