T2735 99887921 183570
True Love Requited: Or, The Bailiff's Daughter of Islington. The young-man's Friends the Maid did scorn, 'Cause she was poor and left forlorn; They sent the Esquire to London fair, To be an Apprentice seven year. And when he out on's time was come, He met his Love a going home, And then to end all farther strife, He took the Maid to be his Wife. To a North-Country Tune. Or, I have a good old Mother at home. THere was a youth, and a well-belov'd youth and he was a Esquires Son, He loved the Bayliffs daughter dear that lived in Islington. She was coy, and she would not believe that he did love her so; No, nor at any time she would any countenance to him shew. But when his friends did understand his fond and foolish mind, They sent him up to fair London an Apprentice for to bind. And when he had been seven long years and his Love he had not seen, Many a tear have I shed for her sake when she little thought of me. All the Maids of Islington when forth to sport and play; All but the Bayliffs Daughter dear, she secretly stole away. She put off her Gown of gray, and put on her puggish Attire; She's up to fair London gone her true Love to require. As she went along the Road, the weather being hot and dry, There was she aware of her true Love, at length came riding by. She stept to him as red as any Rose, and took him by the Bridal Ring, I pray you kind Sir give me one penny to ease my weary Limb. I prithee sweetheart canst thou tell me where that thou wast born? At Islington kind Sir, said she, where I have had many a scorn. I prithee sweet-heart canst thou tell me whether thou dost know The Bailiffs Daughter of Islington? she's dead, Sir, long ago. Then will I sell my goodly Steed, my Saddle, and my Bow, I will into some far Country, where no man doth me know. O stay, O stay, thou goodly Youth she's alive, she is not dead; Here she standeth by thy side, and is ready to be thy Bride. O farewell grief, and welcome joy, ten thousand times and more; For now I have seen my own true Love, that I thought I should have seen no more. Printed for P. Brooksby at the Golden Ball in Pye-corner.
