C898a 816.m.17[34] R225226 99885954 188573
The CASE of CONRADE GREIBE, Gent. To the Right Honourable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, in Parliament assembled. HUMBLY SHEWETH, THAT the said Greibe faithfully serv'd His present Majesty in the late Wars in Ireland, as Adjutant to a Regiment of Dutch Horse, com∣manded by John Seyger, Baron van Rechteren, Collonel, a Relation of the Right Honourable my Lord Portland's; which said Collonel did abuse his Regiment to such a degree that they mutini'd. Greibe petitioned His Majesty for Redress: Whereupon His Majesty was graciously pleased to command the said Collonel Rechteren to be tried by a Court-Martial, where Greibe had his Discharge in the great Room at the Horse-guard at Whitehall, of which Court-Martial the Honourable Brigadier Thomas Earl was President; where the Articles alledged to his Charge were so amply proved by Greibe against the said Collonel, that he remained in Dilgrace for some time after, and took care, in order to his re-establishment, to rectify some of those Abuses; amongst which, one chief thing that he did, was to pay to the said Conrade Greibe, your Petitioner, out of 200 l. then due to him for Arrears, the Sum of 150 l. which 150 l. was paid him with this Threat, That it was given him in order to send him out of the way, as his Wife was inform'd. That accordingly some time after, notwithstanding his Sincerity to His Majesty's Interest, openly manifested as well abroad in War, as at home, in daring to complain against a man so potently upheld as the Baron Rechteren; the said Greibe was (as 'tis to be suppos'd) by the ma∣lice of such Enemies as that Zeal of his to the King's Interest had raised him, represented to the Right Honourable Sir William Trumball, Secretary of State, &c. as a Dangerous man in the time of the Late Horrid Conspiracy against His Majesty's most Sacred Person. And a Warrant, dated March 7. 1695/6. was issued out to Mr. James Kitson, a Messenger, to seize the said Greibe, and his Papers, for Treasonable Practices, and to bring him before the said Secretary to be examined, and to be further dealt with according to Law. That upon the 9th of March, Mr. Kitson, by vertue of that Warrant, did apprehend the said Greibe, and took him into custody to his own House; where, after a week's durance, there came a Message to Kitson, to order Kitson to clap Greibe in a Dungeon, if he had one; and that he should let him have neither Fire nor Candle, and that none of his Friends or Relations should be allowed the liberty to see or speak with him. That upon the 27th of March, between One and Two a Clock at Night, there came a Dutch Serjeant, and a File or two of Dutch Musqueteers to Mr. Kitson's, who forc'd him away almost without his Cloaths; and told him, They came to carry him to be examined. Mr. Kitson deliver'd him to those men; They hurried him to Gravesend, clapt him on Board of a Dutch Frigat, called the Errand of Amsterdam, Captain Ingenhove Commander; where without any Examination con∣cerning those Treasonable Practices alledged against him in the Warrant whereby he was taken up, and from which he ought to have been cleared by Law, he was detained till they set Sail, under most severe Custody, not allowed Pen, nor Ink, nor Paper, nor so much as to speak to any body, (for fear he should get any one to acquaint his Wife) where he was, by word of mouth; and after all, without any form of Law, he was carried away beyond the Seas. At last she received a Letter from her Husband (writ in the presence of the Gaoler) dated July the 2d Old Stile, from Stonegate Prison in Brussells, wherein he acquainted her, That he lies there deprived of all Necessaries, in a dismal Condition; and she was acquainted by one who came over, that he is in a Dungeon, that they give him Bread and Water, and indeed little enough of that. That he desired her to petition the Right Honourable the Parliament of Eng∣land, to vindicate the Glory, the Justice of the English Laws, the Liberty and Property of the People they represent; That they would order him to be cleared by the Justice of those Law by which he stood committed, and desire to be tried. His Wife did Petition the Honourable the House of Commons the last Session of Parliament, who out of their great Goodness and Justice were inclinable to redress her. Then the Right Honourable Sir William Trumball, did desire this Honourable House to give themselves no further trouble, for he would take care that she should have Relief, and likewise kindly proffer'd her a Pass to go over to him, and order'd her to attend him at his Office. Where he was pleas'd to tell her, That he had several times writ about it, but could get no Answer; He knew not how her Husband was dispos'd of, and bid her apply her self to my Lord Portland. In July last she had an opportunity to address to my Lort Portland, who told her, if she would bring Security for her Husband's Behaviour for the future, she might perhaps have him again. But she finds it impossible to get any Security, except she could tell what he is charg'd with, or unless he were here to answer for himself. The 5th of August last, this poor Woman coming from Mr. Secretary's Office, at Three a Clock in the Afternoon, was struck down dead, which Blow, 'tis supposed, will shorten her Days. By the great indisposition of her Health since that, and the loss of her time in sollicit∣ing this Affair so long, she has quite lost her Imploy, and is utterly undone. She knows not where to apply her self for any Relief, but to this Honourable House, and humbly begs for Jesus Christ's sake, your Consideration of her miserable Condition. Your poor Petitioner Greibe humbly prays he may be brought for England, to have the be∣nefit of the Laws of this Kingdom, by which he stood committed, and according to which, and no otherwise, he humbly sues to be dealt with. That if he hath done any thing amiss, he is ready to submit to any lawful Prosecution which shall be made against him. But if there be no grounds for any, (as he is sure there is none) that then by such Process of Law he may be discharg'd from his most hard Imprisonment. That he may not lye and rot in a Goal with∣out just Cause, being able to serve the King and Country, which he is willing to do either by Sea or Land, and would be glad to venture his Life for such Service in the most dangerous Actions. And your Petitioner shall ever pray, &c.
THE CASE OF Conrade Griebe, Gent.
