C1083 816.m.17[51] R225232 99885960 188590
THE CASE OF THE Governour and Garrison of Londonderry, when it was Besieged by the Irish Army, 1688. and Such of them as were afterwards added by His Majesties Most Gracious Warrants, as Supernumerary or Reformed Officers, and served as such during the War of Ireland. Humbly Submitted to the Honourable the Commons of ENGLAND, in Parliament Assembled. THAT at the Beginning of the Late Happy Revolution, viz in December, 88. The Inhabitants of Londonderry shut up their Gates against the Earl of Tirconnel and his Irish Forces, and together with the Gentlemen of the several Counties in Ʋlster and Connaught, Declared for his Highness the then Prince of Orange, and the Interest of England, and thereupon sent Commissioners to his Highness, and acquainted him with their Proceedings. That His Present Majesty, by Letters dated the 10th. of February, 88. to my Lord Mount Alexander, assures them of Succours, approves and encourages their putting them∣selves in a Posture of Defence, against the Illegal Practices of the Papists there, and at the same time sent them Commissions for raising several Regiments, with Commission to Col. Lundie, to be Governour of Derry, and some Store of Arms and Ammunition. That pursuant to those Commissions my Lord Mount Alexander, Sir Arthur Radeing, Mr. Sheffington, my Lord Blaney and others, formed several Regiments of the Protestants of Ʋlster and Connaught, who at several times, tho' greatly over-numbred, disputed the Interest of England with the Popish Army with great Success, till at Claudy upon the River Finn, part of the said Forces being attacked by the Body of the Irish Army who had unexpectedly forded there, were then defeated and dispersed. Whereupon a resolute Part of them retreated to Londonderry, with purpose to defend that Hold, being the last in Ireland, save Inskilling, and there formed themselves into Regiments. That during the Siege the said Officers and Soldiers defended the said City with great Vigor and Constancy, so that the Number of the Enemy that fell, and were taken by Sallies, were computed at more than 9000 Men. That during the said Siege the said Officers and Soldiers were plundered of all, their Houses burnt, their Corn destroyed, their Lands wasted, and their Plantations cut down, while those that submitted to the late King were protected in their Possessions. That extream Want and Famine ensuing in the said City, the said Officers and Soldiers, and such Inhabitants as remain'd, were reduced to great Want and Misery; so that of 12000 that dyed in that Garrison the greatest part were starved, leaving their Widows, with numerous Fatherless Children, and the Survivours forced to eat Horse-Flesh, Horse-Blood, Dogs, Cats, Rats, Tallow, Salt and Dryed Hides, Starch-Graves or Tallow-Pressings and Sea-wreck, &c. and such Food at a stinted Allowance; there not remaining thereof when the City was relieved, sufficient for above two or three Days, by which all the said Garrison were very much enfeebled and almost starved, yet their Resolutions for the English Interest no wise abated. That the Enemy being exasperated at the Steddiness of the Besieged, and encouraged by the deplorable Necessities within, drove down all the Ancient Persons, Women and Children they could find in the Countries thereabouts to a vast Number, under the Walls of said City, which were of the near Kindred of the said Garrison, and sent Word to the Besieged that they would sire upon them till the City should take them in. That the Besieged thereupon caused Gallowses to be erected upon the Walls of the Town, and ordered all their Prisoners to prepare for Death, and sent Word to the Irish Army of their full Intentions to execute them instantly; whereupon they permitted those Men, Women and Children to shift for themselves, and the Besieged desisted from their said Intentions. The General of the Irish Army thereupon proferred Articles, wherein were contained, That they that would should be encouraged in the late King James's Service, those that would live in Town to have their free Liberty of Goods, &c. and Religion; and such as would go home, safe guarded and be restored to all formerly lost, both by the Justices of Peace and also by their Army, who would do them Right, and reprise for them what was taken from them and carried into the Mountains or otherwise, and upon Treaty thereupon engaged full Pardon, and Restitution of all things, Liberties, Priviledges and Religion; all which the Besieged (preferring the Interest of England) notwithstanding their then present Wants, Dan∣gers and Miseries, refused to accept, tho' no other Prospect attended then but starving, or the Sword without Quarter. That Their Majesties by their Declaration, dated 22d. Feb. 88. amongst other things, were graciously pleased to declare, that the Irish Lands and Estates of all such as should then after by Law, be forfeited to Their Majesties, should by Their Majesties be distributed and disposed to those that should be aiding and assisting in the Reduction of that Kingdom. That in August 89. the Town being providentially relieved, the said Regiments were broke by Col. Kirk, at a Court Marshal by him held the 7th. of the same Month. That His Majesty was graciously pleased by his Letter of the 16th. August 89. to Col. Walker and Col. Michelbourne, Governours of Londonderry, to commend their Services, and to bid the Commanders in Chief and themselves rely on His Majesties Royal Favour toward them, and thereby commanded the said Governours in His Name, to assure the said Officers, Soldiers and Inhabitants of Recompence, as not to repent their said Services and Sufferings. That His Majesty by His Gracious Warrant, dated the 16th. September, 89. was pleased again to express His Satisfaction in the Courage and Loyalty of the said Officers and Soldiers in Derry, and thereby directed them to be formed into three Regiments of Foot, as other Regiments then in Ireland; and thereby ordered, that all that were Officers in Derry at the time of the said Court Marshal, and not provided for in the said three Regiments, should be added to the said Regiments, as Supernumerary or Reformed Officers, and to be in full Pay as in their last Qualities, till disposed of to their greater Advantage, and no other to be preferred till all the said Derry Officers were so provided for, saving those of Col. Baker's Regiment who were before broke, and which were thereby ordered to be provided for equally with the rest so broken at the said Court Marshal. That their Lordship's the Committee for the Irish Affairs, by their Warrant to the Lords of the Treasury, dated the 8th. January, 89. reciting, That whereas His Majesty had ordered the said three Regiments to be formed as aforesaid, and had declared his Pleasure that they should be paid, together with the said Supernumerary Officers, from 1st. October 89. with the rest of the said Regiments in Ireland, They the said Lords, the Committee by His Majesties Command, desired the Lords of the Treasury to furnish Mr. Harboard, Pay-Master of His Majesties Forces in Ireland with Monies for that Service. That His Majesty by His Gracious Warrant to his Grace the Duke of Schomberge, dated the 27th. February 89. Wherein His Majesty is again pleased to mention the good Services of the Derry Officers, and that His Majesty had ordered an Establishment to be made of their Pay, which was thereby transmitted to his Grace, His Majesty did thereby direct Pay∣ment to be made to the said Regiments and Supernumerary Officers from time to time, as to the rest of the Army under his Grace's Command. That by Report made to Her late Majesty of Blessed Memory, dated the 28th. May, 91. by my Lord Marquis of Carmarthen, President, Earl of Bridgewater, Earl of Nottingham and Sir Henry Goodrick (on the Humble Petition of the same Officers and Soldiers) the Pay of the said Reformed Officers from the Time of the said Siege, and during such Time as they should continue in His Majesties Service, was by them setled; and in pursuance thereof, and by Her Majesties Special Command, by Two Reports, One dated the 1st. March, 91. and the other 21st. of April, 92. from Mr. Charles Fox to the Lords of the Treasury, their Pay was stated from the 5th. February, 88. (the Time which they took up Arms) to the 12th. August, 89. viz. Till the Time the City of Londonderry was relieved. That the Honourable the Commons of England in Parliament Assembled, as appears by their Journals of the 9th. April, 98. upon the Petition of the Mayor, Commonalty and Ci∣tizens of Derry did Resolve, that the Services and Sufferings of the said City were very Eminent, and of great Consequence to His Majesties Service and the Preservation of the Three Kingdoms, that in regard thereof, the said City had well deserved to be considered, and to have some Special Mark of His Majesties Bounty, for a Lasting Monument to Posterity, and thereupon Ordered an Address to be drawn up to His Majesty. That by the said Journals of 23d. of June, 98. It appears, an Address was drawn up accordingly, wherein the Honourable then Commons of England most Humbly Represented to His Majesty, the great Losses, Services and Sufferings of the said City, Governour and Garrison, Praying His Majesty would be Graciously pleased to make some Compensation to the said City, Governour and Garrison, by such Means and in such Manner as His Majesty in His Princely Wisdom should think fit. That by the said Journals 29th. June, 98. It appears, that His Majesty having been attended with the said Address, touching the said City, Governour and Garrison, His Majesty was pleased to say, He would take them into Consideration, according to the Desire of the House. That pursuantly His Majesty has been Petitioned, but the said Governour, Officers and Soldiers, not being admitted by the Commissioners by the Late Act, For Taking, Examining and Determining the Debts due to the Army, &c. to be Comprehended within the Words of the same Act; and no other Provision being made for them, are still without Relief. Wherefore, The said Governour, Officers and Soldiers do with all Humility, lay their said Services and Sufferings before this Honourable House, Hoping, That some Early Provision will be made for them, towards the Stating and Satisfying their said Arrears. And as in all Duty bound, Shall ever Pray, &c.
