C2472 [ocm]12272957 197439
HIS Maiesties Message TO COLONELL GORING of PORTSMOVTH. WHEREIN Hee declares His Resolution in com∣ming in Person to the said Town. Likewise the Parliaments Instructions to the Earle of Essex concerning Portsmouth. Wherein is Declared the full Power that they have given to the said Eale for the besieging of the said Towne of Portsmouth. With their Resolution concerning the Ile of Wight, and their determination concerning adjourning the Parliament. Ordered that this be printed and published, Hen. Elsing, Cler. Parl. D. Com. LONDON, August 9. Printed for I. H. and T. Rider.
THE KINGS MAJESTIES MESSAGE to Colonell Goring of PORTSMOUTH. THE Resolutions and proceedings of His Majesty against Hull and other places of strength hath often bin divulged to the eyes of the vaste World, but this re∣lation which I will in this following sub∣ject describe unto thee was never divulged neither is it knowne to any but the high and Honourable Court of Parliament, and to other some eminent persons. The Rela∣tion
whereof I have here set downe in these ensuing particulars: Upon Thursday last there was a Mes∣senger came to the House of Commons informing them that Portsmouth was taken by Colonell Goring, hee most traiterously betraying the trust reposed in him by both Houes of Parliament, who having got a great summe of money from the inhabi∣tants of that County, being divers Papists inhabiting therein, made it knowne to the Officers and Souldiers that lay in Garri∣son, and so by that meanes won the hearts of divers of them, but a great part left the Towne; hee also made them acquainted with the command that he had received from his Majesty, which was to this effect, That He had sent to him to put the town of Portsmouth into such a posture of De∣fence, he being Governour thereof that it might bee fit for the guard and safety of His Majesties person, and that His High∣nesse did expect to finde a place of trust in the said Towne; This is the summe
and full scope of His Majesties Mes∣sage, to the Governour of Portsmouth, Colo∣nell Goring, the said Goring being resolved to raise Fortifications and Bvlwarkes neere to the Towne for the safety of the same. Both Houses of Parliament having ta∣ken the proceedings of Colonell Goring into consideration, and foreseeing the great danger that might ensue thereby, after some time of debate, resolved upon these instructions to be sent to Hampshire, and to Southampton, to this effect: That the Earle of Essex (Lord Generall of the Army) for the defence of the King, Kingdome, and Parliament, shall forth∣with appoint Officers to levie Horse and Foot in those places, and march to Ports∣mouth, giving him command to those that shall oppose them in their passage, and that they shall also in the Name of the High Court of PARLIAMENT de∣mand the said Towne of Portsmouth,
and the Castle, and command Colonell Groing Governour thereof to deliver up unto them, and to demand the said Goring, and to apprehend him as guilty of High Treason, and if he denyed to lay siedge a∣gainst the Towne, and to suppresse all that shall come to oppose them, and that they shall also require the aide and assistance of all the next adjacent Counties, in the name of all the Commons in England, with ma∣ny other directions concerning the said businesse; All which were carried up to the Lords, desiring their assent to them, that they may be forthwith put in execu∣tion. These are the instructions that are given to the Earle of Essex, for the preser∣ving of the peace of the Kingdome. The said Houses of Parliament having taken into serious consideration the great dan∣ger that may ensue by the revolt of Colo∣nell Goring, in the Ile of Wight the Earle of Portland Governour thereof being a fa∣miliar friend with the said Goring and his Mother a Papist; They out of their judi∣cious
care and respect which they beare to the peace and welfare of this Kingdome, have thought it very necessary to displace the said Earle of Portland, and to repose the trust of the said Ile of Wight to the custody of the Right Honorable the Earle of Pembroke, which they have accordingly done, and hath given him command, that he shall see the same strongly fortified and guarded. The Honourable Court of Parliament, having for a long time sate with much paines taking for the safety of this King∣dome, the Malignant partie having got such a head, that they doe daily seeek the utter ruine and destruction of this Iland, and long since had prevailed and brought their plots and conspiracies to perfection had it not been for the Honourable Court of Parliament, to whom we are all bound to defend to the uttermost of our Lives and Fortunes; and they also taking into consideration the great disturbances that are now in severall Counties of this Realm
there was a motion made in the House of Commons for adjourning the Parliament for 15. dayes, onely a grand Committee to be appointed to sit during that time, and the rest of the Members to goe to their severall places to settle the peace of the Countrey; which Motion was refer∣red to the grand Committee of both Houses appointed to consider for the safety of the Kingdome. Ordered that this be printed and published, Hen. Elsing, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
