C2786 R18241 [ocm]11743427 48238
HIS MAJESTIES SPEECH, DELIVERED To both HOUSES in Parliament: The 14th. of December 1641. Tudor rose surmounted by a crown Scottish thistle surmounted by a crown French fleur-de-lis surmounted by a crown Irish harp surmounted by a crown LONDON: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majestie: And by the Assignes of JOHN BILL. MDCXLI. C R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown and flanked by the English lion and Tudor rose on one side and the Scottish unicorn and thistle on the other
HIS MAJESTIES SPEECH, DELIVERED To both HOUSES in PARLIAMENT, the 14th. of December 1641. My Lords and Gentlemen, THe last time that I was in this place, and the last thing that I recom∣mended unto you, was the businesse of Ireland, where∣by I was in good hope that I should not have need again to have
put you in minde of that businesse; But still seeing the slow proceed∣ings therein, and the daily Di∣spatches that I have out of Ireland, of the lamentable estate of my Pro∣testant Subjects there, I cannot but again earnestly recommend the di∣spatch of that Expedition unto you, for it is the chief Businesse that at this time I take to heart, and there cannot (almost) be any bu∣sinesse that I can have more care of. I might now take up some of your time in expressing my detestation of Rebellions in generall, and of this in particular; But knowing that Deeds and not Declarations must suppresse this great Insolencie, I do here in a word offer you what∣soever my power, paines, or indu∣stry
can contribute to this good and necessary work of reducing the Irish Nation to their true and won∣ted obedience. And that nothing may be omit∣ted on my part, I must here take notice of the Bill for pressing of Souldiers, now depending among you my Lords, concerning which I here declare, That in case it come so to Me, as it may not infringe or diminish my Prerogative, I will passe it: And further seeing there is a dispute raised (I being little be∣holding to him whosoever at this time began it) concerning the bounds of this ancient and un∣doubted Prerogative, to avoide further debate at this time, I offer, that the Bill may passe with a Salvo
jure, both for King and People, lea∣ving such debates to a time that may better bear it. If this be not ac∣cepted, the fault is not mine that this Bill passe not; but those that refuse so fair an offer. To conclude, I conjure you by all that is, or can be dear to you or me, that, laying away all disputes, you go on cheerfully and speedily for the reducing of Ireland. FINIS.
