C7089 E.293[18] 3850[20] R200165 99883209 186862
GOOD NEWES OUT OF THE WEST, Declared in a Letter sent from Lieueenant Generall CROMWEL, To a worthy Member of the House of COMMONS. Shewing what great things God hath done by small means. Two thousand slain and taken prisoners: Also fifteen hundred Horse taken beside Bag and Baggage. Published by Authority. LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons. 1645.
THE COPY OF LIEUTENANT GENER ALL CROMVVEL HIS LETTER TO To a worthy Member of the House of COMMONS. Dear Sir, I Have now a double advantage upon you, through the good∣nesse of God, who still ap∣peares with us. And as for us, we have seen great things in this last mercy: It is not infe∣rior to any we have had, as followeth: Wee were advanced to Long-Sutton, neere a very strong Place of the Enemies, called Lam∣port, farre from our owne Garrisons, without
much Ammunition, in a place extreamly wan∣ting in provisions, the malignant Club-men interposing, who are ready to take all advan∣tages against our parties, and would undoubted∣ly take them against our Armie, if they had op∣portunity. Goring stood upon the advantage of strong passes, staying untill the rest of his re∣treats came up to his Army, with a resolution not to engage, untill Greenvill and Prince CHARLES his men were come up to him. We could not well have necessitated him to an Engagement, nor have stayed one day longer without retreating to our Ammunition, and to conveniency of victuall. In the morning word was brought us, That the enemy drew out He did so, with a resolu∣tion to send most of his Cannon and Baggage, to Bridgewater, which he effected: But with a resolution not to fight; but trusting to his ground, thinking he could march away at plea∣sure. The passe was strait between him and us, he brought two Cannons to secure his, and laid his Muskettiers strongly in the hedges: wee beat off his Cannon, fell down upon his Musket∣tiers,
beat them off from their strength, and where our horse could scarcely passe two a breast, I commanded Major Bether to charge them with two Troops of about an hundred and twenty Horse, which he performed with the greatest gallantry imaginable, beat back two bo∣dies of the enemies Horse, being Gorings owne Brigade, brake them at Swords point. The e∣nemy charged him with neer four hundred fresh Horse. He set them all going, untill oppressed with multitudes, he brake through them with the losse not of above three or foure men. Major Desborough seconded him with some other of those Troops, which were about three, Bether faced about, & they both ranted at swords point,  great body of the enemies Horse; which gave such an unexpected terror to the enemies Army, that set them all a running. Our Foot in the mean time coming on bravely, and beating the enemy from their strength, we presently had the chase to Lamport and Bridgewater. We took and killed about 2000, brake all his Foot: We have taken very many Horse, and considerable priso∣ners; what are slain we know not, we have the Lieutenant Generall of the Ordnance, Col: Pre∣ston,
Colonel Heveningsham, Colonel Slingsbey, we know of: besides very many other Officers of quality. All Major Generall Massies party was with him 7 or 8 miles from us, and about 1200 of our Foot, and 3 Regiments of our Horse: so that we bad but 7 Regiments with us. Thus you see what the Lord hath wrought for us: Can any creature ascribe any thing to it selfe? Now can we give all the glory to God, and de∣sire all may doe so: for it is all due unto him. Thus you have Long-Sutton mercy added to Naesby mercy: And to see this, is it not to see the face of God? You have heard of Naesby, it was a happy victory: As in this, so in that, God was pleased to use his servants; and if men will be malicious, and swell with envy, we know who hath said, If they will not see, yet they shall see and be ashamed for their envy at his people. I can say this of Naesby, that when I saw the ene∣my drew up, and march in gallant order towards us, and we a company of poore ignorant men to seek how to order our battell: The Generall ha∣ving commanded mee to order all the Horse, I could not (riding alone about my businesse) but smile out to God in praises, in assurance of vi∣ctory,
because God would by things that are not, bring to nought things that are, of which I had great assurance, and God did it. Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord, and declare the wonders that he doth for the children of men. I cannot write more particulars now, I am go∣ing to the Rendevouz of all our Horse, 3 miles from Bridgewater, we march that way. It is a sea∣sonable mercy; I can better tell you then write, that God will goe on. We have taken two Guns, three Carriages of Ammunition in the Chase. The enemy quitted Lamport: when they ran out at one end of the town, we entred the other: they fiered that at which we should chase, which hin∣dered our pursuit, but wee over-took many of them. I beleeve wee got neere fifteen hundred horse. Sir, I beg your Prayers: Beleeve and you shall be established, I rest, Your Servant. FINIS.
