C7475b R213564 99835107 35409
A TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE Sufferings and Relief OF A YOUNG GIRLE; Strangely Molested, By Evil SPIRITS and their INSTRUMENTS, in the WEST: COLLECTED From Authentick Testimonies there-anent. WITH A PREFACE and POST-SCRIPT Containing Reflections on what is most Material or Curious; either in the History, or Trial of the SEVEN WITCHES who were Con∣demn'd to be Execute in that Countrey. JOB 2.6. And the Lord said unto Satan, behold he is in thine hand; but save his life. MATH. 15.22. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, thou Son of David; my Daughter is grievously vexed with a Devil. ROM. 16.20: And the God of Peace shall bruise Satan under your Feet shortly. EDINBURGH, Printed by JAMES WATSON in Craig's Closs, on the North-side of the Cross. M.DC.XCVIII.
PREFACE. WISE Men do justly suspect, and are hardly brought to credit, the Accounts of extraordinary Stories; especially anent Witch∣craft: Because the frequent impostures which the Romanists have obtruded on the World in their Miracles and Legends; the many Relations of odd things as done by Daemons or Wizards, which yet, were either false, or the product of simple natural causes; the ignorance of several Judges and Juries, who have condemned silly Creatures eerly upon their ridiculous Confessions, or other slender proof; and the difficulty of conceiving the Manner or Philosophy, of some Operations and Appearances, tho undoubdly true in Fact; are good prejudices against a Suddn belief, and precautions for an exact Inquiry. But they are Men of weak Souls, destitute of distinct thoughts; who deny all, because they have discovered Error in some; or condemn as false, all facts, which they are ignorant how they came to exist: By the same rule of reasoning that, there are no Enthusiasts, because the best Men have been some times mis∣taken for these; nor are there any Criminals, in respect severals have suffered who were not truely such: considering, that many Historys are fabulous, there∣fore none is to be trusted: And all the Phaenomena's in Nature, whose in∣visible causes they cannot comprehend, are meer Delusions. The following narrative, as to the truth of Fact, is the best attested peice of History of this kind, that has occurred in many Ages: the most of the matters therein represented having gained the assent of privat Scepticks; and been pro∣ven before publick Judges. So that it's more surprising than the strange things of Witchcraft that any should seriously deny the Beeing thereof, and from thence dis∣credit such useful Providences at a distance, when Notoriety has dispelled all Objections in the places where they did exist. Many Authors have proven, at large, that there are Witches and witch∣craft from Reason, Scripture, Antiquity, and Experience or all Nations and Ages in the World: And they have solved the difficultys which might obstruct the belief of this positive proof, by possible Hypotheses of Philosophy: Where it's to be observed, that tho any such explications of the natural manner of Phe∣nomena's are subject to cavil, yet the existence of a thing which has so certain positive Evidence cannot be denyed in sound Reasoning; because, Angels, and Men not being made for civill converse together in this World, and all communion with Devils being interdicted us, the Scripture needed to unfold little of their way of acting; and still the next Age, may discover what this could not reach, As this has already unveiled what was thought unextricable in the Last: Unless Impossibility were presently demonstrate. Herefore such a short hint, as may somewhat Illustrat the Events in the sub∣sequent discourse, may suffice in the present Case: Especially since Providence does, by eminent occurrences, rather design our practical instruction, then a Subject of national Speculations. The Devil can assume a corporeal Shape, and bespeak Man out of it: As he did to Eve, with our SAVIOUR, and in some Heat Oracles: So that there is Capa∣city for their entring into Contract. Satan is willing thus to ensure mortalls of being enemies to Heaven, Earth, and their own Salvation; by his indefatig∣able malice against all the three: As Curiosity in Witts; Revege, and Dis∣closure of Secrets in the great; covetousness in the Wordling or or, and
ures in all whom he thinks nfull (they being impregnable otherways) and is permitted by GOD, to attque in this manner; does sufficiently blind them, to be Susceptible of his Proposals thereanent. We see dayly, how Criminals sts inflamed by Satan, divert their Horrour no only of ternal, but also of tempo∣ral immenet Torments: Perverting these instincts of Nature which might fright them from suender. But further, he does commonly facilitate his conquest on Witches, by decoying them Piece-mae to his Lure, through the mediation of Others from amonge Mankind that are already embarqued, till they be prepared & he get an opportunity of making with them an explicit Transaction. That accordingly he has defacto prevailed in making Sorcerers and Witches, appears from the Testimony of the Wisest and est, in all States and Times. The Heathens, by Nature and Practice, discovering this truth, made Laws a∣gainst Male and Mathematic's (these last tho they assumed the name of an art much couraged by the Legislators; yet were known, under the Cloak thereof, to consult the Devil anent the fates of Men and States) which the Roman Senate and People did excut: And even the Prsians, in some good Reigns, did the like. Under the Old Testment, the Magīcias of Egypt and Baby∣lon, who were baffled by Moses and Dniell; Balaam and the VVitch of d, with the success of both; yea, Jesabel, Manasseth, and the ten Tribes their just Judgement for their Sorceties and VVitchcrafts amongst other Crimes; and the Laws made ainst such, as distin om other Guilts: Under the New Tea∣ment, Smon Magus who bewitched the People of Samaria; Elima the Sorcerer that was struck blind at Paul's Rbuke; the Pythnisse who seems to have been possest of consent, because she was not Tormented, but gt profit thereby; and such as confessed, shewed their Deeds, and burnt their Books in Ephesus: Are undeni∣able instances hereof. Finally there are prophesies of False-Christs with sigu and wonders, able to deceive, if posible, the very Elect: General Councils have made Canons against these VVretches: And the experimental-Kowledge of in∣jured Mortalls, with the publick Sentences which did vindicate the same; in subsequent Ages, are delivered down to us by the VVriters thereof. Hence Gulielmus Linensis, a Popish Doctor, was justly put to Death, even tho' he dyed penitent, he having confessed VVitchcraft (whereof the written Cove∣nant was found in his pocket) and that his share of the Devils Service was to per∣swade and preach that VVitches were only silly deluded Melancholians, where∣by their Confessions were no proof. His success was such in this work of Darkness, that the People and Judges did Slack, and VVitches were valy multiplyed in few Years. vid. Pet: Mamorius de Lamiis, who gives an account of the Process, from authentick Records. Through these periods, it is observed, that Satan has oft shifted the Scene, and turned himself to many Shapes, as he found it most accomodat to his purposes: Whereby the manner of Apparition of Devils has been different, according to the state of the times. So of old, Satan appeared, and was worshiped, as such for deprecating his Mischeif: which is said to be retained in some of the most barbarous places of the Indies to this day. In the darkness of Popery he transform∣ed into a more innocent Spirit (that pretended to fortell Deaths, reveal the De∣functs will, discover ocult murers, do other friendly Offices, &c. Which were subtile means of ducing to him, and relying on him) in the Brunies and Phairies. These were then very frequen, he having impuden thus to appear openly pro∣potional to the knowledge of Men, over whom his reign was so universal: As t is related to continue in the more Northern Regions at this day. But since
Light has broke out in our Horison, he ofter works externally by Magicians and Witcher, and internally on the lusts of Men, being now mostly restrained to his own Sphere or Subjects. Yet still he ensnares eerals, partly, by ping the Ordi∣nances of GOD; especially as they are corrupted in the Romish Church, whence so many Monks and Nuns as already prepared, have been found overcome. So he keeps with them publick Assemblys in the Night as of extraordinary mit▪ They formally worship him by many mimicall Gestures: He imprints on them a kind of Sacrament: He inflicts dreadfull Penances on such as have not execute the commanded mischeifs: He teaches them odd words and signes, upon re∣peating of which Exorcisms, he (it being his interest) effectuats the fore pa∣tined Oprations &c. But though what he does of himself, or on the Watch-word or Ensign of Sorce∣rers or Witches, may, by collection, & artful disposal of Matter and Form; ap∣pear surprising: Yet he cannot work against Nature; or so apply Actives to Pasives, as to overturn the Course thereof; since that is only competent to its Author who alon can do true Miracles, or know immediatly, the thoughts of Man. ea, after the Fall it is like, that even Satans natural Powers are come down below those of good Angels; and it is certain, that he is often befoole in his Designs by Providence: Notwithstanding whereof, he retains so much as (being permitted) is sufficient to bring about, by unseen natural Means, most of the extraordinary Appearances, that the Generality of the Learned have attributed to him: And particularly those in the subsequent Narrative: Many of which, tho' they are beyond the Efficiency of Disease, Decert, or any visibl Cause; yet may be the Effects of some such unperceived Means as follow. There is no difficulty in Satan's transmitting in a short time an Account of Things which are past; since it's known he goes to and fro in the Earth: Ye, he may have certainly fore told some future Events, as lexander's Succes against Persia, &c. seing he understands and may steal, the great Revolutions of the World, out of the Prophets; wherein they are so graphically circumscribed▪ Or he may discover his own Resolutions when-ever he is commissioned or or permttd to execute a Judgement; which is the case of those whom, for seeking their Horoscops, GOD gives over to him to whom they do apply; and of Saul, who got so exact an account of his own End by the Philistines. But without some such aid, Satan can only guess like the Phisician by the Ʋine, or Politician by the Crisis of States: which is the Cause that most of his Oracles are ambiguous. His transporting of Witches is elsewhere explained. He can raise Hurrianes (as appears in Job) which are known to carry over Tracts of Sea and Land, very ponderous Bodys: As it's easy for him to Condense a part of the Vechicle: which may proct the Beathing and yt cutt the Air; like the Fence of Dyvers, & beak of a Sloop: In which also he affects the magnifying of his natural Powe to be no less than of good Angels, who transported Ezekiel & Elijah. His cover∣ing of the Witches from siht, at some times, is also cleared, from the difficultys which seem to attend it, in another place: Where it appeats vry pss that his skill in Opticks, Reslection & Refraction of ight &c. To which his Power & Agility as a Spirit Subministrats Materials: may effectua all that can be proven to be true Fact in the Case. But Glanvil, More and others lay an other Hpothesis in both. viz. That the Soul is sparable from the Body in some Cases, without Death. When by God's Permission, Satan, of the parties Consent, gets power over Soul and Body; where∣by he may carry away the ne from the Heim of the other, and sett it back again
in it's Seat; providing the vital Sirits which make the Body a fit Receptacle, be well preserved by Ointments, that cstrict the Pores, till the return of it's Guest: But Death ensues from a Separatn when the Organs of the Body are rendred ltogether pt to obey the Sou Commands in its unctions If such an opi∣nion could be true, Sat might place this captivated Spirit to actuat any shape he thinks fit. But there needs not so much Metaphycks to unridle the Appea∣ances of Witches as Beasts, and the like: Since their reall ersns may be vered with a Vehicle; which by dspsal of th Rays comming therefrom, may fascinat the Eyes by the same Impresions that come from the true sight o such. His power of representing another thing indien of that which is truly present; is so certain tht its found he may make up the Image of persons who are not present at all: For it is undoubted that Spiritual Devils may some times be permited to repre∣sent by Phantom▪ the most innocent and praise worthy Men, as Devils incanat do traduce them. He that accuseth the Brethren & imitats an Angel of light, may likeways personat the Children of Light by his Delusions: Yet the Amedents, Concomitants, and Consquents, of such providences, do readily prple the Fals∣bood; so as the just man, for the most part, shall not perish in his Righteousness, and GOD, in his ordinary Providence, will not lagh at the trial of the nnocent; tho sometimes it fall out, that the Sons of Belial may swear away the life of an inncent Nboth. There are several other things of less difficult Expliction. Particularly, the Devil, or Witches might have been heard in onverse by the Maid and not by Others; the sme way as a sound directed through a speaieg Trmet does reach the Ears to which it is aimed without dispersing towards the intermediat, that are not in a streight line betwixt. The confederated Devil may, upn the Wches de∣sire, infuse poisoous Humors, extracted from Herbs▪ of the same vsibe Oprtin with the Steem of Madd-dogs, or the Pestlence; which being joynd to the rapidous course of the Patient's own Spirits, Humors, & Bood, that Satan, by igyring himself thereunto, may, through the natural Means of Pulson, set in Career: Can very well produce these extrardinary Motions which are mentioned in the following Acount. They delight uch in the Torture, or destruction, of young Children, in envy of CHRIST, who is tender of such▪ Little Ones; and because the Crime is the greater the less the Patient has offended, or can reift. They use, or make others to repeat, Scripture-wrds, for gining Credit, or llovating the Terror, or to disgrace the Word, by such a Mock-use as they did in time of our SAVIOUR, and therefore their Testimony was rebuted. It's observable from many passages; that he hastens, sometimes, and effects their Discovery; by his Malice against their prsent temporal Enjoyments; uncertainty of their Continuance; and unsatible Desire for their sull wreck: Yet some of them, who, are most maliciously bent, he thinks fit to keep here, as useful instruments; and Providence permitts others to Live, that they, wilfully filling up their measure, under Means, may be finally inexcusable. As to those whom, in secret Judgement, the Devil is permitted to torment; but, in Mercy, not to overcome: He may be carried thereunto from his design of perverting them by Terror, whereof he is at last disappointed: And however, the defacing of GOD's Image, and especially in despight of JESUS CHRIST Who honoured that Nature by assuming it, is his chief Delight: or he is constrained to make such stupendious Appearances against his Will (because he's most successful when he is least known) for a visible Testimony supead∣ded to the greater Gospel-proofs, in gross times, that there are Spirits and a Devil to torment them, as it's observable that this was denied by Mr. Alkenhead (tho
he died in full Conviction thereof) at the time when these things fell out in the Country. Or Providence may tollerat such Sufferings, that they▪ tho' in∣tended by he Devil for an instance of Malice, may, by their Nttoriety, be a mean of moving the iscovery, and bringing to Justice these Miscrea, whom he made se of as his Instrument in them; and who may have lived long in Rebellion against Heaven, and Destruction of Mankind by Malefices of the same sort; which fell out in this Case. Finlly, the aboundant & efficacio Grace of God onspicuous in bling a young Girl to resist the bestlaid Assanl of the evil Orie to the utmost. As it is certain that he shews the greatest Malice in Countries where he is ted and hateth most; and the nearer his Reign be to an End. There are many other prsitable Instructions which arise from this wonder∣ful Providence, for such Dispensations have their own Language, and the Man of Wisdom shall see GOD's Name. The sags of Charme for Men or Bea, certain Characters, Words, Ver∣ses, and Spells: The observation of Times and Seasons as lucky, or ulucky: The ele of having Scers by carying abou some Herbs, Plants, or branches of ees: And many the like Sprstitns; which can have no natural Causali∣y  the effects desired, are the very Rdiments of Witchcraft, and an implicit application to the Devil for vertues which GOD has denyed to things: Whence they are to be abhored ored as sinful in themselves, & introdctory to explicit engadg∣ment. So gross ignorance, prophane loosness, stupi forgetfulness of GOD, and neglect of his worship in Closets and Familys; Malice, Envy, Revege, Discotent, oppressive sear of want, and distrustful anxiety of Spirit: Finally, a Libidio emper, Curses, Imprecations, and sinful Cuiosity, art to be cyited as paving the way to the same mischief. Let none enveigh against a prfession of Religion, because some under that specious covert have been found in League with the Devil. It's because of the glorious Lustre and Excellency of our Holy Faith that these Miscreant paint themselves with it; whereby like wise they may be less suspected, and most able, subtily to gain on others, and do their Masters work: So it was no sin on the Apostles that Oe of their number had a Devil, was a Traitor and Cheat: Nor that Satan transformes himself into an Angel of Light, of design that the good ways of the LORD may be evill spoken of Neither let us be under a arish Fr and Terror of that Hellish Tibe, in truckling to their Humor, least they should do Harm, which savours of worshiping and paying homage to the Dev; whereas we ought only to make the Lord of Hosts our Fear and our Dread. There is no just ground to reflect on particular Persons or Families upon account of such troubles. For no Man kweth either Love or Hatred by All that's be∣fore them: All things come alike to All: And suppose ye that these were Sinners above all the Gureas, or above all that dwelt in Jerusalem? The in∣finit wise GOD may thus try Faith, Patience, and Christian Fortitude Job and our SAVOU were asslted; and seven Devils cast out of Mary Magdelen a chosen Vesiel unto the LORD. A Daughter of Abrham was bound by Satan for eighteen Years; and his Messener was sent to Buffer the great Apostle of the Geales. The Woman of Canan, ath. 15 c. 22. v. And the godly Man. Mark 9.24 v. Had their nearest Relations vext in this manner: And blessed be the LORD that has left such instances in Record for Prevention of stumbling; though it must be confesed that the same Carity which judges well of all things, cannot but alter it's rark when it's proof is sfficiently clear from the
way in which the person affected did formerly walk, since presumptions do alway cede to Truth, and Lawiers have a Maxim, that in re clara non est locus conjectis. The deaf Adder that stope the Eares at the charming voice of a Sun shine Gospel, will, one way or other, fall into the charmes of Satan or his instru∣ments When Men will have none of CHRIST, he gives them up to their own Lusts, and power of their spiritual Adversarie; as, when Israel had frthook their GOD, he gave them up to worship the Host of Heaven. But how much ought we to be humbled, and how great Diligence ought to be used in the dis∣covery, of so many hid Athns that are in the Camp of Israel! And what holy caution and pious use of out Baptismal Covenant, ought we to improve as the best Amulits against being either Entysed with the snares of the Devil, or affect∣ed by the attempts of his Instruments. Yet Poverty, Age, or Features, of any; yea nor simple fame or the like slender grounds, which could not be worthy of being represented to a Magistrate; ought not to move us to Suspition, much lest to defa: Since Charity hopes all things, and we ought to do to others, as we would be done by. These things may meet with a very different Reception, especially in this un∣happy Age and place of the World, where Brittain may be termed the unfort Island, Afck never having been more Fertile in the production of, Monsters: since it's observed that through All the Successions of Me, there was never be∣fore, any Society or collective Body of Atheists▪ till these drggs of time; though there might have been here and there some mishappen Births. But wisdom is justified of her Children, and it's the Season for Ss to awake when Delilah gives the Alaru, that the Philisns are upon him▪ What peace? so long as the Whodomes of Jesebel and her Witchcrafts are so many. But good things are hoped of our Magistrats, who have already so happily begun. The Apostle said of Job's Tryalls, ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen it he End of the LORD. So in this Narrative, you have a deplor∣able Schem of this Maids formidable Fitts, and of the powers of Darkness that com∣bin'd, not only for ruining her Body; but also for murdering her Soul. In the mean time, the Hearts of many were bleeding for her, and much Application was made to GOD in her behalf: Diverse solemn Fasts were observed, both in her Fathers Family, in the Paroch, and throughout the hounds of the Presbitry▪ and else-where, her Case was expresly minded in publick Addresses to the Throne of Grace: Till at length there was a general Fast Reilgiously keeped in most parts of the Syd; that GOD might give an effectual Check to Satan's Rage and Dominion in the Countrey. Boasting of Prayers is to be abhorred, yet it is our Duty with all Gratitude, to acknowledge GOD the hearer, and to pro∣clame to the World, the Excellency, of them; upon this very occasion: For He hath not turned away his Ear from Ʋs; it being the comfortable Result of this History, that the Girl hath been perfectly well for many Months: And is not this a Brand plucked out of the fire; and have not the splintres wherewith the Witches thought to have destroyed her, recoiled back upon some of themselves; and we wait execution of justice on the rest. The Devil could not enter the Herd of Swine, nor touch one Hair of Job's Head, without Permission from Him Whose Kingdom ruleth over all: Whence though our Enemies be very Indefatigable and Invisible, yet we are under the Conduct of the Watch-man Who neither slumbers nor sleeps; to Whom Dark∣ness and Light are both alike; and greater is He that is in us, than he that is in the World: So that unless we wilfully forfeit our Priviledges, there is no fear
of Counter-oising the wicked Ones, throwing down the Gantlett to all their Pro∣jects and Machintions; since neither Angels, Principaies, nor e, shall be able to separat us from the Love which is in CHRIST JESUS our LORD: And though no Algument can be dwn from any Merit inns; yet we'll carry the day against all the Militia of Hell under the Captain of our Salvation; since he will rest in His own Love. Is this the manner of Man, O Lord God? yet a little while the Devil and his Accomplices, will be cast into the bottomless Pit, and we transported into Imanuel's land. It will not be a natural sturdiness of Temper, nor a lifeless Mentining of the Name of GOD or CHRIST, that can shelter vs from those evourers, as appears in the Seven Sons of Sceva, Acts 19. but if the LORD o GOD then follow Him; for who is he that will harm you if ye be Foloers of tha wht go: he shall give His Angels Charge of thee to keep thee in all thy Ways: Geat eace have they that love Thy Lw, and nothing shall offend them: And they wre∣stle most successully agaist Principalities and Powers▪ who fght upon their Knees: As resisting of the Devil is the way to make him flee frou us. Yet whom Satan cannot obtain to be tortured hereafter he will (when permitted torment in this side of time; hence if obsessions of Bodys be so gret plage▪ how much worse is it to have him reign Master of our Souls: Whereoe let us watch and pray against every Sin, the least of which is more Pleasing to Him and worse to Ʋs then the being so corporally tormented. If Satan as a Spint may insinuat himself into our Humors; no wonder that by having such advantage in the temper, he can influence the Flegmatick to Slouth, the Cholerick to Anger, the Sanguin to Lust and sinful pleasure, the Melancholick to Despair, &c. So they who think that they stand have need to take heed lest they fall: And to pray▪ that the Watch-man of Israel may make an Hedge about them and their House and about all that they have on every side Let this not only rouze our Diligence and stir up our Gratitud for not being affected alike: But let it also recall our Admiration and love of JESUS CHRIST who hath freed our Souls and Bdys from the power and Slavery of Satan: And finding our selves too weak for him in awarding these deluding pleasures which procure our being deserted by GOD, and are Satans Baits to this fearfull Thraldom; let us run to the Rock of Ages for Protection and support, our Suf∣ficiency being only of GOD. Seing there are Witches and Devils, there are also immortal Souls of the first▪ since the last does contract for them, and takes such Pains to tain them: So that the Soducce's tho they have a judicial blindness in their reason, are hereby rendred inexcusable by very sense Evill Books which stirr up and ensnare curious Fantasis, that are seldom accompanyed with accurrat Judgments (the Soul's looking out ward diverting it from dyving into the deepth of truth) are to be restrained: And also such ridiculous amphlets as o doubt by the Instigation of Satan, have lately been sent abroad, of design to frustrat any good use which might be made of such rare Providences as are contained in the ensueing Nar∣rative, by Forging Othrs, or Disguising thi, This has been delayed so long to be published; partly, that there might be the more narrow Scrutiny made into the Matters of Fact; and partly, by some Accidents which did retard it. In it the Reader is not to expect any Accuracy of Sile; because the designed Curtness did occasion the wraping up of much Mat∣ter in small ounds; and the punctual Exactness of Truth in every Circumstance was the chief im: So that other Defects ought to be the less quarrelled.
THE NARRATIVE IT was about the end of August One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Six, when the first Rise and Occasion was given, (so far as can be known) to these strange Things that befel the Child, who is the Subject of this Nar∣rative; and the Manner was thus. Christian Shaw, Daughter to a Gentleman of good account called John Shaw Laird of Bargarran, in the Parish of Erskine, within the Shire of Ren∣frew; a smart lively Girl, and of good Inclinations, about Eleven Years of Age, perceiving one of the Maids of the House, named Catharine Campbel, to steal and drink some Milk, she told her Mother of it; whereupon the Maid Campbel (being a young Woman of a proud and revengeful Temper, and much addicted to Cursing and Swearing upon any light occasion, and otherways given to Puroining) did, in a most hideous Rage, thrice imprecat the Curse of GOD upon the Child; and at the same time did thrice utter these horrid words, The Devil harle (that is Drag) your Soul thorow Hell. This ast upon Munday, Au∣gust 17. in presence of several Witnesses, who afterwards made Evidence of it. Upon the Friday following, being August 21. about Sun-rising, one Agnes Naismith, an old Widow woman, ignorant, and of a Malicious Disposition, addicted to Treatnings, (which sometimes were observed to be followed with fatal Events) who lived in the Neighbourhood, came to Bargaan's House; where finding the Child Christian in the Court with her younger Sister, she ask'd How the Lady and young Child did, and how old the young sucking Child was; to which Christian replied, What do I know? Then Agnes ask'd, How her▪ self did, and how old the was; to which she answered, that she was well, and in the eleventh Year of her Age. On the Saturnday-night thereafter, being August 22. the Child went to Bed in good health; but so soon as she fell asleep, began to struggle and cry, Help, Help: And then suddenly got up, and did fly over the top of a Refting-bed, where she was lying (her Father, Mother, and others being in the Room, and to their great Astonishment and Admiration) with such violence, that probably her Brains had been dasht out, if a Woman, providentially standing by, and supported by a Door at her back, had not broke the force of the Childs motion; who being laid in another Bed, remained stiff and insensible as if she had been dead, for the space of half an Hour; but for Fourty eight Hours thereafter could not sleep, crying out of violent Pains thorow her whole Body▪ and no sooner began to sleep or turn drowsie but seemed greatly affrighted, crying still Help, Help.
After this the pain fixt in her left Side, and her Body was often so bent and ri∣gid, as she stood like a Bow on her Feet and Neck at once, and continued with∣out power of Speech, except in some very short intervals, for eight days; during which time, she had scarce half an Hours intermission together, the Fits taking her suddenly, and both coming on and going off by a Swerff or short deliquium, but appeared perfectly well and sensible in the Intervals. But about the midle of September, her fits returned in a manner differing from the former, wherein she seemed to fight and strugle with some thing that was invisible to spectators, and her Action appear'd as if she had been defending her self from some who were assaulting or attempting to hurt her, and this with such force that four strong Men were scarcely able to hold her; and when any of the People present toucht any part of her Body▪ she did cry and schreek with such vehemence, as if they had been killing her, but could not speak Before this time as she was seized with the trouble, her Parents had called for Physicians from Pasy, viz. John Whyte Apothecary a near relation, and afterwards Doctor Johnstoun; who took Blood and applyed several things both at first, and afterward, without any discernable Effect upon the Patient either to the better or worse: And she all the while of these Later Fitts being afflicted with extraordinary ings and fallings of her Belly; like the motion of a pair of Bellows! and such strange movings of her Body as made the whole Bed she lay on shake, to the great consternation of Spectators. Some dayes thereafter was an alteration in her Fitts, so far, that she got speaking, during the time of them; and while she was in the fits, fell a crying, that Katharine Campbel and Agnes Nasmith were cutting her side, and other parts of her Body; Which parts were in that time violently Tormented And when the fit was over she still averred, that she had seen the same Persons doing the same things which she complained of while under the fit (it being remarkable that in the intervals she was still as well and sensible as ever and would not be∣lieve but that others present saw them at well as she! In this condition she con∣tinued with some but not very considerable variation either as to the fits or in∣tervals, for the space of a Moneth. After which time she was coneighed to Glasgow, where Doctor Birbane a Phisician deservedly famed for skill and experience, did by Mr. Henry Marhell apothecary apply Medicine to her; after which having stayed in Glasgo about ten dayes and being brought home to the Countrey, she had near a fortnights in∣termission But then her fits returned, with this difference, that she knew when they were acoming by a pain in her left side, which she felt before they cme, & in these Fits her Throat was prodigiously drawn down toward her breast, & her Tongue back into her Throat; her whole Body becoming stiff and extended as a Dead Corpse without sense or motion: And some times her Tongue was drawn out of her Mouth over her Chin to a wonderful length, her Teet setting together so fast upon it, that those present were forced to thrust something be∣twixt her Teeth for saving her Tongue. And it was oft observed that her Tongue was thus tortured when she essayed to Pray. And in this condition she was for some time, with sensible intervals wherein she had perfect health, and could give a full account of what she was heard to utter while in the Fit. For several dayes these Fits continuing with some variation, her Parents resolved to return her to Glasgow, that she might there have the more conveniency of being under the Doctors Oversight and Care, for further discerning the nature of her trouble and making use of the most probable natural remedies. But being on er y
in her Grand-mothers house at Northbar, she did thrust or spit out of her mouth porcels of Hair, some curled, some plaited, some knotted, of different colours, and in large quantities: And thus she continued to do with several swoon∣ing Fits every quarter of an hour, both in her passage to Glasgovv which was by Boat on Thursday, Nor. twelfth: And when she was in Glasgovv for the space of three dayes ensuing e puts frequently hair out of her Mouth and in as great quantities, as the first day; her former swerfing or swooning Fits re∣curring as often torow out the day as before: And thereafter from Munday to Thursday following she put out of her Mouth Coal-cinders about the bignss of Chastuts, some whereof were so hot that they could scarcely be handled, one of which Dr. Birsbane being by her when she took it out of her Mouth, felt to be hoe then the heat of any ones body could make it. Then for the space of two days in these swooning Fits, as formerly, there was put or taken out of her Mouth straw in great quantities, tho but one straw at once folded up together which when put out returned to its length, was found to be both long and broad, and it was remarkable that in one of them there was a little small pin found. Thereafter were put out of her mouth bones of various sorts and sizes, a bones of Fowls and small bones of the heads of Kine and then some small sticks of Candle firt (a sort of Fin in this Countrey th burns like Candle) one of which was about three or four inches long; which, when any, upon sight of either bones or sticks took hold of to pull out, they found them either held by her Teeth set together upon them, or foribly drawn back into her Throat; particularly chibald Bonatie of Kelli younger observing a bone in her mouth like a duck shank or le bone, and essaying to pull it out, he declared be found something drawing it back into her throat; so that it took a deal of force to get it pulled out. It is to be noticed that she never knew how these things were broght into her mouth, and when they were got out of it she im∣mediatly recoveed of her fit, for that time. After this she put out of her mouth some quantity of unclean Hay intermixed with dung, as if it had been taken out of a Dunghil; which was so stinking that the Damsel could not en∣dure the nauseating taste and vile relish those things produced in her mouth, which did necessitate her still to rinse her mouth with Water after the putting of that sort of matter out of it. Then for more then a days space she put out of her Mouth a number of wild fowls feathers; after that a gravel-stone which in the judgment of beholders had been passed by some person in a gravel fit; with some small whitestones and a whole nut gall (wherewith they use to dye and to make ink) together with lumps of Candle grease, and egg-shells; during which time she continued as formerly in her recurring swooning fits with some intervals wherein she was in perfect health: Of all which there were many Fa∣mous Witnesses who in that City (besides those who were continually with hr) came frequently to visit her. It is to be noticed, that the Damsel at the time of the putting out of her Mouth the Sticks abovementioned being in Bed about eight a Clock at Nigt, told, she was to be grievously tormented with sore Fits that Night, which ac∣cordingly fell out: For a litle thereafter, she fell into along swoon, wherein she had no use of any Sense, either of Hearing, Seeing, or Feeling, so as th oft times the Beholders called to her with a loud Voice, moving also and tos∣sing her body, all was to no purpose, and when the Laird of Kelly younger a∣bovenamed, to try the Truth, gave her a very sore pinsh in the Arm, she had no Sense of it in the time After recovery from the Swoon! but yet continu∣ing
in the Fit) she fell a reasoning with Katharine Campbel after this manner, Thou sit'st there with a uck in thy Hand to put in my Mouth; but thorow GOD's strength thou shalt not get leave: Thou art permitted to Torment me; but I trust in GOD, thou shalt never get my Life, tho it's my Life thou design'st And at th time callng for a Bible and Candle, said, come near me Katie, and I't hee see where a godly Man was given up to Satan to be Tormented: But GOD keeped his Liem His own Hand: And so I trust in GOD, thou shalt never get my Life, and all that thou shalt be permited to do unto me, I hope thorow GOD's mercy, shall turn to my Advantage. This Man was Rob'd of All, and Tormented in Body, and had nothing left him but an ill Wife. Come near me Kae, and s'lread it to thee "And teach∣ing that Passages  Job. when she came to the place where hu Wife said to him Curse GOD and Die, that Damsil considering these words atle, said? O! what a Wife has this been, that bids, her Good man Carse God and Die? she who should have been a comfort to him in his Trouble, turned a Cross to him? Then after reading of the Chapter to the end, she kt tovvards the foot of the Bed and sad. No Katie, what think'st thou of that? Thou seest, for all the power the Devil got over Job he gain'd no Ground on him; and I hope he shall gain as litle on me. Thy Master the Devil deceives thee, he is a bad Master whom thou serv'st, and thou shalt find it to thy Smart, except thou Re∣pent before thou Die; there is no Repentance to be had after Death: I'l let thee see Katie, there is no Repentance in Hell, And turning over the ook ng uk: 16. Chap. nar the letter end thereof, and reading the samen over, said, Katie thou seest there is no Repentance in Hell, for this Rich Man besought Abrabam to testify to his five Brethren, that they come not to the place of Torment, where he was; but Repent & turn to the LORD, for there is no win∣ning out if once they come there; no Katie, thou hear'st this, what think'st thou of it I'l le thee hear another place which should pierce thy very Heart, And turning over the Book, sa d h vvould red about Adam and Eve thr, thou know'st Katie, the serpent the Devil thy Master, thought to have ruined Mankind at the beginning, his Malice was so great at that blessed State wherein they were then, seeing himself cast down from all hopes o Mercy, used all means possible for him to subvert their happiness, by suggesting to them fair Promises, and a prospect of Advantage to them before their Eyes, in causing them Eat of that forbidden Fruit; whereby they and their Posterity fell from that Estate wherein they were; & were made Subject to GOD's Curse for ever: But GOD did not suffer them to be at this stance, but of his infinit Mercy shewed to them a better way, whereby they might have Life Eternal by revealing to them that blessed Promise, the Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Hea of a the Serpent. Now Katie, what think'st thou of that Promise? But have mind of this, thou it get no Advantage by it, it's not made to thee, who hast renounced GOD's Service, and taken on with the Devil; thou art his Slave, thou deny'st this; but I know thou art a Hypocrite; for I re∣member, when thou wast in my Mothers House, thou bought a Catechism, upon a pretence to learn to Read, to cloak thy Sin: Wil't thou hear me, know'st thou the reward of the Hypocrit? I'l let thee hear it; I remember Mr. W lliam Gilles was Lecturing the other day upon the 23 of Mathevv, where many a wo is pronounced against the Hypocrit, Eight dreadful Wo's here, Katie, and some of them belongs to thee: But I'l tell thee more, know'st thou the reward of the Hypocrit, they shall be cast into the Lake that burns
forever, that's their Portion; do'st thou hear this now? Thou turn' thy Back to me, when I am telling the truth; if I were reading a Story-Book, or telling a Tale to thee, thou would'st hear that. Remember it will be thy Portion too, if thou do not Repent, and Confess, and seek Mercy. Again turning over the Book, she read about Pilat saying,Pilat he made a shew of cleansing himself of CHRISTS Blood, he wash'd his Hands and declar'd himself Innocent; but for all his washing, he had a foul Heart; he would not loss his Office for the saving of CHRISTS Life: He knew well enough that CHRIST was an innocent Person; but he preferred his Honour before CHRIST; Therefore to please the Jevvs, and to quench the strugling in his Conscience, he washt his Hands, and then delivered CHRIST to be Crucified by them. Thus she continued for more then two Hours space; reason∣ing at this Rate, and exhorting her to Repent, quoting many places of Scripture thorow the Revelation and Evangelists. And when any offered to pull her Bible from her, she uttered horrid Schreeks and Out-crys, saying, She would never part vith her Bible as long as she liv'd, she vvould keep it spight of all the Devils. Before we pass from this, it will be needful to give the Reader advertisement of some things. 1. That while she call'd for her Bible and a Candle she nei∣ther heard nor saw any of those Persons who were then actually and discernably presenting he Room with her, and that Katharine Campbel to whom she directed her speech was not discernably present to any other Body but her self. And that pinch she got in her insensible fit, she found and complain'd of the pain of it in that part afterward, but knew not how she came by it, nor blamed any of her tormentors for it. 2. That these words set down as spoken by her, were the very same both for words and order as nearly as they could be gathered and remembred by the hearers, without any addition of their own. 3. That altho she was a Girle of a pregnant Spirit above her age, and had much of the Scrip∣tures, and withal had pretty good understanding, above what might be expect∣ed of one of her years, of the foundamental principles of Religion taught in the Catechisms; yet we doubt not but in so strong a Combat, the Lord did by His good Spirit graciously affoord her a more then ordinary measure of Assist∣ance, both now and at other times in the like debates. Sometime after the putting out of her mouth the trash above-mentioned she fell into extreamly violent fits, with lamentable crying; four Persons be∣ing hardly able to withhold her from Climbing up the Walls of the Chamber, or from otherwayes doing her self hurt, mean time having no power of speech, while in the fit, but her back and the rest of her Body grievously pained: In which condition she continued four of five days with the usual sensible inter∣vals: In which she declared, that four men Alexander and James Andersons, and other two (of whom she gave particular and exact marks, but knew not their names) were tormenting her. It was observ'd that many of these she named were known to be Persons of ill-fme, as these two Persons last nam'd were: It is also remarkable, that for some time she knew not the name of the said Alexander Anderson, till one day he came a begging to the door of the house, where the Damsel was, whom she seeing, immediatly cryed out, that vvas be vvhom she had seen among the Crevv. After this she fell into other Fits, wherein she saw the forenamed Persons with some others, and heard and saw several things that past among them. Parti∣cularly, she sometimes told when she was to take the fits, how often she would
take them, (which fell out accordingly) with some discourses that were among them relating to her self and others. About the eight of December, being brought home again from Glasgovv, and having had six or seven days respite from her ts, she afterwards fell into fright ful and terrifying fits: The occasion whereof she declar'd to be, her seeing the Devil in prodigious and horrid shapes, threatning to devour her, and then she would fall dead and stiff with all the parts of her Body distended and stretcht out as a Corpse without sense or motion; which fits as they came suddenly on without her knowledge, so she did as suddenly recover and grew perfectly well; and they usually came on when she essayed to pray. In which time also o∣ther fits took her more sensibly, she knowing when they were a coming, how long they would continue, and when they would return: In which fits her eyes strangely altered, and turned in her head in the admiration of Spectators, with a continual painful working about her heart, sometimes her joynts were complicat and drawn together, and her fore head drawn forcibly about toward her shoulders; which fits she took by first falling into a Swoon, and after her violent fits inntly recovered after the same manner. During this time the fits altered again as to their times of comming and continuance; in which she sometimes endeavoured to ber own singers, or any thing else that came in her way, also when she saw the Persons before mentioned, one or two of them about her, pointing them out to the Persons present with her, tho by them unseen, and sometime declaring that she had hold of them by their Cloaths. Particularly. December, 17, She being in a fore fit she cry'd out of several Per∣sons that were tormenting her; and being in the bed, grasped with her hands towards the foot of it, and cry'd out, that she had got a grip of the sleeves of one J. P's. Jerkin (or Jacker) which was, as she said, duddie, (that is rag∣ged or tattered) at the elbows: And in that very instant the Damsels Mother and Aunt heard the sound of the rending or tearing of a Cloth, but saw or felt nothing, only found in each of the Damsels hands which were fast closed when they got them opened, a bit of red Cloth, locking as torn off a Gar∣ment; of which kind of Cloath there had been none in the Room at that time nor in the whole house nor near it, that any knw of. Another particular she told was, that there was such an one among the Crew going to prick her Tongue, which thereupon was instantly pull'd back into her Throat, she lying dumb for a considerable space. Sometimes upon her recovery from her Fits she told that she heard several things spoken and communed among her afflict∣ers, but durst not make them known; because they threatned to Torment her after this, or the other mannr, if she should make them known, and accord∣ingly when by her Mother or others she was prevailed with to begin to tell them instantly the Torment fell out as was threatned. She told further that her Tor∣mentors appear'd to her usually with Lights and strange sorts of Candles, which were frightful to her to look to. Thus she continued till the first of January. 1697, not only in the fits fore∣mention'd with some alterations, but fell likewayes by swooning into light its, wherein she continued for two or three hours together, sometimes more, sometimes less, with very short Intervals, in which Fits she did not much com∣plain of pain; but had a great palpitation in her breast, and sometimes in other parts of her Body strange and naccountable motions, which continued in a greater or lesser degree during the whole time of the Fit, wherein she was some∣what light, and not so solid in her mind s as at other times; tho in the Inter∣vals
of these, as of all other fits she was sufficiently composed; which Fits,  all the rest, came suddenly on and went as suddenly off b a Swoon or Swef. Before we proceed further in the Relation, les it be noticed first, that the foresaid, Agnes Naismh, being brought by the Parents a second time to see the Damsel▪ did (o not desied) pray for her, viz. that t Lord God of Heaven and Earth might send the Damsth hth ad try out the Verity: After which, the Damsel declared that to the said Age ha oely been very troubeome to her; yet, from that time forth she did not more appea to er, as her Tormen∣tor; but upon the contrary, as she apprehende, defeding her from the fury of the rest. 2. It is further here to be noticed that the fore nam'd Katharin Campbel, could by no means be prevailed, with to pray for he Damel, but upon the contrry when desired by some, crsed them and all the Family of Bargarren, and in particular the Damsel and all that beloned to her, withal adding this grievous Imprecation; The Devi let er nves grow bette, no any concern'd in her, be in a better condtion then she vvas in, for vvhat they ad done to her. Which words she spoke before diverse famous Witnesses. 3. That Bar∣garren having revailed with the Sheri deput of the Shie, to imprison the said Kathaine Caphel; she from the time of her Imprisonment, never appear'd to the Damsel (tho formerly she had ordinarly appear'd as one of her most vio∣lent Tormentors) except once or twice, at which times it was found upon after enquiry, that she wa not in the Tobooth but either in the aylors house, or had liberty granted her to go out to Church. 4. That at the time when the Damsel did put out her mouth the hair and other trash as above related. Katrin Campbel being taken into custody, thee was found in her poket a ball of hair of several colours, which was afterwards thrown into the Fire, after which time the Damsel put no more ha out of her Mouth. And it is to be further noticed that she said, she heard amongst the Crew, when tormenting her, that Katharine Campbel made that Ball of har found in her poket, of the hair of the Damsels head which had been cut when he trouble began, and which did a∣gree in colour, &c. when compared. Upon the first day of Jauary about ten clock at night, she fell by swooning into Fits differing from the former, in that, after the swooning fit was over, she lay quiet, as if she had been dead, making no motion at all with her Body in the Bed; yet at the same time these present heard her mournful talking, but with a low and hardly audible Voice, and repeaing several Storys in meeter which they hought to be Expressions of the Rise and Progress of her own trouble; and thus she continued (still withall naming some of the forementi∣oned Persons) till her Parents and others offered to Rouze her, by Touching & Moving her body. Whereupon instantly she uttered horrid Schreeks, and cry'd at if she had been pierced thorow with Swords, and assaulted for her Life. After which she fell a Singing, Leaping, and Dancing for a long time, laughing with a loud Voice, in an unusual manner, tearing down the Hingings of the Bed, & pulling off her Head-cloaths and Nek cloaths; in which Extravagances she was acted with such Force and Strength, that her ather and Minister tho joyn∣ing their whole Strength together, could not get her Dancing and Leaping hindered. But after Prayer, the Minister finding her Composed, enquired if she remembered what she had done in time of the Fit; to which she reply'd, That she distictly remembered her miscariages, and in speciall her Singing & Dancing, saying withall, that the Witches enclosing her in a Ring (or Circle) and Dancing and Singing about her, was the occasion of her Dancing, which
he then gladly performed with the rest. For some days after she had Fits much after this manner, with some varition: In one of which its, as she was tearing off her Head-dress cloaths, her Parents resolving to see what would be the event, did make no hinderance to her: Whereupon she stript her self of all her Cloaths that were upon her, not leaving so much as her Smock u∣pon her Body, if that had been peritted. After this toward or about the Eleventh of January, she fell into Fits diffe∣rent from the former, in which she was suddenly carried away from her Parents and others that were about her, with a sudden flight, and in the first of these (to their great amazement) thorow the Chamber and Hall down a long wind∣ing Stair toward the ower-gate, with such a swift and unaccountable motion, that it was not in the power of any to prevent her, her Feet not touching the Ground, so far as any of the Beholders could discern, being heard in her mo∣tion to laugh in an unusual manner: But by Divine Providence the Gate being shut, her motion was opt till such time as some of the Family could over∣take her, who endeavouring to carry her back, found her instantly fall as one dead and become stiff: In which posture, being brought back to the Chamber, she lay for a considerable space. And being recover'd she did declare, that there were about the number of Nine or Ten Persons who had carried her away in a Shue (as she term'd it, that is as one swinging upon a Rope) wherein she then took pleasure, her Feet not at all touching the Ground, to her apprehension. The Night following she was suddenly carried away, as before, from her Parents and others who were about her, thorow the Chamber and Hall, and sixteen large steps of a winding Stair up, toward the top of the House! where she met with Apparitions of strange and unaccountable things, but was carried down again as she thought in a shue or swing, asserting after her ecovery that she met upon the Stair the number of six Women and four Men, and by them was carried toward the Gate again, where accordingly she was found, and was carried up as formerly, all the parts of her Body distended and stiff as one Dead; in which posture she lay for sometime, and when recovering, declared, that both now and formerly, she had endeavoured to open the Gate, and that those she saw about her were helping her, with a design to get her to the Court to drown her in the Well, which she said she heard them saying among themselves, they intended to do, and that then the World would believe she had destroy∣ed herself. It is observable that (these kind of Fits continuing with her for some few dayes) in one of them she wa stop't at the Gate, and found in the foremention'd Posture which was neither Locked nor Barred; yet could they not get it oppened tho both e and her Tormentors endeavoured it. Before we proceed in the Relation, it is not to be omitted that as soon as the Damsels affliction was observ'd to be extraordinary and preternatural there were (besides times formerly set a part in a more private way) at the desire of the Parents and Minister, and by the Presbytries special order, a Minister or two appointed to meet one day of every Week at the house of Bargarra to joy a with the Family, the Minister of the Parish and other good Christians of the Neighbourhood, in Fasting and Praying which usually fell to be on the T∣day▪ And upon the 12th of January it being the turn of Mr. Patrick Simp a Neighbour Minister to be there; when he came to the house he found both the Minister of the Parish; and the Brother who was to joyn with him had been ne∣cessarly withdrawn; yet resolved to carry on the Work with assistance of three Elders, some other good People being present. When he first saw the Dam∣sel
after he came to the house, he found her under some lesser Fits which came and went off quickly, and when Prayer began she was quiet and sober during the same, but in time of singing the 93 Psalm, she fell into a sore Fit, of great∣er continuance, first Laughing then making some sound like Singing, after that pulling her head Cloathdown over her Face, and lastly turning so outragious in her otions that her Father could scarce get her holden with his whole strength, but beoved to ly over upon the ed with her in his Arms untill the Fit abated: After her Recovery from which, she was quiet and composed all the time of Prayer▪ and while the Minister Lectur'd on M, 9. from 14 verse and forward to verse, 30. was very Attentive, carefully looking in her Bible the Scriptures quoted, so all along both in time of Prayes and Singing untill the whole Religious exrcise was ended, and some Refreshment after the same taken, at the end of which she told the Company▪ she had something to tell which she heard some among her Tormenters saying, which she durk not reveal; But the Minister and her Mother urging her to befree and not to obey the Devil, she said, she would tell it her Mother in her ear. Then coming from the other side of the Table, and placing her self betwixt her Mother and Aunt she began to Whisper in her Mothers Ear; but before she got a Sentence fully pronunced, she fell into a violent Fit, so as her Mother and those next her could scarcely hold her till the Violence thereof began to abate, and then her Mother told that she was speaking of a Meeting and a Feast they had spoken of in the Or∣chard of argarran, but was able to say no more▪ and after Recovery, her Mo∣ther desiring her to tell the rest of it, and she beginning to Whisper in her , as before, could not get one word uttered till she was seiz'd again of a Fit, as violent as the former. Whereupon the Minister perceiving her Torment, de∣sired them o forbear any further troubling of her. Notice, that according∣ly there was a Feast and Meeting in that Orchard about that time, of the Crew▪ acknowledged, and declared afterward by three of them that Con∣fessed themselves to have been there. viz Elizahath Andersen, James and Thomas Lindsars they not knowing what either the Damsel had Spoken, or one of them what another had Confest relating thereunto. About or within a little after this time, she was again suddenly carried from them in the former manner down a Stair, which goes off from a Corner of the Chamber to a Celler just below it▪ where her Brother & Sister were providential∣ly gone down a little before, to bring some drink from the Celler, and already near the stair Foot, with a lighted Candle, which she soon put out: But they crying and holding her by the Head-Cloaths, quikly discovered to the rest where she was. Upon which Mr. Alexander King Minister at Bonil (being then in the Chamber) made hae down Stair where he found her▪ bu her Brother and Sister had lost hold of her, she having loosed her Head-cloaths and let them go; yet Mr. King having caught hold of her, keept her in his Arms till a lighted Candle was brought, and endeavoring to bring her up Stairs, did de∣clare that he found something forcibly drawing her downwards, but he still keeping his hold, she fell stiff as one Dead upon the Stair & was in this Posture carried up and laid in Bed, where she lay a considerable space. And when re∣covered of the Fit, she declar'd that the Occasion of her going down Stairs with such Force, was, that the Crew had suggested to her while she was in the light Fits, that the Devil was in the Meal Chist in the Celler, and that if she would go down and put out the Candle, she might force him out of it. Notice here first, that when some Fits of this kind were ready to seize her, she sometimes
gave advertisement thereof to these present with her, giving signs of her earnest desire of their help to prevent her Motion, which usually proved to be of good effect, wherein the Divine Mercy toward her is much to be observed. 2. It is also to be noticed, that about the time when she was in these flying Fits, she used to utter horrid Screek and Out crye not like those of Rational Creatures: In which time there was heard for three nights together, when the Damsel was a sleep in Bed, Screeks and Ot-cryes of the same kind in the Court, when none of the Family was without Doors, to the great afrightment of those who heard them, being that they exactly resembled the Crys and Skreeks the Dam∣sel used to utter in the Fits; who afterwards in one of her Intervals hearing some of the Family talking of those Crys and Skreeks, and alledging they had been uttered by some wild beast or other, said to them, they were mistaken▪ for it was Margare. And two others of the name of Margaret call'd by the Crew their Maggi's, had uttered these Skreeks, the Devil having promised to them at that time to carry her out of the House to them, that they might drown her in the Well, where there were eighteen more waiting for her. After this she fell into freting and angry fits (as she term'd them) in which her humor was cross to all that those about her could either say or do▪ nothing proving to her satisfaction, but every thing displeasing, (her former fits with∣al now and then seizing her) but when restored to a right composure of mind, she declar'd that her Tormentors about her did still suggest to her and advise her to go to such and such remote places of the house her alone and bring with her a Snood (which is a head-lace such as Women ty up their hair with) or a Cra∣vat or some such thing, promising her rough Almonds or some kinds of swet∣meats which they nam'd to her, and for that end, to bring her apron with her to hold them in, and accordingly when seiz'd again with fits of this nature did resolutly endeavour to repair to these places, having a Snood or Cravat and her Apron with her, and would suffer none to be in her Company, which put her Parents and others to a necessity of detaining her by force, and she being thus prevented, utteted hideous schreeks and outcryes, of which in this sort of fits she was seldom free. Thursday, January 14th▪ at night a young ass or Girle apper'd to her with a scabbed face amongst the rest of her Tormentors, relling her she was to come to the house to morrow about ten a clock, and forbidding her to reveal it. The next day being January 15th, in the afternoon the Damsel earnestly en∣quired at her Mother and the rest of the Family what Beggars had come to the gate that day, and of what Countenance and visage they were▪ But the Family not knowing her design in such a question, gave no heed unto it; yet she still in fisting and being in Company with her Mother and another Gentlewoman, about four a clock at night said to them, she thought she might tell them some∣what (the time being now pa) the was forbidden to reveal; but beginning to tell she presently fell a crying that she was tormented and pricked throw her whole ody; yet recovering from the fit, went on and told it; the thing the had to reveal was, that a scabbed fac'd ass appear'd to her yer-night and was to e at the gate this day at ten a Cloak. Whereupon the Servants being en∣quired at, what sort of beggers had been there that day, did declare among o∣thers, there had been a begger Wife at the door and a younger Woman or Lass with her who had Scabs on her Face, and receiv'd their Alms. January, 16th, and 17th, When recovered of her swouning Fits, she put u of her Mouth a great number of Fins, which she declared J.
had forc'd into her Mouth, and a Gentlewoman who had been always one of her most violent Tormentors. January, 21. Her Fits altered again, after this manner, she would fall in them with heavy Sighs and Groans and hideous Outeryes, telling those about her that Cats, Ravens, Owles and Horses were destroying and pressing her down in the Bed: And at the same time her Mother and another Gentlewoman, be∣ing in the Room with her, did declare that immediatly after they had taken the Girle out of her Bed in this condition, they did see something moving un∣der the Bed-cloaths as big as a Cat. The same Morning in the interval of her Fits, she said, she heard her Tor∣mentors Whisper amongst themselves, and suggest to one another, (naming J. P. the Andersons and others) that the Devil had promised and engaged to them, to carry her over the Hall Window, to the end they might Drown her in the Well which was in the court; and then they said the World would believe she had destroyed her self; and the same day and several dayes thereafter, when seiz'd with her Grievous Fits, did attempt with such force to get her self over that Window, that Spectators could scarce with their whole strength prevent her. About this time, nothing in the World would so discompose her as Reli∣gious Exercises, if there were any discourses of God or Christ, or any of the things which are not seen and are Eternal, she would be cast into grievous A∣gonies; and when she assayed in her light Fits, to read any portion of the Scrip∣tures, repeat any of the Psalms, or answer any Questions of out Catechisms (which she could do exactly well at other times) she was suddenly struck Dumb and lay as one stiff Dead, her Mouth opened to such a Wideness that her Jaw appeard to be out of joynt, and anone would clap together again with incredi∣ble Force. The same happened to her Shoulder blade, her Elbow, and Hand∣wrists. She would at other timely in a benum d Conditions, 2nd be drawn toge∣ther as if she had been ty'd Neck & Heels with Ropes; yet on a sudden would with such Force and Violence be pull'd up and Tear all about her, that it was as much as one or two could do, to hold her fast in their Arms: But when Ministers and other good Christians (seeing her in such intollerable Anguishes) made serious Application by Prayer to God, on her behalf, she got respite from her grievous Fits of this kind, and was ordinarly free of them during the time of Prayer, tho seiz'd of them before; and albeit usually when Ministers began to Pray she made great disturbance by idle lowd talking, Whistling, Singing, and Roating, to drown the Voice of the person praying. Particularly January 22. She was more Turbulent then at other times she us'd to be, and continu∣ed some space after the Minister began to Pray, Singing and making a hideons Noise, ferening furious Blows with her Fist, and Kicks with her Feet at the Minister, uttering reproachful Talk of him, and calling him Dog, &c. Yet she being Compos'd, and her Fits being over before Prayer was ended, and the Minister when he had done, finding her Sober and a right Composure of Mind, enquired why she made such disturbance? To which she reply'd, she was force to do it by the Hellish Crue about her, and that she thought they were none of her own words that shouttered. January 24th. She said some things relating both to herself and others had been inggested to her by her Troublers; but that they had threatned to Torment her, if the should offer to make them known. And accordingly she Essaying to express her Mind, was cast into two greivous Fits, in which she cry'd out of
violent pains; all the parts of her Body becoming Rigid and extended like a Corpse, her Head was twisted round, and if any offered by force to obstruct such dangerous Motion she seem'd to be upon, she would roar exceedingly so menmes her Nec bone seem'd to be dissolv'd; and yet on a sudden became so stiff, that there was no moving of it; and when those greivous Agonys were over, she again Essay'd to express her Mind by Write, but to no purpose; for instantly she was cast into other two very greivous Fits, wherein she was struct Dumb, Deaf and Blind, and her Tongue drawn a prodigeous length over her Chin. And when the Fits were over, declar'd, the Andersons J. P. the Gentlewoman, and I. D. with the rest of the Hellish Crew, some of whom she could no shame, had been Tormenting her in the Fits, and that there has been fifteen of them about the House all the last Night; but were now all gone, save one, who was to sta about the House till her Fits were over. And ac∣cordingly her Brother and Sister did declare; they saw that Morning a Woman in the Garden with a red Good about her Head, sitting at the Root of an Aple-Tree; but Bargarren with most of the Servants being abroad, the Matter was not further search't. The same day about Six at Night, she was seiz'd with variety of greivous Fits again, in which sometimes she lay wholly Senseless and Breathless, with her Belly swer'd like a Drum, as like a Woman with Child, her Eyes were pul'd into her Head so far that Spectators thought she should never have us'd them more, sometimes when she was tying her own Neck-cloaths, her enchanted Hands would ty them so strait about her Neck, that she had strangled her self if Spec∣tators had not given some Relief unto her; sometimes she was in hazard of burning her self in the fire, offering with violence to throw her self into the same. Divers time she did strick furious Blows at her near Relations in her Fits, she'd maintain Discource with her Tormentors; and asking Questions con∣cerning her self and others, received answer from them; which indeed none but her self perceiv'd: Reasoning particularly with one of them after this manners; O what ail'd thee to be a Witch! thou sai'st it is but three Nights since thou wast a Witch, O if thou would'st Repent, it may be GOD might give thee Repentance, if thou would'st seek it, and Confess; if thou would desire me I would do what I could; for he Devil is an ill Master to serve, he is a Dyer from the beginning, he promises but he cannot perform. Then cal∣ling for her bible, she said, I'l let thee see where he promised to our first Pa∣rents, that they should not Die. And reading the passage, said, now thou seest he is a Lyer; for by breaking of the Commandment, they were made lyable to Death here and Death everlasting. O that's an Uncouth word; long Eter∣nity never to nave an end, never never to have an end: Had not GOD of his infinit Mercy ordain'd some to Eternal Life throught JESUS CHRIST. The Devil makes thee believe thou wilt get great Riches by serving him; but come near,  and having uttered this word she lost power of Speech, her Tongue being drawn back into her Throat; yet beckning with her Hand to the Spectre to come near her, & turning over the Book, kep't her Eye upon that passage of Holy Scripture. Job. 27.18. And pointing with her Finger at the place' and shaking her Head; turn'd over the Book again. And recovering Speech' said, I'l let thee see where GOD bids us seek and we shall find, and reading over the place said, it is GOD that gives us every good Gift, we have nothing of our own, I submit to his will tho I never be better; for GOD can make all my trouble turn to my Advantage; according to his Word, Rom. 8.28. which
place the then read, and thus continued Reasoning, for the space of an Hour. Sometimes she cry'd out of violent pain, by reason of furious Blows and Stroaks she had received from the Hands of her Tormentors, the Noise of which Stroaks by standers distinctly heard, tho they perceiv'd not the Hands that gave them. One Night the Girle fitting with her Parents and others cry'd out. some∣thing was wounding her Thigh. Upon which, instantly her Mother puting her Hand in the Damsels pocket, found her folding Knife open'd, which had been folded, when put in her Pocket, but her Uncle not trusting the thing; did again put up the Knife and leaving it folden in her pock't on a sudden she cry'd out as before, the Knife was cutting her Thigh, being unfolded by the means of I. P. and others, as she said: Upon which her Uncle searching her Pocket, again found the Knife open'd as formerly. This happened twice or thrice to the Administation of the Beholders, tho they took special Notice that she nor any other visible Hand opened it. January 25th. She was again seizd with her Swooning stiff Fits, with this re∣markable Variation; her Throat was sometimes most prodigiously extended, and sometimes as strangely Contracted and Convel'd, so that she appeard in palpable danger of being Choak't, and through the violence of pain in her Throat and difficulty of Breathing struggled with her Feet and Hands, as  some had been actually Strangling her, and could Speak or Cry none; with which kind of Fits she was frequently seiz'd for several days; and in the intervals did declare that the fore-mention'd persons, and other (whom she could not get then nom'd) were strangling her, and that the occasion of her not having power to speak or cry in the Fit, was a Ball in her Throat, which also was visible to spectators; for they did clearly discern a Bunch in her Throat (while in the Fit) as bigg as a Pullets Egg which had almost Choak't her. Sometimes she was kep't from eating her Meat; having her Teeth sett, when she carried any food to her Mouth. Diverse times also she was kept from Drinking, when at Meat; for no sooner could she taste the Drink, but she was in hazard to be Choak't thereby, and her self sometimes would have held the Cup so hard betwixt her Teeth, that it was not in the power of those with her to unloose it. And when any thing had fallen out amiss in the place where she was, as the falling and breaking of a Cup, and Body's receiving harm, and such like. She would fall a laughing and rejoyce extremely; which kind of Jollity was for from the Girl's temper when at her self. February 1st. She Essaying to tell some things she had been forbidden by her Tormentors to make known, was handled with intolerable Torments. At the beginning of her Fits usually she would be kep't odly looking; sometimes toward the Chimney, sometimes towards other particular places in the Room, but could not always tell what she saw; yet for ordinary she'd Name such and such Persons, who, she said were then come to cast her into Fits. And when any desired her to cry to the LORD JESUS for help, her Teech were instantly sett closs, her Eyes tuisted almost round in her Head, and she was thrown upon the Floo with the stiffness, & posture of one that had been some days laid for Dead: And on a sudden recovered again, and would weep bitterly, to remember what had befal'n her. The same day, when her Fits were over, she said, she now per∣ceiv'd it was by the means of a Charm, that such Restraints were laid upon her that she could not tell what the Witches had forbidden her to make known, but the Charm might be found out (as she said) by searching for it beneath the Bed where she lay; and she having quickly done this her self, found (to the
apprehension of Spectators) beneath the foresaid Bed, an inteir Egg-shell open in the end, which being in stantly thrown into the Fire, did melt away after the manner of Wax. without any such Noise as Egg-shells use to make when burning in the Fire. After this the Girle said, she would not now be handled so severely, upon Essaying to make known what the Witches had forbidden her to tell, only her Tongue would be drawn back into her Throat, which accordingly happened. She did like ways inform her Friends of many things she had not liberty to do before the Charm was found out, particularly that her Tormentors had frequently solicited her to become a Witch her self, and promised her great Riches, and perfect Health also, to induce her thereunto. Which Tentation, she through the infinit Mercy of GOD still resisted, reasoning with them after this manner The Devil promises what he cannot perform, and granting he could fulfill his promises; yet I am sure from the Scriptures, Hell and the wrath of GOD will be the final re∣ward of all such as yeild to this Wickedness. To which the receiv'd this reply (which indeed none but her self perceiv'd) thatHell and the wratch of GOD so much talk't of, was not so formidable as was represented. She also said, the Witches had Importunately urged her to give them her Consent, to take away the Life of her young Sister, who was at that time upon her Mothers breast; which Tentation also she was enabled thorow the Grace of God to resist. She told her Parents likeways, there had been a Charm laid upon the top of the House where her young Sister was (the Child having been sent out a nursing, by reason of the continued Affliction of the Family) and that the Charm had been plac'd upon the top of the House by pinch'd Maggi, who thereby did design the taking away of her Sisters Life; and that this was the Cause why she had so often for some Weeks before desired her Mother to bring home her Sister, constantly affirming, that the Child would daily decay as long as she stayed there: Where∣upon her Parents observing the daily decay of the Infant; even to Skin and Bone, brought her home, where she recovered. And the Girle being asked how she came to the knowledge of these things? Reply'd, some thing speaking distinct∣ly as it were above her Head, had suggested these & other things of that Nature to her. February 2d. The Girle being in the Chamber with her Mother and others, was on a sudden struck with great Fear and Consternation; and fell a trembling upon the sight of John Lindsay in Barcloch, talking with her Father in the Hall. She said to her Mother, the foresaid Lindsay had been always one of her most violent Tormentors, and that she had been threatned with extreme Tortures, if she should offer to Name him; whereupon she was desired to go toward the place where he was, and touch some part of his Body in a way unknown to him, which she having done with some Aversation, was in stantly seiz'd with extreme Tortures in all the parts of her Body. After which Lindsay was put to it, and Interrogat thereupon; but he giving no satisfying Answer, was desir'd to take the Damsel by the Hand, which he being unwillingly induc'd to do, she was immediatly upon his Touch cast into intolerable Anguishes, her Eyes be∣ing almost twisted round in her Head, and all the parts of her Body becoming Rigid and stiff, fell down in the posture of one that had been laid for some days Dead, and afterwards got up in a sudden, and tearing her Cloaths, threw her self with violence upon him, and when her Fits were over, Spectators did also take the Damsel by the Hand; yet no such effect followed.
About Six at Night there came an Old Highland fellow to Bargarran, who calling himself a wear traveller, said he behoov'd to Lodge there that Night, but the Servants refusing him Lodging, gave him something be way of Alins. At this time the Damsel being in the Chamber with her Mother and another Gentle woman, said to her best apprehension there was one of the wicked Crew in or about the House at that time; whereupon her Mother made haft with her Daughter down flaars toward the Kitchen. And finding there unexpectedly the Highland fellow, whom the Girle then accused as one of her Tormentors, she desired the Highland fellow to take her Daughter by the Hand, which he being urg'd to do, the Girle immediatly upon his Touch was grievously Torment∣ed in all the parts of her body And this falling out in divine providence, Bagar∣ran caus'd secure him. The next Morning the Minister having come to Bargarran to visit the Damsel, and the matter being imparted to him, called for the Hihland fellow, and having question'd him to and again about this Matter without any satisfying Answer, brought the Child our of the Chamber covering her Face, and almost her whole Body with his Cloak, and giving signs to the Highland fellow to touch her in this posture, as he had ordered him before, without the Damsels knowledge, which he having done with reat Aversion the Girle not knowing of his touch, was instantly cast into intollerable Agonys as former∣ly; yet others afterwards touching her, no such event followed. And when her Fits were over she besought the Highland fellow to allow her the Liberty for to discover and tell Persons that Haunted and Molested her, whom he had for∣bidden her to make known: Upon which the old Fellow looking at her with an angry Countenance, her Mouth was instantly stop't, and her Teeth sett: But being desired by those present to speak her mind freely; whether he would or not, at length reply'd, she fear'd to do it. And when thorow the impor∣tunity of the Lairds of Dargavel and Porterfield of Fulwood, and some other Gentlemen there present, the Essay'd to declare her mind, she was seiz'd with her Fits again. Before this time, the lamentable Case of the afflicted Damsel and Family had been represented to His Majesty's most Honourable Privy Council, who, upon serious Application made to them, worthily and piously granted a Com∣mission to a Noble Lord and some worthy Gentlemen, to make enquiry into the same. By vertue of this Commission some suspected persons were seiz'd; particularly February 4. Alexander Anderson (an Ignorant, Irreligious Fellow, who had been always of evil Fame, and accused by the afflicted Damsel) by a special Order from the Commissioners for Enquiry, was apprehended and com∣mined to Prison; as was also Elizabeth Anderson his Daughter, upon flagrant Presumptions of Witchcraft; for the other Year Jean Fulton her Grand-mother, an old scandalous Woman, being cited before the Kirk Session, and accus'd for hideous Cursing, and imprecating Mischief upon several ersons, which had been followed with fatal Events; the fore-mentioned Elizabeth Anderson her Grand-child, who liv'd in the House with her, did declare before the Session, she had frequently seen the Devil in company with her Grand mother, in the likeness of a small black Man, who usually did evanish on a sudden within the Walls of the House, when any Body came to the Door. Upon this Presump∣tion was the said Elizabeth Anderson seiz'd with her Father, and committed to Custody; but at first most obstinatly denied accession any manner of way to the Sin of Witchcraft, until afterwards, when seriously importun'd and dealt with in the Prison by two Gentlemen, did, before she came to Bargarran's
House, confess her Guilt, without Bargarran's knowledge at that time. And that she had been at several meetings with the Devil and Witches, and amongst others, she did delate her own Father, and the fore-mentioned High-land Fel∣low to have been active Instruments of the Girle's Trouble; and gave, before she was confronted with him, exact marks of this Highland body, and tho she declar'd she knew not his Name; yet when confronted with him did accuse him, and affirm he was the person she spoke of. February 5th. A Quorum of the commissioners being met at Bargarran, and the persons then delated by Elizabeth Anderson to have been at Meetings with the Devil, and active instruments of the Damsels Trouble, Viz, Alexander Anderson her Father, Agnes Nasmith, Margaret Fultoun, James Lindsay alias Curat, John Lindsay alias Bishop, Katharine Camphel, were all of them (except∣ing John Lindsay alias Bishop, who was not then apprehended) confronted with Christian Shaw before the Lord Blantyr and the rest of the Commissioners at Bargarran, and several other Gentlemen of Note and Ministers then present. and accused by her as her Tormentors. And they having all severally touched her i presence of the Commissioners, she was at each of their touches seiz'd with grievous Fits, and cast into intolerable Anguishes, others then present also touching her the same way, but no such Effect followed. And it is remark∣able, when Katharine Camphel touched the Girle, she was immediatly upon her touch seiz'd with more grievous Fits, and cast into more intolerable Torments then what followed upon the touch of the other accused persons, whereat Camphel herself being Damped and Confounded, tho she had formerly declined to Blessher, uttered these words; The Lord God of Heaven & Earth Blesithee, & save that both Soul & Body; after which the Damsel when the Fits were over, in which she had lyen a most pitiful Spectacle did declare she was now loos'd, & that the might freely touch any of the accus'd persons, or they her after this without trouble, which accordingly upon tryal fell so out, and being enquired how she came to the knowledge of that, answered as formerly in the like Case, That some thing speaking distinctly as it were above her Head, suggested this to her; And likewise, usually gave her the knowledge of the Names of her Tormentors, and Places in which they liv'd. February 6. The Girle being sez'd with sore Fits, some thing was seen in her Mouth, to the Judgdment of Spectators like pieces of Orange Pills invisibly convey'd into her Mouth, which she seem'd in her Agonys to be Chewing, and having got down her Throat, as those present apprehended, she did fall down Dead and stiff, as if she had been Choak't struggling with her eet and Hands, as if at the last Gasp, her Throat swelling in a Prodigious manner; to the af∣frightment of Spectators, and when recovered, but yet in the light Fit; she'd say, O it was a very sweet Orange Fill which I got from the Gentlewoman, and did constantly affirm the same, declaring also that there had been others there present with the Gentlewoman, particularly Margaret L. or pinch't Maggi, whose Sirname she had neither Power nor Liberty to express, neither durst she offer to do it, lest she should be Tormented as was throatned, and al∣wayes fell out when she Essay'd to do it, either by speaking or writing, which had appear'd the day before in presence of the Commissioners. About this time, Thomas Lindsay a young Boy not yet Twelve Years of Age, was sez'd, upon slagran; Presumptions of Witchcraft; he had said before several credible Persons, the Devil was his Father, and if he pleas'd he could fly in the likeness or a Crow upon the Mast of a Ship, he sometimes caus'd a Flough stand
& the Horse break the Yoke upon the pronouncing of some words, and turning himself about widder-shins; that is a turning himself round from the right hand to the left, contran to the Natural course of the Sun. This he would do upon the desire of any Body who gave him a half-peny. Upon these and ther like flagrant Presumptions he was apprehended, who at first tho he continued most obstinat in denyal; yet afterwards confess'd to the Minister in his own House before famous Witnesses, compact with the Devil, and that he had receiv'd the insen∣sible mark from the Devil, which is visible upon his Body: As also, that he had been at several meetings with the Devil and Witches, where he said were pre∣sent, his Brother James with others, and particularly those who had been delated by Anderson. This he confest, with some other wickedness of this kind before he was committed to Custody in Bargarran house. After this Bargarran made diligent fearch for James Lindsay, elder Brother to Thomas, having been all along accused by the afflicted Damsel as one of her Troublers, whom she call'd the Glei'd, or squint Ey'd, Elff (as he was indeed) for that was the Name the Crue about her gave him, who when he was brought upon the place, tho' he did at first most obstinatly deny his Guilt, yet at length thorow the Endeavours of Mr. Patrick Simpson, a Neighbour Minister, ingenu∣ously confessed the Guilt he was charged with, and in his Confession did agree in every material Circumstance with the other two, tho he knew not what they had confest, he having not seen them before his Confession, not had he any occasion of Information in conference with others there-anent, being imme∣diatly brought to the place from the Tolbooth of Glasgow, where he had been some Weeks before that time in Prison as a vagabond Begger, upon a design to have sent him to Forreign Flantations. A more particular Account of what they freely Confess'd and Acknowledg'd before the Commissioners for Enquiry, we have for the satisfaction of the Reader subjoin'd to the Narrative; with an Abstract of the Report made by the Commissioners, to the Lords of His Majesty's most Honourable Privy Council, concerning the whole Affair. February 11. There was by the Presbitry's appointment a publick Fast kept upon the Damsels account in the Church of Erikie, in which Mr. Tur∣ner Minister of the place begun the Work with Prayer, expounding Rev. 12. from Ver. 7. to Ver. 13. Mr. James Hutchison Minister at Killellan took the next turn of Prayer, and did preach upon 1 Pet. 5.8. and Mr. Simpson conclu∣ded the Work, preaching upon Mat. 17.20, 21. where the Girl was present all day; but before she came to Church that Morning she told, that while she was in one of her Fits the Night before, she heard the Devil speaking of that publick Fast, and what Ministers were to be there, and that old Man Mr. James Hutchison should stumble, and his Peruick fall off as he went up to the pulpit, and all the people should laugh at him, and he should break his neck in going home. And when she came out of the Church after the Fotenoon's Work, she said, the Devil was a Liar, for no such thing fell out as he had threatned. She was all day very quiet in Church; altho being in some of her light Fits some Spectres appear'd in time of the publick Work, which she told of thereafter. About six at Night there were present in the Chamber with the Damsel, Mr. Simpson with his Wife, Lady Northbarr and others, discoursing and conferring about her Case; and while they were thus conferring together, she told them, she would gladly make some things known if she durst for her Tormenters;
and afterwards essaying to do it, was instantly seiz'd with a violent Fit; in which she leapt straight up, and appear'd as if she had been choak'd, so that it was as much as one or two could do, to hold her fast in their Arms: And when the Fit was over, Mr. Simpson going about Family Worship, did expound Psalm 110. and speaking of the limited power of the Adversaries of our Lord JESVS CHRIST, from the latter part of Ver 1 she was on a sudden seiz'd with another grievous Fit, in which she put out of her Mouth some Blood, which rais'd Grounds of Fear and Jealousy in the Minds of Spectators, that something in her Mouth hurting her had been the occasion of it; yet they could not get her Mouth opened, tho they used means to open the same, her Teeth being closs set. And in the interval of the Fit she being ask'd, if she found any thing in her Mouth that had been the occasion of her putting out of Blood; she reply'd, she found nothing, not knew the Cause thereof; but opening her mouth, those present found one of her double Teeth newly drawn cut, but knew not what became of the Tooth; for tho' search was made for the same, it could not be found: After which the Minister proceeded upon the same subject, but was again interrupted by her renewed Fit, yet closed the Exercise with Prayer, after which, without more trouble, she was taken to her Bed. February 12. Margaret Laing and her Daughter Martha Semple, being delated by the three Confessants, and accused by the Girl to have been active Instru∣ments in her Trouble, came of their own accord to Bargarran's House, and before they came up Stairs the Girl said, she was now bound up, and could not accuse Margaret Laing to her Face: And accordingly the Giri's Mother ha∣ving desired some of those who were sitting by her to feel some parts of her Body, and they having done it, found her Body so stiff and inflexible, that there was no moving of it, and immediatly again found some parts of her Body contracted and drawn hard togethe, as if by Cords; after this Margaret Lang and her Daughter, having gone to the Chamber to the Girle, did in presence of the Ministers and others, desire the Damsel to come to her; for she would do her no Harm, and laying her Arms about her, spake very faisly to her, and question'd her if ever she had seen her or her Daughter amongst her Tormentors, to which the Girle did positively reply, she had frequently seen her Daughter; but declined thorow fear to accuse her self, saying faintly No; after which Marga∣ret and her Daughter returning into the Hall, and the Minister enquiring at her why she said No, seeing she had accus'd her before, she answered, take me contrar, upon which she was seiz'd with a grievous fit; yet after her recovery being urg'd again by those present to tell her Mind freely, whether or not Margaret Lang was one of her Tormentors the Child thereupon Essaying to say Yes, and having half pronounced the Word, was cast into unexpressible Anguishes; and again in the interval of the Fit, she Essay'd to express the same thing, and saying only the word Tint (that is lost) was on a sudden struck with another fit, and when the fit was over, and the Child returned to the Chamber, Margaret Lang who was sitting near the Hall door, spoke these words after her. The Lord blessthee, and ding (that is beat, or drive) te Devil us of thee. A little after which words, Margaret going down stairs, the Damsel came to the Hall and said, her Bonds were now loos'd, and that now she could ac∣cuse Margaret Lang to her Face, and declar'd the occasion of her being so Re∣strain'd and Bound up while Margaret was present, was her letting fall a par¦cel of Hair at the Hall door as she came in; being a Charm made by her for
that end, which also had been the occasion of her uttering the word Tin in the former fit: And accordingly a parcel of Hair had been found at the Hall-door, after Margaret Lang had gone straight from the Hall to the Chamber, which immediatly was cast into the Fire and burnt. And its remarkable, that it could be attested that there was no Hair, or any other thing else in that place before Margaret Lang came in, and the Girle being enquired, what way she knew Margaret Lang had laid the forementioned Charm upon her, re∣plyed, something speaking distinctly to her as it were above her Head, had sug∣gested that to her. About Eight at Night she was severely handled in her Fits, much after the former manner, and while she was in her swooning Fits, there was seen in her Mouth a Pin, where with she seem'd almost Choak't; but by divine provi∣dence it was with great difficulty got out. After this she was somewhat com∣posed, and did not much complain of pain; but was distinctly heard to enter∣tain discourse with some invisible Creatures about her, and the Reply's given by her, and herd by those who took care of her, gave them ground to conclude she was tempted to set her Hand to a Paper then presented to her, with Promises that upon her yielding thereunto she should never be troubled any more; as also that ue should get sweet meats, a drink of Sack, a bonny handsome Coat vvith silver Lace: She was also distinctly heard say, resisting the Tempter, Thou art a filthy Sow, should  obey thee; this was not the end of my Creation, but to Glorify GOD and enjoy Him for ever; and thou promisest what thou canst not perform: Art thou angry at me for saving thou Sow, what should I call thee but thou filthy Sow? Art thou not the filthy Devil, for as brave as thou art with thy Silver and Gold Lace? Wouldst thou have me Renounce my Baptism? Dost thou promise to give me brave Men in Mar∣riage, and sine Cloaths, and perfect Health, if I should consent thereunto? Dost thou say my Baptism vvill do me no good, because thou alledgest he was not a sufficient Mini∣ster that baptized me? thou art a Liar, I'll be content to die cre I rendunce my Baptism. O thorovv the Grace of GOD I'll never do it. And thus she continued Reasoning, being both Blind and Deaf, for the space of two Hours; and when she came to herself did declare it was the Devil, who first presented himself tempting her in the shape of a Sow, to Renounce her Baptism, as is hinted; and that he did chide her when she call'd him, thou Sovv, and immediatly appear'd to her again in the shape of a brave Gentleman, as having Gold and Silver Lace on his Cloaths, still urging her to renounce her Baptism, which Tentation she thorow the special assistance of the Grace of GOD effectually resisted: she also said, that it had been suggested to her by the Spirit, speaking to her as it were above her Head, after the Combat with the Tempter was over, that one of her Tor∣mentors would be at the House the Morrow. February 1. She was seizd with a sore fit about Twelve a Clock of the day, in which she continued for more than two Hours space, both Deaf and Blind. Those in the Room with her crying to her with a loud Voice, and pinching her Hands and other part of her Body; but all to no purpose. And in this poure was hurried To and Fro with violence thorow the Room: And when any oy by force offer'd to hinder the daugerous and violent Motion she seem'd to be upon, she'd Roar exceedingly, sometimes she'd desire her Father and Mother and others o come and take her Home (supposing her self not to be in her Fahes House) when the Gie was in this deplorable Condition, Margaret oger who liv d in the Nigbour-hood, came to the House of Bar∣garran enquiring for the Lady; and having come up stairs, the Parents of the
Damsel remembering what the Girle had said the Night before, that one of her Tormentors was to come that day to the House, brought Margaret Roger to the Chamber where the Gitle was, and so soon as she entered the Door; the Dam∣sel tho she could discern none of these who were present with her, nor answer them when they cry'd to her; yet presently saw her and ran towards her crying, Maggi, Maggi, where hast thou been? wilt thou take me with thee, for my Father and Mother have left me. Whereupon Spectators being astonish'd, caus'd Margaret speak to the Child, which she having done, the Girl distinctly heard and answered her every word. After this, the Three Confestants were also brought up to the Chamber where the Damsel was, and as soon as they entered the Door, she ran also to them laughing as if she had been overjoy'd, answering them when they spoke to her: and Margaret Roger there present, being confrented with the Confessants: They did declare, that she had been at Meetings with the Devil and Witches in Bargarrans Orchard, consulting and contriving Christian Shaw's ruine. The LORDS Day following, being February 14. After some short intervals she was again seiz'd with her fits, in which she said, Margaret Lang and her Daughter Martha Simple, were Tormenting her and cutting her Throat; which words thorow violence of Pain, and difficulty of Breathing, she-uttered with a ow and hardly audible Voice, and upon the naming of Margaret Lang and her Daughter, she was tost'd and dreadfully Tormented in all the parts of her Body, being made sometimes to stand upon her Head and Feet at once, some∣times her Belly swelling like a Drum; and falling again in a sudden, and sometimes her Head and other parts of her Body were like to be shaken in pieces, so that Spectators fear'd she would never speak more. And when the fit was over, she declar'd, Margaret Lang said to her while in the fit, That she would give her a Tsy (which imports hot and severe handling) for naming her. At this time she was seldom free of her light fits, which for most part were all the respite and ease she had from the unexpressible Agonys she edur'd in her more grievous fits; unless when asleep: and while she was in these fits, no Body could perswade her to pray, yet when in a right composure of Mind and perfectly at her self, she'd weep bitterly to remember this, espressing her fears, left that might be any evidence GOD would for sake her. February 18. About two in the Afternoon, she being in the light fit, said, The Devil now appear'd to her in the shape of a Man; whereupon she being struck with great Fear and Consternation, was desir'd to Pray with an audible Voice, The Lord rebuke thee Satan; which she Essaying to do, instantly lost power of speech, her Teeth being sert, and her Tongue drawn back into her Throat, and she Essaying again, was immediatly seiz'd with another grivous fit; in which her Eyes being twisted almost cound in her Head; she fe own as one Dead, strugling with Feet and Hands, and again getting up on a sudden, was hurried with violence Too and Fro thorow the Room Deaf and Blind; yet was speaking with some invisible Creatures about her saying, with the Lords strongth thou shalt neither put Straw nor Sticks into my Mouth. After this she cry'd in a pitful manner, the Bumbee hath sting'd me, then presently sitting down and loosing her Stock∣ing, put her Hand to that part which had been Nip't or Pinch't, Thereupon Spectators did visibly discern the lively marks of Nails of Fingers deeply im∣printed on that same part of her Leg. And when she came to her self▪ she did declare, That something speaking to her a it were above her Head; told her it
was M. M. in a Nighbouring Parish (nameing the place) that had ap∣pear'd to her, and pinch't her Leg in the likness of a Bumbee. She likewise did de∣clare, that the forementioned M. M. instantly after this had been suggested to her, appeared in her own shape and likness as she us'd to be at other times. Shortly after this being still seiz'd with her light fit, she whisper'd in her Mothers Ear. The Devil was now appearing to her again in the shape of a Gentleman: And being instantly seiz'd with her fits, in which she was both Blind and Deaf, was distinctly heard arguing after this manner. Thou think'st to tempt me to be a Witch; but thorow GOD's strongth thou shalt never be the better: I charge th in the Name of GOD to be gone and thy Papers too, in the LORDS strength I'l not fear thee, I'l stand here and see if thou can come one step nearer me, I think thou fearst me more th I fear thee. Then turning her self again, she was hurried To and Pro with vio∣lence thorow the Room, as formerly saying, she was Bitten or pinch's very sore in the Hands with Teeth, and Nip't with Fingers, above Twenty four times; which constrain'd her to horrid Schreeks, and out crys at every time she receiv'd them, shewing and pointing with her Finger on these parts of her Arm and Leg which had been Pinch't and Bitten; but neither savv not heard any about her. And accordingly Spectators did visibly discern the evident marks of the Teeth and Nails of Fingers upon her Arms and Legs. In this posture the Girle continued from tvvo to five in the Afternoon, and vvhen her Miserys were over, she said M. M. told her in the Fit, that Margaret Lang then in custody, had ordered her to handle her after that manner. And that Margaret Lang had a commanding power over her. Friday and Saturday thereafter being February 19. and 20. she was frqeuent∣ly seiz'd with the foremention'd fit and being violently Bitten Pinch't and Nip't in her hands neck and other parts of her body, so that the clear marks of the nails of fingers and steeds of teeth both Upper and Lower, with the spitle and slaver of a mouth thereupon were evidently seen by spectators. About this time when seiz'd with her Blind and Deaf fits, a crooked fellow appear'd to her having his two feet deform'd his two heelis wrying inward toward one another, and the fore parts of his feet outward from one another, so than the broadside of his feet mov'd fotemost, and upon the appearing of this fellow her feer were put in, the very same posture during the time he tormented her. It is to be no∣ticed that there is a fellow in one of the neighbouring parishes, whose feet are exactly in that manner derform'd, who has been of a long time of evil fame, and given up by the confessants to have been seen at meetings with the Devil and the rest of the crew in Bargarrens Oxchard. Saturday being February. 20. The whole family being gone to bed, they had left a great quantity of Peets (or Turf) beside the hall Chimney, which the next morning they saw them burnt to ashes, tho there had been no fire in the Chim∣ney nor near them, so that the plaister and stones of the wall where the Peets or Turfe lay were in a great part turn'd to rubbish thorow the violence of the fire but no other damnage followed, the hall floor being laid with stones, and the Peets lying within the bosome of a large Chimney brace. February 27th, The Chamber fire having been covered with ashes in the Chimney when the family went to bed, the next morning tho a good quantity of ashes had been left; yet they found all clean sweept away, and no appear∣ance of ashes nor fire there at all, albeit none in the family that night nor next morning had been thereafter the fire was gathered, before this was observed.
In fits of this kind she continued for several days thereafter, haming the fore∣mention'd crooked fellow. J, R. and M. A. living in the neighbouring pa∣rishes, which two Women were delated by the three confessants to be amongst her tormenters, and particularly upon the Lords day being February 21. and the Munday following, the said J, R, appearing to her grievously vexed her, withall telling she was commissionated so to do. The Gentle woman M. M. having a pain in her head at that time, and so not able to come forth. Con∣cerning which it is worthy of remark, that the Damsel declar'd M. M. to have appeared to her about two days thereafter with her head bound up with a Nap∣kin (or handker chief) in which like habite or posture, she did not formerly appear. Upon Thursday thereafter being February 25 She continued in the former fits, weeping bitterly and complaining of pain in both her sides, she also told in the interval of her fits, that she was that night to be in very grievous and sore fits, her tormenters being resolved to choak her, by putting pins in her mouth, which (tho she emptied her self of all that were in her Cloaths) yet accordingly came to pass: In which she was both Blind and Deaf, leaping up and down in an extraordinary manner, pulling down vvhat ever came to her Hand, and this continued for some days putting out of her Mouth a great quantity of small broken Pins, vvhich she declar'd J. R. had forc'd into the same. Upon the Lords day being the last of February, about five a Clock in the Afternoon she fell into grieous fits, accompained vvith Hideous or loud Laugh∣ing, Leaping, and runing vvith violence to and fro, and thereafter vveept sore, crying out of Pain, that alittle Highland Man, (whom she knew to be such by his habit and speech) was now breaking her Leg; which (because of pain) she scarce could get told in the fit, and putting her Hand to the part of her Leg affected, Spectators untying her stocking, distinctly observed a sore bruise in her Shin-bone; which when touched did so pain her, that she uttered horrid Schreeks and Crys; and when recovered did declare, that the little Highland fellow had given her that bruise. After this, she put out of her Mouth a crook∣ed Pin, by which she told the fore said Highland fellow having forc't it into her Mouth, design'd to Choak her. The first eight days of March she continued in her former fits; with little Variation, putting out of her Mouth a great number of small Pins, often faint∣ing and falling as Dead upon the ground on a sudden, again strugling with Feet and Hands; by all which her Natural Spirits were much Weakned and Exhausted; sometimes also she Essay'd to go into the Fire. About this time when Ministers and other Christians met in the Family for Prayer, she us'd at the beginning of the work to make great disturbance, particularly March 2. which day being set a part for Fasting and Praying in the Family, prayer begun, she was for some time very composed, untill of a sudden, a strong blast of Wind forced open the Windows of the Room; upon which she was instantly seiz'd with a violent fit, the Minister in the very same time supplicating GOD that she might be delivered from Satans Bonds: In which fit she being both Blind and Deaf as to All, except her Tormentors, was hurried with violence to and fro the Room, sometimes falling down as one Dead, sometimes Singing and making a Hidious loud Noise, somtimes nameing M. M. and o∣thers, who she said, were there present Afflicting and Tormenting her, withall, nameing the particular places of the Room where she, saw them standing and sitting. After all which, when recorered out of the fit, she told that a Gentle∣woman
woman and a little Highland fellow came in with the blast of Wind, which forc'd open the Windows. This falling out upon the Tuesday, she continued in the light fit without any Intermission, till the Sabbath thereafter, not being seiz'd with any of her sore fits: And having gone to Church the Lords day fol∣lowing, was perfectly well for the most part of the day; yet affirmed she saw Janet Wagh and others in one of the Windows of the Church, tho invisible to all others. Tuesday, being March the 9th. Her Mother and Margaret Campbel her Cou∣sin took the Damsel to walk with them in the Orthard; and returning back to the house, her Mother entring the Tower gate first, the Damsel being at her back and Margaret Campbel tarrying a little while at the gate; her Mother going into the Kitchen, suppos'd they had both been with her, whereas the Damsel was of a sudden carried away in a flight up Stairs with so swis and unaccounta∣ble motion, that her absence was nor in the least suspected, but her Mother turning about and missing her, cry'd whither is Christian and Margaret Camp∣bel? And instantly runing up Stairs to look for the Damsel heard a noise and fol∣lowing the same, found the Damsel Leaping and Dancing upon one of the Stairs being seiz'd with fits, out of which when she had recovered she told, that J. P. had carried her away from her Mothers back as she entred the Kitchen door (her feet not touching the ground to her apprehension) and that with a design to strangle her in an high wardrob with Ropes on which the Linning us'd to dry, but that the said J. P. could carry her no further then the place where she was found, and did therefore leave her in such a Violent fir, Upon the Lords day thereafter being March 14. Her fits again altered, in that her Mouth and Nose were prodigiously distorted and turned about while in the fit, herface being thereby strangely and horridly deform'd. That same day she being in Church in the Forenoon, her Glove falling from her, the same was a∣gain put into her Hand by some invisible Agent, to the Amazment of beholders. To which we may add here, as that which is worthy of remark, that all this while an Invisible beeing, haunted her on all occasions, suggesting many things unto her, both concerning her self and others; but yet never heard by any but her self. The same day betwixt Sermons, she told that she was to be violently Tor∣mented in the Afternoon; which accordingly came to pass, and when in her fits she named one J. K. a Woman living in the Nighbouring bounds of whom she said, that she had seen her in the Church. As also, that she was Master of these kind of fits she was now afflicted with; withal asserting, that if the said I. K. were not sent for, she would grow worse and worse; which her pa∣rents finding to be true, sent in the Evening for the said. I. K threatning her, if the Damsel was any further troubled with her, that she should be ap∣prehended as others had been; after which the Damsel being in the mean time in a very sore fit, the forementioned I. K. prayed (tho not desired) that GOD might send the Damsel her Health; whereupon the Damsel was no more troubled with these kind or fits; but did instantly recover, by failing in∣to a swoon as she us'd to do before recovery out of any of her fits. Tuesday being March 16, she was again seiz'd with her other kind of fits, all the parts of her body being Stiff and Rigid; and sometimes in them was hear'd conversing with the Gentlewoman (as she call'd her) vindicating her self of what the Gentlewoman alledged against her, Viz. That she had accused some innocent persons as her Tormenters. To which the Damsel distinctly Reply'd, That
she was a Lyer, saying, it was you your self, and none other ever mentioned any such thing. Thus she continued untill the Friday thereafter, being never free of the light fits, now and then also falling into swoons, and appear'd to be almost choak∣ed by the means of some Charms and Inchantments, invisibly conveyed into her Mouth; which to the apprehension of Spectators, were as if it had been pieces of Chastnuts, Orange-pills, Whites of Eggs, or such like, all which were distinctly observed, when occasionally in the fit she opened her Mouth; and when Spectators Essay'd to get them out, she kep't her Mouth & Teeth so closs, that no strength could open the same. And when recovered out of the fit, she told L. M. a Woman living in the Neighbouring bounds had put them in her Mouth. Upon Friday being March 19. She was violently Tormented with sore fits, in which her Neck was distorted, and bended back like a Bow towards her Heels, strugling with Feet and Hands, sometimes Stiff, Blind, and Deaf, putting out of her Mouth a great number of small Pins; which she said the forementioned L. M. had put in her Mouth. And about six a Clock that same Night be∣ing violently Tormented, fell a crying, That if the Gentlewoman was not ap∣prehended that Night, it would be in vain to apprehend her to morrow: For, said she, I have much to suffer at her Hands betwixt Twelve and One a Clock in the Morn∣ing. After this the Damsel lifting up her Eye lids with her Hands, and looking upwards, said, what art thou that tells me that the Sheriff and my Father are coming here this Night? After which the Sheriff, her Father and James Guthry Meacer to the Justiciary Court instantly come up stairs, to the Amazment of those who remembered what the Damsel just now had said. The Damsel continuing all this while Blind and Deaf; yet was heard (the foresaid persons being present) distinctly to discourse with some in visible Beeing near to her, saying, Is the Sheriff come, is he near me? and streaching out her hand to feel if any were about her, the Sheriff put his hand in her's; notwithstanding of which, she said to the invisible Beeing discoursing with her, I cannot feel the Sheriff, how can he be present here? or how can I have him by the hand as thou say'st, seeing I feel it not? Thou say'st he hath brown coloured Cloths, red plush Breeches with black strips, flovvredMusting Cravat, and an imbroidered Sword Belt: Thou says there is an Old gray Hair'd Man with him, having a Ring upon his Hand; but I can neither see nor feel any of them? what are they come to apprehend the GentleWoman? Is this their Erand indeed? And the Gitle being enquired how she came to the knowledge of these strange things? Reply'd as formerly in the like case, something speaking distinctly as above her Head, suggested them to her. It is very observeable here, that the foresaid persons had that same After∣noon got an order from the Commissioners of Justiciaty to apprehend the same Gentlewoman, and were so far on their way to put it to Execution against the next Morning; but being witnesses to the Damsels trouble, and hear∣ing what she had told, to wit: That a delay in that matter would prove to her exceeding dangerous, they went straight on in their Journey that same Night to the Gentlewomans Habitation, and put their warrand to Execution. As the Damsel still continued to be violently Tormented, sometimes lying with her Neck and other parts of her Body upon the Ground; as if they had been disjoynted, sometimes also Essaying to throw her self into the Fire. A∣bout Ten a Clock the same Night she continuing in the Fit, her Father (who had not gone with the Sheriff) beginning to read a part of the Word of GOD, she re∣peated
the Words after him tho Blind and Deaf in the mean time, which made Spectators apprehend, that the Damsel had the sense of Hearing in these sorts of fits, at least when the Word of GOD was read: To find out the truth of which, her Father did cease from reading, which tho he did; yet the Damsel continu∣ed to repeat the following Verses of the Chapter, while none in the Room were reading, and she her self had no Book: withal being heard say to some invisible Beeing about her, Wilt thou teach me a part of the Old Testament as vvell as the Nevv. The Damsel still continuing in the fore mentioned Fits, said unto the Per∣sons present, that now it was Twelve of the Clock; Oh it is now past Twelve, sometimes lying as one dead thorow the violence of pain and decay of her na∣tural Spirits, sometimes again recovering, essay'd to express somewhat, but could not; withal putting out of her Mouth a great quantity of crooked Pins, and the parts of her Body being prodigiously distorted, she complain'd of great pain: Thus she continued until half an hour after Twelve a Clock at Night; when on a sudden she recovered, to the admiration of Beholders, telling them, She might novv go to Bed, being told by some invisible Informer, that the Sheriff and the other Gentleman, to wit the Macer, had now entred the Gentlewo∣mans House; and accordingly going to bed, was no further troubled that Night. It is worthy of remark here, that the Sheriff and Macer at their return did declare, that it was just about that time they entred the Gentlewomans House, which the Damsel condescended upon. Saturday being March 20- About Ten a Clock in the Forenoon she was of a sudden seiz'd with fits falling down as dead, her eyes quite closed, sometimes again opening and turning in her head, she saw nor heard none about her, but was hurried with violence to and fro thorow the Room, crying with a loud voice when any by force would hinder her motion. She being in this posture and depriv'd thus of her senses, James Lindsay one of the three Confessants was brought into the Room, who no sooner entered the door but was perceived by her, and she smiling ran towards him, saying Jamie where hast thou been this long time; how is it with thee? And answered him distinctly to every word he spake, tho at the same time she neither heard nor saw any other in the Room, nor could con∣verse with them albeit tryed by several experiments for that purpose, particular∣ly a Tobacco Box being held before her Eyes by a person present in the Room, she did not see it, but as soon as it was put in the hand of James Lindsay she in∣stantly enquired at him, "Where he had got that Box; she continuing in this posture, the Sheriff, her Father being present, thought it fit to confront M. M. who was now come, thereby to try if the Damsel would hear or see her as she had done James Landssay, which accordingly they did. And as soon as M. M. entered the door the Damsel (tho still in the fit) presently smiled and said, I see the Gentlewoman now, tho formerly she had never seen her personally but only her spectre in the fits. She likewise heard her when she spoke to her answering distinctly some questions proposed by M. M, such as, When it was she had seen her tormenting her. To which she answered, she had seen her the other night in her fits, and further challenged her, Why she had re∣strain'd her from making known the Highland Wifes name, as also saying un∣to her, Thou pretends thou knowest not what I say, thou knowest well e∣nough. Upon all which; the Gentlewoman on a sudden (without being desired) prayed, That the Lord might send the Damsel her health saying, "Lord help thee poor daft Child and rebuke the Devil. Which words were no sooner ut∣tered then the Damsel fell down as dead, and being in this posture carried to a∣nother
Room instantly recovered of the Blind, Deaf, and also of the light fit be∣comeing perfectly well & continued so for sometime, & being thus recovered and M. M. removed into another Room, the Damsel was enquired at whom she had seen in her last fit. To which she reply'd, she had seen the Gentle∣woman, tho in the mean time she was altogether ignorant of the Gentle∣womans ever being personally present in the Room with her. The same day the Commissioners of Justiciary having come to Bargarran. M. M. and the Damsel were again confronted, upon which the Damsel (being in the light Fit) upon the first look of the forementioned M. M, was suddenly seiz'd with sore Fits, out of which when recovered, she accused her as being one of her most violent tormenters, particularly mentioning such and such times in which she had in an extraordinary manner afflicted her, as also what words she spoke in her hearing while in the Fit, and which is yet more remarkable, did question the Gentlewoman if she did not sometime in December last when she was tormenting her, remember how she went away from her in great haste, say∣ing, she could stay no longer being obliged to attend a Childs burial at home. In confirmation of which it is very credibly informed that W R, a near neigh∣bour of hers had a Child burried that same day, and that the Gentlewoman came not in due time to attend the Corpse to the burial place, but the Corpse being near to the Church yeard ere she reached the House from whence they came, she returned again to her own lodging, and so did not accompany the burial at all. The Lords day following being March 21, she fell into Swooning Fits com∣plaining of no pain, except near to her heart, falling down as dead not only when the Fits seiz'd her, but also when she recovered, sometimes Singing after an unusual manner, withall informing Spectators that J. G. con∣strained her to that kind of Musick, her own Lips not at all moving in the mean time, which beholders saw to be true, only her Tongue, for preventing of which she frequently put her hand into her Mouth. And at this time when either the herself, or those about her, offered to read any part of Scripture, she was violently. Tormented, declaring if she did but so much as hear the word of God read that day, she would certainly be extremely Tortured, in Confirma∣tion of which when some essay'd to read Hebr. 11.2, 4.6. Isa. 40. Psal. 3. She uttered horrid Schreeks and Out-cryes, Complaining that She was Pinched, in evidence of which, the Prints or Marks of the Nails of Fingers were distinctly seen on her Arms, and being thus pinched or bitter four several times with great violence and pain, the Skin it self was seen to be torn from off these parts of her Arms and Fingers where the Prints of the eeth and Nails were observed; so that from the deepness of the Wounds the foresaids parts affected fell a Bleed∣ing, which Blood was bot seen and handled by Spectators. Moreover the Dam∣sel while in this sad and mentable condition seem'd to be extremely affected and oppressed with sore Sickness, as one in a Fever, ying sometimes to Re∣move these Dead Children t of her Sight; which she frequently repeated from six to nine in the Morning, and she fall continuing thorow the reft of the day, it was observed that some Charms and Ichantments were put in her Mouth as formerly, of which the Damsel being very sensible, fell down on  Sudden on the Ground putting her hand to some Spittle which she had put out of her Mouth, and lifted some Trash which she again cast down to the Ground, it making some Norse, but yet neither seen in her Spittle, nor else where by Spectators, tho while in her Mouth they distinctly observed something like Orange Pils, Whites of Eggs, and peeces of Chasnts.
Munday, Being March, 22, the fore mentioned L. M. or J. G. came to Bar∣garrans house, and being confronted with the Damsel, questioned her if ever she had seen her in any of her Fits, withal alledging that she viz. L. M. or J. G could be none of her Tormentors, because the Damsel was not now seiz'd with a Fit, tho looking upon her as she us'd to be, when she look'd upon any of her other Tormentors when Confronted with them; upon which the Damsel being for sometime silent. L. M. or J. G. did again propose the same que∣stion to her, to which the Damsel distinctly reply'd Yes, upon which L. M. re∣ply'd, perhaps, you have seen the Devil in my Shape. As to this Conference there are several things exceeding remarkable, as first, that the Damsel upon her Answering, Yes, was immediatly seiz'd with a Fit. 2dly. That however after Katharine Campbel had touch'd the Damsel in presence of the Commissioners, upon the 5th, of February last, she had ever since that time freedom to touch any of her Tormentors without being seiz'd with her Fits, as has been hinted, yet true it is, that in the room of that Charm a new one took place, viz. When any time she looked upon her Tormentors in the Face, at the very first look she was seiz'd with her Fits; which Charm she declar'd was laid by the means of the forementioned L. M. or J. G. And also taken off again by her that very Morning before she came to visit the Damsel, and this she said was suggested to her by some invisible beeing, speaking distinctly as it were above her head; and that therefore the Damsel now had freedom to look L. M. in the Face without being seiz'd with Fits, which for a considerable time be∣fore she could not do when confronted with any of her Tormentors 3ly, It is yet more observable, that in the same Morning before ever L. M. came to visit the Damsel, it was told by the Damsel to several Persons in the Family, that L. M. had taken off that Charm, of her being seiz'd with Fits when look∣ing any of her Tormentors in the Face, but withal that she had laid on another in its room, to wit, that as soon as the Damsel should by words confer with any of her Tormentors, so soon should she be seiz'd with a Fit, which accordingly was verified when she spoke to L. M. or J. G. Tuesday being March. 23d, The Damsel being asleep in the Bed with her Mo∣ther about three aclock in the Morning was on a sudden awakned (having for sometime Struggled in her Sleep) in great fear and consternation, and being seiz'd with her Blind and Deaf Fits, took fast hold of her Mother, de∣claring to her Father and her, that the Devil was standing near to the Bed assault∣ing her, upon which she cry'd suddenly: God Almighty keep me from thy meetings. I'l die rather then go to them, I'l never thorow the Grace of God Renounce my Baptism; for I'l certainly go to Hell if I do it: Thou sayest I'l go to Hell however, because I am a great Sinner; but I believe what the word of God sayeth, tho I have many Sins; yet the Blood of Christ cleanseth from all Sin, and I will not add that great wickedness to my other Sns, which thou art tempting me to do. It's no wonder thou lie to me, seeing thou wast bold to lie in Gods Face. I knovv thou art a Liar from the beginning; and the red Cot thou promisest me, I know thou canst not perform it. And altho I should never Recover, I'm never resolv'd to renounce my Baptism, It is God who hath keeped me all this time from being a Witch, and I trust, he will yet by his Grace keep me, not because of any thing in me, but of his n great Mercy, and that he who hath keeped me hitherto from being devoured by thee, I hope wil yet keep me. This Conference continued near the space of an hour, her Father Mother and others being ear Witnesses to the same. And after recovery the Damsel declared that it was the Devil, who
(in the shape of a naked Man with a Shirt, having much hair upon his hands and his Face like Swine Bristles) has appeard to her tempting her as aforesaid. Untill Sabbath following she continued in the light Fit, but withal every Morning and Evening was still seiz'd with her sore Fits, continuing still to name M, M, (who was at this time set at liberty) the forementioned L. M, E. T. an Highland wife, and others as being her tormentors. It is more then remark∣able here that M, M. being set at Liberty upon Bail, the very day after she went home, she again appear'd to the Damsel tormenting her in her fits, and conti∣nued so to do several days thereafter, particularly upon the Saturday being March 27 after she was set at liberty: The which day the Damsel was heard name her in the fits and say to her, wilt thou say God help me poor mad or foolish child as thou saidst the other day before the Judges: art thou wishing the Devil to take me? vvhere is the Habite thou was cloathed vvith the other day. On Sabbath Morning, being March 28. the Damsel thorow GOD's great Mercy towards her, was perfectly recovered, both of all her Sort and light Fits; becoming as Well, Sensible, and Composed as ever. If it shall be questioned, how the Truth of all these strange Things is atte∣sted? There is none of those Particulars mentioned in the Narrative, but had in the first Draught the Witnesses insert at the end of every particular Paragraph, and attested before the Commissioners for Enquiry at Rnfrew, by the Sub∣scriptions of the respective Witnesses. But seeing the placing of them so now, would have occasioned the repetition of several persons Names over and over again, & would have made this Narrative swell too much in bulk; Therefore we judg'd it fittest now to set down the Names altogether ar the end of the Narrative; & the rather that seing these things fell not out in a private Corner; but Thou∣sands in this Countrey have been Eye & Ear Witnesses thereof to their admiration and raising of their Sympathy, and been fully convinced beyond all debate of a Diabolical influence upon the Affliction of the Damsel: We shall only now make mention of a few, Viz, beside the Father, Mother, Grand-mother, and nearest Relations of the Damsel, and servants of the Family, who were always present with her in her Fits: such of the Commissioners for Inquiry, and of Justi∣ciary as had occasion to be on the place of the Events, particularly the ord Blan∣tyre, Mr. Francis Montgomery of Giffen, Sir John MaWell or Pollock, Sir John Houston of That ilk, Alexander Porterfield of that ilk, the Laird of Black hall younger, the Laird of Glanderstone, the Laird of Craigens, Porterfield of Fulwood, John Alexander of Black house, Mr. Semple Sheriff of Renfrew: And several other Honourable prsons of good Sense and pring Witts; such as the Noble Earl of Marshal, the Laird of Orbiston, the Laird of Kilmar∣nock, the Laird of Meldrum, the Laird of Bishopton Elder and Younger, Gavin Cochran of Craigmure, William Denneston of Colgrain, Dr. Mathew Brisbon, &c. And many Ministers, who kept days of Humiliation and Prayer weekly in the Family, and sometimes in the Parish Church with the Congre∣gation, Viz. Mr. James Hutchison Minister of the Gospel at Kellan, Mr. Patrick Simson at Renfrew, Mr James tirling at Kilbarchan Mr. Thomas Blackwal at Paisly, Mr. James Brisban at Kilmacolm, Mr. Rebort Tayler at Houston; and of Neighbouring Presbytries, Mr Neill Gillies; Mr. James Brown, Mr. John Gray Ministers of the Gospel at Glasgow; while the Damsel was there; Mr. John Ritchie Minister at Old Kilpatrick, Mr. Alexander King at Bonnil, Mr. Archibald Walace at Cardress, Mr. John Anderson at Dryramen, Mr. Andrew Turner Minister of the Place, who was frequently there: besides; Mr.
Menzies of Camme, and Mr. Grant of Cullen, Advocates: who were Eye and Ear Witnesses to several important passages of the Damsels Affliction, and the con∣vincing evidences of it's flowing from the Operation of the Devil, and his Instruments. The Truth whereof is further Adminiculat by the Progress and Issue of the Tryal, at which were present at several Occasions, not only Sir John Hamiltoun of Halcraig one of the Senators of the Colledge of justice, Sir John Shavv of Greenock, Commissar Smollet of Bonnill, Mr, James Stevvart Advocat, who were concerned in the Commission with these others before mentioned: But also a great confluence of several Nobility and Gentry out of the Countrey, such as the Earl of Glencairn, the Lord Killmares, the Lord Semple, &c. And now we are sure, that after all the pregnant evidences of the truth of this Relation as to matter of Fact, they must be persons very hard of belief that can allow themselves to deny credite thereunto: And must needs conclude, that there is nothing credible in the World that ever hath been delivered to Mankind or posterity; and that they resolve to believe nothing though never so fully attested which they do not see with their own Eyes, and perhaps there are some hardned in their prejudicat conceits that will not believe even these so far as they may have influence to convince them of their Errors; but wisdom is and will be justified of all her Children. And among all Ingenuous and sober Persons, We are hopefull this Narrative (which plainly relates things as they fell out without any kind of disguise) will obtain such enter∣tainment as it is truely design'd for, Viz. That we be hereby more and more confirmed in the Faith of the beeing of God and invisible Spirits, and admire & adore the wonderful works of God in the Depths of his Judgment, & that there is really a Hellish Hierarchy & Combination of Infernal Spirits enemies to God; & working all the mischief they can to Men; whereby also, there is an evident Te∣stimony giv'n to the Truth of what is related in the Scriptures concerning the same, & withall to lament, that thorow the just displeasure of our Holy & Righ∣teous GOD, those Devils get leave to break forth with so much Rage and Fu∣ry, and gets so many among profest Christians into a hellish confederacy with themselves to be the instruments of their Malice, and the actors of so many Tra∣gedies in the Christian World: To stir us up also to bless and magnifie our GOD that those Devils and their Instruments are chain'd and limited that they can∣not work all the evil they would, and as long as they will: and therefore to join in Thanksgiving to GOD for His deliverance of that afflicted Family and Damsel. Finally as we are to submit to such Afflictions as the LORD may think fit to measure out unto us, by whatsoever instruments as in the case of Job; so we are called to Watch and Pray that we enter not into Temptati∣on while we have such Adversarys going about still seeking to devour us, & to rejoyce that we have a strong protector the blessed Captain of our Salvation, the LORD JESUS CHRIST who hath obtained the Victory over all the Devils in Hell, and hath promised all his Saints a share in His Victory, which they begin to have even in time, 1 Epistle Job. 4.4, And he hath given us hope through Grace of a speedy and certain accomplishment thereof. Rom. 16.20. And therefore when we see all these things come to pass. Luk, 21.28, "Let us lift up our heads because our Redemption draweth nigh. FINIS.
An Abreviat of the Precognition and Report made by the Com∣missioners appointed by His Majesty's Privy Council for Enquiry: And of the Confessions of Elizabeth Anderson, James and Thomas Lindsays, transmitted by these Commis∣sioners to the Council before granting of the Commission for the Trial. To which is subjoined, the summ of the Confessions of Margaret and Jannet Rodgers, who did con∣fess during the Trial of the rest, beyond Expectation. To∣gether also with an account of the Confession and Death of John Reid, who made a Discovery conform to the for∣mer Witnesses, after the Trial was over. And finally, there are added some passages which fell out at the Exe∣cution of the Seven Witches who were Condemned. THE Commissioners for Enquiry having met at Bargarran in February 1697, did choose the Lord Blantyre Praeses, and took the Confession of Elizabeth Anderson, aged about 17 Years, as follows. That about seven Years ago she stayed with Jean Fultoun her Grand-mother, and playing about the Door, she saw a black grim Man go in to her Grand-mothers House: After which, her Grand-mother came to the Door, called her in, and desired her to take the Gentleman (as she nam'd him) by the hand; and which she did, but finding it very cold, became affraid; and immediatly he evanished. About a Month thereafter, her Grand-mother and she being in the House together, the said Gentleman (whom she then su∣spected to be the Devil) appeared to them, and fell a talking with her Grand-mother, by rounding in one anothers Ears: Upon which the Grand-mother de∣sired her to take him by the hand, being a friend of hers; but Elizabeth refus∣ing, the Grand-mother threatened, that she would get none of the Cloaths promised to her, unless she should obey: Yet Elizabeth withstood, saying, The Lord be between me & him; whereupon he went away in a flight, but she knew not how. Elizabath was not trouble for a long time thereafter, till her Father desiring her to go with him a Begging through the Countrey; and she saying, that she needed not seek her Meat, seeing she might have Work; her Father pressed her to go alongst, and took her to a Moor in Kilmacome, where were gathered together, at that and other subsequent Meetings, Katharine Campbel, Margaret Fulton (her Grand Aunt) Margaret Lang, John Reid Smith, Marga∣ret and Janet Rodgers, the three Lindsays (beside the two Confessant ones) &c. and severals whom she did not know, and the foresaid Gentleman with them. He came to Elizabeth, bidding her renounce her Baptism, promising that if she would consent thereunto, she should get better Meat and Cloths, and not need to beg. But (as she declared) she would not consent. Then he enquired what brought her thither, she answered, that she came with her Father: Whereupon the Devil and her Father went and talked together a∣part, but she knew not where about. Declares, that in that Meeting was con∣ferred the Tormenting of Mr. William Fleeming Minister at Inneripp his Child. Elizabeth Confesses she was at an other Meeting with that Crew above the
Town of Kilpatrick, with the foresaid Gentleman whom they called their Lord: And that she went with her Father to the Ferrie-boat of Erskin; where the Devil with the rest of the Band overturned the Boat and drowned the Laird of Brighouse and the Ferrier of Erskine, with several special Circumstances thereanent; particularly that some of the Crew would have saved the Ferrier, but one of them, Viz. His Mother in Law gainstood it, in regard he had expelled her out of his House alittle while before the Meeting. Acknowledges she was present with them at the destroying of William Montgomeries Child, by strangling it with a Sea Napkin: where they having entred the House lighted a Candle which was some what Blewish, and Agnes Naismith saying, what if the People a wake, Margaret Fulton replyed, ye need not fear: As also declares, that about five Weeks before the date, her Father brought her on foot to Bargar∣rans Orchard, into which they entred by a slop in the Dyke, and where were pre∣sent the persons before named, &c. and the Devil, who told that no Body would see them, at which they laugh'd. At this Meeting they, with their Lord, contrived the Destruction of Christian Shaw: Some being for Stobbing her with a Touck, others for Hanging her with a Cord, a third sort for Choaking her, and some intended to have her out of the House to Destroy her; but fearing they might be taken before the next meeting to that effect, their lord (as they call'd him) gave them a piece of an unchristned Child's Liver to eat, (but the Declarant and the other two Confessants slipped the eating of it) tel∣ling them, that though they were apprehended they should never Confess, which would prevent an effectual Discovery: And further, severals of them being affraid that the Declarant would Confess, and tell of them as she had done formerly on her Grand-mother, they threatened to tear her all in peices if she did so; and particularly Margaret Laing threatned her most. After two Hours, or thereby, they disappeared in a flight, except the Declarant, who went home on her Foot. Confesses likewise, That one Night her Father rai∣sed her out of her Bed, and they having in a flight; from whence they went on foot to Dunbritton, and in Mr. John Hardy Minister his Yeard, the crew and their Lord being met, they formed the Picture of Mr. Hardy, and dab∣ed it full of pins, and having put it amongst Water and Ale mixed, roasted it on a Spit at a Fire. &c, After which her father and her self returned in the same manner as they went. Declares the particular persons that were imploy∣ed, and most industrious in the several Facts before-mentioned, &c, James Lindsay (aged 14 Years) declares, That one day he met with the decast Jean-Fulton his Grand-mother at her own House, where she took from him a little round Cape and a plack; but being grieved, he required them from her again, and she refusing he called her an old Witch and ran away, upon which she followed him and cryed that she should meet him with an ill turn. About 3 days thereafter he being a begging in the Countrey he met his Grand-mother with a black Grim Man, &c. Whom she desired him to take by the hand, which James did, but found it exceeding cold and was straitly griped, whereupon the saids Gentleman (as she termed him) asked the declarant if he would serve him, and he shod have a Coat, Hat, and several other things, to which James answerd yes, I'le do it, and after this the foresaid Gentleman (whom the declarant knew thereafter to be the Devil) and his Grand-mother went away but knowes not how. Acknowledges he was frequently thereafter at meetings with the Devil and Witches, particularly these mentioned in Eli∣zabeth
Andersons confession: that their Lord came to James at the first publick meeting, took him by the hand, and forbade him to tells that they contrived be∣fore hand at the said meeting the dtowning of Brighouse, and concurrs with Elizabeth Anderson anent the design of saving the Ferrier which his Mother in Law did divert. He being Interrogat, declared he did not see J. K. and J. W. at committing of the foresaid Fact; (And indeed they were then in prison) that they with a Cord strangled Mathew Park's Child; and that the Person who waited on the Child finding it stifled, cryed out Mathevv Mathevv, the Bairn is Dead: Elizabeth Anderson concurrs in this particular; and tells that when they had done, they took the Cord with them. Declares, that he was present at strangling William Montgomeries Child with a Sea Napkin, and heard Agnes Naismith say dravv the Lp &c. That about five Weeks since he was carryed to them in Bargarrans Orchard, and concurrs with Elizabeth Ander∣son in what was treated there, anent distroying Christian Shavv, and the Charm against Confessing. Likeways the Meeting in Dunbritton anent Mr. Hardy, is acknowledged by him: And that he has several times appeared to Christian Shavv both in Glasgovv and Bargarran, with the others that did Tormen her and put in her Mouth Coal-cindets, Bones, Hay, Hair, Sticks, &c. Intend∣ing thereby to Choak her: That he and they did oft times Prick and Stob her in this manner, Viz. He had a Needle which if he put in his Cloaths, her Body would be pricked and stobed in that place where he fixt the Needle, and if he put it in his Hair, that part of her Head would be Tormented: That he saw her put out the Pins they had put in, at which time he cryed these words, Hep J. D. who was also then present: That when the Ministers began to pray in Bargarrrans House at several occasions, the Devil and they immediatly went away &c. Thomas Lindsay being below pupillarity, declares the same Jean Fulton his Grand-mother awaked him one Night out of his Bed, and caused him take a Black Grimm Gentleman (as she called him) by the Hand; which he felt to to be cold: And who having enquired if Thomas would serve him and be his Man, and he would give him a Red Coat, the declarant consented: And the Gentleman (whom he knew thereafter to be the Devil) gave him a Nip in the Neck which continued sore for Ten days. Thereafter one day after his Grand-mothers decease, coming by her House, he thought she appeared to him clapping his Head, and desiring him to be a good Servant to the Gentle∣man to whom she had gifted him, and forbidding him to reveal it. Declares, that one Night lying in Bed in the house of one Robert Shavv, he was awaken∣ed out of his sleep and carried in a flight to Mathevv Parks House, where were present the particular persons named by him, and concurrs as to the manner present the particular persons named by him, and concurrs as to the manner of strangling of the Child with James Lindsay his Brother: And that another Night being in the House of Walter Alexander; he was brought to the strang∣ling of William Montgomeries Child, and agrees likeways in the manner of it with his Brother; only he sayes the Sea-Naphin with which they com∣mitted the Fact was specled. He likewise concurrs as to the Meeting in Bar∣garrans Orchard about five weeks agoe, and what was acted therein: As also anent Mr. Hardy; with this Addition, That himself turned the Spitt whereon the Picture was roasted, &c. It is to be noticed, that as the three Confessants were separatly apprehended upon several occasions, so they (after the obstinacy to discover was abated) did in it these confessions in several distinct places without Communication with, or
knowledge of, one anothers confessions in manner mentioned in the preceed∣ing Narrative. The Commissioners did examine them upon other trying que∣stions that were new, thereby to make experiment of their cosonancy or disa∣greement: But still found them strangely to accord. The Facts did fall out in the manner declared by them, particularly the strangling of the Children, death of the Minister, drowning of those in the boat, and torture of Bargarrans daugh∣ter mentioned in the Confessions before exprest. Further, the Commissio∣ners did confront them both with Christian Shaw the afflicted Girle, and the Confessants did accuse these to their Faces, and bind them in circumstances with great steddiness and congruity tho separatly brought in. The Commissioners did also try some experiments annent the Girle her falling in Fits on approach of the accused, as is exprest in the Narrative; and examined her, with these who stayed commonly about her upon the particulars of her Sufferings: they tryed to cause her write (since she could not say out) the name of a person whom she first called Margaret or pinc Maggi and asserted to be one of her chief bourriers; yet upon writing Margaret and the letter L, of her Sirname the Girl was persent∣ly taken with a fearful convulsion, the pen being struck out of her hand and her self falling as dead, with groans heavier and sorer then ordinary: After some re∣covery whereof some Ministers pointed to her a passage of the bible, but upon essaying to cast her eyes on it, she fell into vehement pangs; till one of the Com∣missioners desiring the Book might be closed, and that being done she immedi∣atly came to her self, &c. Lastly, the Commissioners called before them those presons who had signed the passages of the several dayes in the written Journal of this Girles sufferings: and having examined them thereupon, transmitted the same with the Declarations of the three Confessants, and several of the passa∣ges that occurred in the precognition, to his Majestys Privy Council by whom they were appointed for that effect Besides this, the fubfcrived attestations of Doctor Mathew Brishant Phisician, & Mr, Henry Marshall Apothecary in Glasgovv, did influence the belief of an ex∣traordinary cause of these events, The Doctor on the 31. December 1696 tells, that at first sight when he was brought, the Girle appeared so brisk in Motion, so florid in collour, so chearfull, and in a word every way healthfull, that he could hardly be perswaded she had need of a Physician: But whithin Je Minuts he found himself obliged to alter his thoughts, for she rose from her Seat, and advertised she was instantly to be seiz'd with a fit, according whereunto he observed a considerable disten∣tion in her left Hypochondre, which in a Trace falling, she was forth with taken with horrid convulsive Motions and heavy Groans at first; which afterwards as soon as she was able to frame words, turned into Expostulatery Mourning against some Women; particularly. Campbel and Nasmith. Yet he thought those Symptomes were reducible to the Freaks of Hpochondriak Melancholy, and therefore put her in such a course as was proper against that kind of Malady. Upon which being freed, for some time: he was alarumed that the Child was returned to Town worse then ever for having his assistance He then was frequently with her, and observed her narrowly; so that he was confident she had no visible correspondent to Subminister Hair, Straw, Coal∣cinders, Hay, and such like trash unto her; all which upon several occasions he saw her put out of her Mouth without being wet; Nay rather as they had been dryed with Artifice, and actually Hot above the Natural Warmth of
the Body; sometimes after severe fits, and other times without Trouble when discoursing with him. When she had not only light Convulsive Motions, but to a high degree, such Rigidity of the whole Body, as we call  she did not fancy as at other times, that she saw these persons al∣ready named about her: But the upcasting of the Trash abovementioned did no sooner cease, then in all her fits when she was able to speak any, she always cryed out that they were pricking or pinching her. He saw her also when free of fits suddenly seiz'd with Dumbness, &c. And this he solemnly declares himself to have seen and andled, and were it not for the Hay, Straw, &c. He should not despair to reduce the other Symptomes to their proper Classes in the Catolague of humane Diseases. And in respect of these and some other Specialitys, the Doctor thereafter being adduced upon Oath in the Tryal, De∣pones, that in his Opinion these things did not proceed from Natural Causes arising from the Patients Body. Mr. Marthali the Apothecary, concurres with the Doctor: And gives some particular instances of his own Observation: And amongst the rest, That the Girle having fallen Head-long upon the ground, as she had been thrown down with violence, fell a reasoning very distinctly thus: Katie what ails thee at me, I'm sure I never did thee wrong, come let us 'gree, let there be no more difference betwixt us, let us shake Hands together (putting furth her Hand as if she would take another by the Hand, then taking in her Hand again, she said) well Katie I cannot help it, ye will not 'gree with me: And immedat∣ly she cryed, fell into a Swerff, and out of that into a Rage, wherein she continu∣ed without intermission for about half an hour; and perfectly recovered. Then she told him, that she saw Katie Campbel, Nanfii Nasmith, &c. and many more; Campbel was going to thrust a Sword into her side, which made her so desirous to be aggreed with her; and when the Girle told him this, she instantly fell into another fit as formerly, in which she continued another half hour, &c. Dated 1 January 1697. During the Dependence of the Trial, Janet and Margaret Rdgers confessed in this manner, The Commissioners had adjourned for two several dyets; and though they were to meet on the Third. yet it was not expected that they would proceed till providence might clear the prisoners guilt by further testimonys of those who might come to confess. The very morning of the third Term, the Rdgers did confess, which was a Surpyse to every one that came up to attend the Court, since these, as they were a Women, and were not formerly noticed as o∣thers were; so they confessed of free motion without any persons desiring it of them at the time; they had not such means of instruction as were administred to others: And the conjuncture of many circumstanes were altogether Singuar, Their confessions did coincide as to the Mestings and hings acted therein, with the three former confessants, and the other evidences of the visible matters of Fact. Only thy were so pointed as to condescend upon some of the pannals whom they did not see at these redevouze; and great care was taken to om∣pare their Testimonys with what had been already discovered, and to ex∣piscate their certain knowledge by new interrogtors when tey were seprate from one another &c. The whole Crisis had such an evidence that now the Com mis ioners, with the general approbation of the most intelligent of the Coun∣trey, who came in to attend the Court, allowed the going on of the Process to debate o the Relevancy, and putting seven of he best known criminals, for whom an Advocat appeared, to te knowledge of an nquest: According whereunto there were some days allowed for the Pannals giving in their Infor∣mations
upon the relevancy: and at the Term; there was a great time spent in adducing the Probation an account whereof is referred to another place. Upon the 21 of May 1697. After tryal of the Seven Witches, there is an Attestation Subscrived by Mr. Patrick Simpson Minister at Renfrevv, Walter Scot Baillie there, &c. of this import. John Reid Smith at Inchennan prisoner, did in presece of the said persons and some others; Declare, that about a Year ago the Devil (whom he knew to be such thereafter) appeared to him when he was travelling in the Night time, but spoke none to him at the first encoun∣ter. At the second appearance he gave him a Bite or Nipp in his Loyn; which he found painfull for a Fortnight. That the third time he appeared to him as a Black Man, &c. Desired him to engage in his Service upon assurance of getting Gear and Comfort in the World; since he should not want any thing that he would ask in the Devils Name: And then he renounced his Baptism, putting the one Hand to the Crown of his Head, and the other to the Sole of his Foot; thereby giving himself up to Satns Service: After which the pain of the Bite or Nipp ceased. He told that hitherto there was none others present; but there∣after he was at several Meetings, particularly that in Bargarrans Yeard, about the time when there was a Fast for Christian Shaw, where the Devil appeared in the same kind of Garb as he first appeared to him, and they consulted Christians Death either by Worrieing or Drowning her in the Well; and the Devil said, he should warrand them, that they should neither be Heard, Seen, nor Confess, to which end he gave every one of them a bitt of Flesh, that the Declarant got, but let it fall, and did not Eat it. Thereafter in presence of the Laird of Jordan∣hill the Minister, Mr. Andrevv Cochran town Clerk, and Baillie Paterson, he owned his former Confessions: And being enquired of Jordanhill how they were advertised of their Meetings, he said that ordinarly at their Meetings the time of the next was appointed; but for particular warning there appeared a Black Dog with a Chain about his Neck, who tinkling it, they were to follow &c. And being enquired by the Minister if he did now wholly renounce the Devil (for he had formerly told how Satan had not performed his promise) and give himself to JESUS CHRIST, and desire to find mercy of God through Him: he assented thereunto. It is to be observed that John Reid after his Confession had called out of the prison Window, desireing Baillie Scott to keep that old Body Angus Forrester, who had been his fellow prisoner, closs and secure; whereupon the company asked John when they were leaving him on Fri∣day night the 21 of May, whether he desired company or would be afraid alone, he said he had no fear of any thing: So being left till Saturdays Forenoon, he was found in this posture. Viz. sitting upon a stool which was on the Hearth of the Chimney, with his feet on the floor and his Body straight upward, his shoul∣ders touching the linel of the Chimney, but his Neck tyed with his own neck-cloath (whereof the knot was behind) to a small stick thrust into a clift above the lintell of th Chimney; upon which the Company, and especially John Camp∣bel a Chyrurgeon who was called, thought at first in respect of his being in an or∣dinary posture of sitting, and the neck cloath not having any run-loup but an or∣dinary knot which was not very strait, and the sticks not having the strength to beat the weight of his Body or the struggl; that he had not been quite dead; but finding it otherways and that he was in such a situation that he could not have been the acor thereof himsf, conclded that some extraordinary couse had done it, espeially considering that the Door of the Room was secured, and that ee was a oard set over the Window which was not there the night before when they it him.
There shall little be added anent what past at the Execution of the seven Wit∣ches, because there is no Subcribed Attestation there anent: And the design of the Publishers has been to advance nothing but what stands Warranded by Testi∣monies of known Credit beyond Contradiction. Yet this much is Nottour; that when they were going to the Stake, one of the Lindsays was overheard to say-to the other, Now Brother it is time that vve should Confess, since our keeping it up vviill serve us to no purpose, or the like Expression; To which the other Answered that they should never do that, &c. And Margaret Lang, before & about Execution, let drop at Minuts of the Devils Inadvertance, That when the Devil first appeared she knew him not to be such till afterwards; that he gave her the insensible Marks found upon her Body: She yielded to engage her self his Service by a Co∣venant, and besides publick meetings she had been above 80 times in private Conferences with him. Being enquired by a near Relation of her own a∣nent her being in Bargarrans House Tormenting Christian Shavv, Answered in these Words, the Devil having an absolute Power and Dominion over me carryed my shape wither he would; and it is known how she Confessed un∣natural Lust, and profound Hypocrisy, &c. Tho truely it did appear from her concurring Mein and Circumstances, that these things fell from her at Sea∣sons, when Natural Ingenuity and the vigour of Truth got the Start of Satan's Manacles. So Agnes Naismith &c. Frequently told the Minister, that their Heart and Tongue were bound up in such manner, that they could not express what they would: And sometimes it appeared by ocular Inspection of their visage, that convulsive Dampts did seize their Heads upon getting out the initial words of any such attempt. There are two remarkable instances in the Case of Katharine Campbel, who was chief Instrument and Author of the Girles trouble. Viz. An Eminent Minister discoursing before famous Witnesses to Katharine, and enquiring if she did not distinctly remember the Godly Counsels, and gracious Admoni∣tions; which Christian Shaw while in a fit mentioned in the Narrative, Page, 13. gave her at a certain time, and instancing some particular thereof: Her ans∣wer was with heavy Groans, Yes I Remember. But being urged wherefore she would not Confess the rest as well as that passage; and finding herself thereby to be Gravelled: She began to Retract and seemed Dampt, not being able to Extricat her Answer before mentioned. This occurred while she was in prison, before the tryal: And after it, she in presence of several Witnesses, did get out these words, That the Doom pronounced on her was most just, and that she could not free her self of Witchcraft: But upon such attempts she fell down Dead, strang∣ly distended, and that six or seven times Successivly, with a Suddeness, that was both Surprising & Convincing to the Spectators: At which occasion it was observed, that immediatly before her falling into these fits; and upon her Es∣saying to speak when there were Charges laid Home on her Natural Conscience; her Mouth seemed to Contract▪ And she uttered heavy Moans; whereupon did follow her Convulsion: but after raising out of them, she turned to be Obstinat and Inflexible: And whenever there was any appearance of her being more Plant, the foresaid fits did overtake her. There is one thing further; which does astruct the Credibility of what these Confessants averred, viz. That there are some others, both Men and Women in the Countrey, who have confessed and told the same things before some of the best Gentry and others, whose Care could proceed no further for want of Authority, which in due time will, no doubt, not suffer these Witches to live,
whom Divine and Human Laws have so justly ordained to be cutt off. Where∣fore till the Event of a further Discovery, there hal only be added some pas∣sages which were omitted in the Narrative, tho they be attested by some of the same persons that were Witnesses to the other Matters mentioned therein. Particularly, the Girle declares, that in one of her Conflicts with the Devil, he told her how a certain Minister (for whom she had a speciall respect) did Compile his Sermons through the Week what Books he chiefly made use of and several other Matters anent his Method of study in his Closet that no. Mor∣tal could know by ordinary Means: By which, no doubt, Satan did partly de∣sign tho by a ver false Argument) to raise the esteem of Books above Ser∣mons collected out of them: Concealing in the mean time, both the Gift of improving Helps, and the Blessing promised to the Hearer of the word preacht. When the ad Bargarran received the two pieces of Red Cloath, that the Girle had tor om one of the Witches Sleeves as is above-narrated; she lock∣ed up the same and keeped the Key Notwistanding of which Caution, some Friends having come to Visit the Girle, and being desirous to see the foresaids ieces of loath; she being in one of her fits, laughed, and told has her Mother needed not to seek for them in the place where they were lock∣ed up; the Witches having taken them away, and laid them in a Corner of the Celler; and accordingly being searched for, they were found in the particular place condescended on. There was another like passage which occurred to a Friend, who came in with Bargarran for soliciting an Commission from the Council: For he having brought alongst with him those pieces of Cloath, and buttoned his Pocket on them at Night; and put it in security as he thought; behold they are amissing in the morning; but after search are found in a good distance from the Pcket; though none visible had been in the Room to open it and carry them off. Finally, this Girle did in discourse, discover a reat Sagacity; yet accompained with extraordinary Modesty: And amongst other instances, the did observe the Doors and windows open and shut again, upon the Witches entry thereat: There was at no time such a number of them about her as he Room might not very well contain, with the visible persons that were present therein: Sh oberved them to shift their place with a great Agility, when any other came into it o attacqud upon her poining them: And she often averted from the instance of the pirit that spoke to her above her Head, old their Naes, and gave her other means of discovering of them, &c. That Satan does often contrive thei Rine, by the most undiscernible Methods he can, because an open Ded would scar others to undertake with so faithless a Master &c.
An Account of TWO LETTERS Which contain a SUMMARY Of what appeared most MATERIAL or CURIOUS In the Trial of the SEVEN WITCHES Who were Condemn'd to be Execute in the West. THE Truth of the strange Things mentioned in the preceeding Narra∣tive was at first, carefully searched into only by private Persons: But at last became so nottour, that, upon Application founded on a Jour∣nal of these extraordinary Events, attested by many of the Gentry in the Country; the Council gave a Commission for enquiring thereanent. The Honourable Persons to whom this was recommended, did, with great Impartiality and Exactness, make a Report: which, in Providence, proved a Mean of moving the Government to notice the Execution of Justice on some of these Witches, who otherways, might have lurked without being discoverered. For, hereupon, the Council directed a second Commission, for Trial of those who appeared to them to be most loaded by the preliminary Probation addu∣ced on the first. Several of these Judges were not only persons of Honour, but also of singular Knowledge and Experience: Conform whereunto they did pro∣ceed with singular Caution, and were so far from Precipitancy in the Affair, that, after several Diets of Court, they adjourned to a long Term, that, in the mean time, the Prisoners might be provided of Advocates. Accordingly an Advocate compeared for them, and managed their Defence with all the Accuracy that could be expected. There were above Twen∣ty Hours imploied, at one Diet, in Examination of Witnesses: And the Inquest being înclosed, did consume about six Hours in comparing the Probation-Whereupon Seven of the most notorious Criminals were Convict and Con∣demned. The Crimes libelled and found proven against them, were not meer spect∣ral Imaginations; but open and obvious Facts: viz. The Murders of some Chil∣dren, and Persons of Age; and the Torturing of several Persons, particularly
Bargarran's Daughter: And both these, not at a distances, but contignously by na∣tural Means of Cords, Pins, and the like. Besides the other ordinary Works of Witch∣craft, such as Reouncing Baptism, entering in Contract with, and Adoring the Devil under a Corporeal shape, &c. which could not but be sustained Rele∣vant in Scotland, since there is an express Stature Parl. 9. Act. 73: Queen Mary, appointing the pain of Death to such. To make the Probation the more convincing, it was adduced orderly in three Periods The First consisted of unsuspected Witnesses, who proved Fact: From whence it was necessarly inferred, That there was Witchcraft in the Case. The Second did include, also unexceptionable Witnesses, who deponed upon Facts; which made it probable, if not necessary, that the Pannals were the Witches. The Third did comprehend six positive Testimonies, of these who did See and Hear these Witches committing the Malefices libelled. The only valuable Subject of Debate, was anent the Import of these last Testimonies; five whereof were by Confessants, who had been at the Meetings in which were committed the Crimes libelled; and the sixth of Bargarran's Daughter, who was one of the Persons maleficiat. The antecedent part of the Probation was by Witnesses beyond exception: And the Judges upon a long Debate did sustain Four of these Six only cum nota, and two of them to be Exa∣mined without Oath. So nice were they in favours of the Pannals Lives, since some of these Witnesses might have been admitted in such a Crime without any quality, by the most scroupulous Judicatory in Europe. But all things were carried on in this Procedures with Tenderness and Moderation: For even the Advocates. who were sent to prosecute the Endytment by His Majesty's Coun∣cil and Advocate, did not act with the Byass of Parties; but on the contrary, showed an equal Concern to have the Pannals assoilaied, if it could be found compatible with Justilse This is the Reason for which the Publisher doubts not, but the two follow∣ing Letters (the one whereof gives a Compend of the Advocates Speech to the Jury, and the other, of their Answers to the Objections against the Confessant Witnesses) will afford a satisfying view of the chiefest part▪ of the Trial: since the Objections which were, or might have been made are therein Stated and Answered, or Anticipat and Prevented; and the inten∣ded Brevity would not permit to printet this time the whole Process, which being extant upon Record, any who are Curious may have easy access there∣unto. There is scarcely need to take notice of a late Scurrilous Pamphlet, that has been printed in England, and pretends to give an account of those proceed∣ings: For any who reads it may easily find, that the Author has been either. Fool, Know, or both, there being neither good Language, Sense, or Truth in the most part of it. LETTER FIRST. SIR, YOU having told me, that the odd Passages which occur in the West, have put many of your Neighbours and your self; upon reading all the Books you can get treating of Witchcraft: And therefore desired me to trans∣mit to you my Observations at the Court: I shall not pre-occupy your Opinion
by giving them in my own Form; but herein I send to you the exactest Dupli∣cat of the Advocates Speech to the Inquest that I could obtain; and by the next Post you shall have something more Curious: viz. A Collection of their An∣swers to the Objections against the Six last Witnesses, that were adduced for concluding the Proof: Having these, you will want little that could be agree∣able to such an accurat Gust as yours is. The SPEECHES to the INQUEST Were of this import. Good Men of Inquest, YOU having sitten above Twenty Hours in over hearing the Proba∣tion: And being now to be inclosed, where, it's like, you will take no small time to Re-consider and Compare it: We shall not detain you with summing up the same in particular; but shall on∣ly suggest some Things, whereof it is fit you take special notice in your perusal of it: viz. 1mo The Nature of your own Power, and the Ma∣nagement thereof: 2do. The Object of this Power which lies before you; where∣in you are to consider, in the First place, Whether or not there has been Witch∣craft in the Malefices libelled? And, in the Next place, whether or not these Pannals are the Witches? As to your Power, it is certain, that you are both Judges and Witnesses, by the Opinion of our Lawyers and Custom: Therefore you are called out of the Neighbourhood, as presumed best to know the Quality of the Pannals, and the Notority of their Guilt or Innocence. Your Oath is, That you shall all Truth tell, and no Truth conceal; which does plainly imply, That you are to Condemn or Assoilzie, conform to your proper Conviction. Such is the excellent Con∣stitution of Juries in England: and ought to hold more specially in this Cir∣cumstantiat Case, where there is such a Chain of different Kinds of Probation concurring against the same Pannals, as will appear by the Review thereof in its proper place We are not to press you with the ordinary Severity of threatning in Assyse of Error, in case you should Absolve; but wholly leaves you to the Conduct of GOD and your own Consciences, and desire that you proceed with all the Care of the Pannals Lives that is possible for you, as the Honourable Judges have set to you a desirable Pattern, in their great Caution thereanent. As to the Probation it self; you see, that it is divided in Three Parts, viz. The extraordinariness of the Malefices: The Probability of the concurring Adminicles: And the Clearness of the positive Probation. As to the First part, The Malefices, or Corpora delicti, are proven by unexcep∣able Witnesses, to have fallen out in such an odd and extraordinary manner, that
it oints out some other Cause, than the ordinary course of Nature, to have produced these Effects. For clearing of this, particulatly in relation to the Torments of Bargarran's Daughter, you may consider not only the extraordinary Things that could not proceed from a Natural Disease, which ly proven before you; but also several other Matters of Fact, which is nottour; have been seen by some of your selves, and ly here in a Journal of her Sufferings: Every Article whereof is attested by the Subscriptions of Persons of entire Credit, before the honourable Com∣missioners appointed by His Majesty's Privy Council, for making Enquiry there-anent This Girl's throwing out of Hair, Pins, and Coals of greater heat than that of her Body or Blood; as also so dry, that they appeared not to have come out of her Stomack; nor had she any press of Vomiting at the time, that she decla∣red the same to have been put in her Mouth by her Tormenters: Is deponed by Doctor Brisban, in his Opinion not to proceed from a Natural Caule. She was not Tormented by any of the Pannals after their Imprisonment: Ex∣cept two Nights by Katharine Campbell; which being a Surprise, it was there∣after discovered, that these two Nights the Jaylor's Wife had got out Katharine Campbell to Spin in her House. She having been speaking to one of her Tormenters as present (tho' Invisi∣ble to the By-standers) and asking how her Tormenter had got these clouted Red Sleeves; she suddenly gets up, takes hold of them, the Company hear a shreid, and she pulls away two pieces of red Cloth, which all the By-standers beheld with amazement in her Hands: Nor was there any other peice of this kind of Cloth to be found in the Room at that occasion. She told, that her Tormenters were giving her a Glass of Sack, an Orange-pile, &c. (thereby ensnaring her to accept of a Favour from them) and accor∣dingly she was seen to move her Lips, and to have the Orange-pile betwixt her Teeth; tho' there was no visible Hand that could have done it. She advertised before hand, that one of her Tormenters was to be at the Door at a particular Hour: And that another of them was in the Kitchin; be∣fore any did tell her thereof: which accordingly fell out: And these being brought to her presence, became obnoxious to the ordinary Means of Disco∣very. When her Glove fell down from her, at a time that several persons were a∣bout her: it was lifted again by a Hand invisible to them. She was not only transported throw the Hall and down Stairs, without per∣ceiving her Feet to touch the Ground: But also was hurried in a flight up Stairs: And when a Minister endeavoured to retain her; he found a sensible weight, besides her own Strength, drawing her from him. When she complained, that her Tormenters had bitten and scratched her; the Steads of the Nails and Teeth were seen upon her Skin, with Blood and Spittle: about the wounds, which were above Twenty four; while neither her own, or any others Teeth that were visible, could have done it. She was most vehemently distorted, upon attempting to Tell, or even Write the Names of her Tormenters: yet that ceased as to any of them, how soon that person was aliunde delated; and particularly she had liberty, after many painful Attempts, to Accuse Margaret Laing, how soon a Charm of Hair to restrain her, which Margaret had left behind the Door, was found and burnt; the Girle having told it to have been tim, in manner mentioned in the Depo∣sitions.
She did thrw out no more Hair after the finding of a Ball of Hair, of the same Colour and Kind with that thrown out by the Girle, in Katharine Campbel's Pocket, with Pins in it, and the Burning of it. After Agnas Nasmith had prayed for her, she did appear to her, but not tor∣men her. She foretold, that her Tormenters had conserted to throw her in a Fit, (where∣of they did premonish, of design to fright her to Renounce her Baptism by the terror) at a certain Hour, and had left one of their Number to execute it: Ac∣cording whereunto, there was a Woman with a Red Coat seen under a Tree in the Orchard, and the Torment was brought on at the time appointed. When she told, that there was something tormenting her under the Cloaths; the Spectators saw, the Bed-cloaths move in an extraordinary manner, after the Girle had been raised out of them. When she complained that she was Beaten: the By-standers heard the Noise of the Stroaks She cried out at a time, that her Theigh was hurt: And one of the Company having searched her Pocket, found a Knife; but unfolded: However, having folded up the same, and put it in a second time; she cries of new: And upon the second search, it (tho' secuted by the Spring) is found open, to the great wonder of the Beholders; since they did watch, that no visible thing could have possibly opened it. She told of a Charm under the Bed: And accordingly it was found in the the shape of an Egg, which melted away being put in the Fire: She told also, that her Sister that was boarded abroad, had Charms put above her in the House, and would not recover of the decaying Sickness till she were brought out of it: According whereunto, the Child being brought home, she straight way recovered. She told of their meeting in the Yeard of Bargarran, for Consulting anent the destroying of her: And accordingly the Confessants have deponed, That they did meet and consult her Ruine in that place. The Story anent her telling, That the Commissioners, tho' at three Miles distance, had granted a Warrand to the Sherriff, to apprehend one of her Tor∣menters: Her telling so perfect an account of the Sheriff, and of Mr Guthri who was with him, while her Eyes were cieled and fast: Her being in exces∣sive Torments (as she fore-told) till that Person was apprehended, and imme∣diatly thereupon, tho' at many Miles distance, her telling that her Tormenters were now taken, betwixt Twelve and One a clock in the Morning; and the Sheriff when he returned, did declare the Seisure to have been about that time: Is so nottour and so well attested, that we need only to put you in mind thereof. Her falling in Fits upon the sight, or touch of her Tormenters, was no effect of Imagination: For she was fully hood-winked with a Cloak, so as she saw no Body whatsomever; yet upon the approach of her Tormenter, she imme∣diatly fell down dead: Whereas she remained no ways startled upon the touch of any other: Which Experiment was tried for ascertaining this Mean of Dis∣covery. Finally, she is naturally Saggacious and Observant: And discovered her intg∣rity in face of Court▪ For when the President asked, Whether or not she knew one of the Pannals Name that was to be pricked? She answered, That tho' she knew her well enough of her self; yet one had told her the Name of this Pannal, when she was sent for to be confronted with her: So far did this Girle discover
her aversion from any thing that might seem intended to aid unfairly the natu∣ral Evidence of Truth; and her Firmness to the outmost against Temptations of becoming a Witch; particularly against the last Assault of Satan, where∣in he perswaded her at least to go to their Meetings; and she answered, that she would not follow such a base fallen Creature: And he rejoining, that she would go to Hell however for her other Sins; and she answering, that he was a Liar from the beginning, and the Blood of JESUS would cleanse her rom all Iniquity: Whereupon he disappeared, and she perfitly recovered upon the Sabbath thereafter, was an happy End put to this fearful Tragedy of Witch∣craft, and confirms to Conviction, the Reality of it. As to the Murdering of the Children and the Minister libelled; you may observe several extraordinary things appearing in them; particulatly the Witnesses de∣pone, the Minister to have been in excessive Torments, and of an unusual colour, to have been of sound Judgement; and yet he did tell of several Women being about him, and that he heard the noise of the Door opening, when none else did hear it. The Children were well at Night, and found Dead in the Mor∣ning, with a little Blood on their Noses, and Blaes at the roots of their Ears; which were obvious Simptoms of Stranglings: Besides that it is testified, that the Mother of one of them, cried out, Matthew, Matthew, the Chid is dead- And the House of the other was Whitened within, with sifting of Meal the Night before. Both which Particulars were told and discovered, by the Con∣fessants, before the Witnesses which now concur with them, in it, were exa∣mined. 2do. The Second part of the Probation consists of several Adminicles, proven by unsuspected Witnesses, which lead us to suspect those Pannals to be Witches, as so many Lines drawn from a Circumference to a Center, and as an Avenue to the positive Probation thereafter adduced: And these either strick at the whole Pannals in general, or some of them in particular. In general we need not e∣numerat all these Adminicles, but remit you to the Probation, which is so full thereanent; only you will be pleased to notice, that it is clearly proven, that all the Pannals have insensible Marks, and some of them in an extraordinary manner: That most of them have been long Reputed Witches, and some of them delated in 1687. by a Confessing Witch, whose subscribed Confession has been produced. You see that none of them do shed Tears, nor were they ever discovered to do it since their Imprisonment, notwithstanding of their frequent Howlings: So that it is not a sudden Grief or Surprise. And finally, that the Girle fell in Fits of Torment upon the Pannals approaches to her, and that she did name them all frequently, either out of, or in, her Fits. In particular, you see how Katharine Campbell was provoked by this Girl's disco∣vering her Thift; whereupon she has brought in the rest of her Confederets to act the following Mischiefs: How thereupon Campbell did Curse and Imprecate in a terrible manner: How she stayed out of her Bed at Night, and was frequent∣ly drousie in the Morning: How she was named by the Girle, particularly the two Nights that she was out of Prison: The Ball of Hair was taken out of her Poc∣ket and burnt; whereupon the Girle's throwing out of Hair did cease: She could not express one word, even when on her Knees, of Prayer, for the Girl's Recovery: And the insensible Marks on her, were very remarkable. Agnas Nasmith did not torment the Girl after she had prayed for her: She was repute a Witch, and hath the Marks. She came early in the Morning to Bargarran's Closs, when by her refusing to go in, it appeared she had no business.
Yea, it is plain. that she had a Resentment, for her not getting a greater Alm's the last time she was there. The Girl declared ex incotinenti, that Nasmith asked her Health and Age; which in these Circumstances was a shrewd Presumption of her evil Design: And she acknowledged herself to have done this, when she asked the Age of another Child; wherein by Providence the was befooled, since that which she thought would have been an Excuse, tended to discover her Gurlt. And lastly, after this appearance of Agnes Nasmith, the Girl did take her first Fit, and nominat her amongst the first Tormenters. Margaret Laing, that great Imposter, has been a Master-peice of the Devil: She has confessed unnatural Lust, which is known to some of your number: She sat near the Door where the Charm of Hair was found which the Girle de∣clared did keep up her Tongue; and upon burning thereof it was loused. The Girle fell in Fits upon her approach: She has notable Markes; particularly one which the Confessants declare she lately received; and by Inspection it appears to be Rect VVhen she came from her private conversation (no doubt with the Del.) she Raged as if she had been possest, and could not but declare, That she expected a violent Death: She looked in the face of James Millar's Child, and asked her Age, whereupon that Child sickned the same Night, and nam∣ed Margaret Laing on her Death-bed: It appears she was ready to show to Janet Laird a sight of her Mother, who had been three Years Dead. And finally, She has been taken in several Lyes and gross Prevarications; particularly you may remember, how six hours ago; when the VVitnesses were examined on the Ball of Hair found with Katharin Campbell, a Gentleman (Mr. Stewart of ) heard her say to Katharin in the Ear; This is well waird on you because ye would not put it away when I desired you &c. VVhich the said Mr. Stewart did openly testifie in Court upon Oath; notwithstanding whereof this impudent VVretch had the confidence to deny it, the Katharin Campbel also Confest, That she had pulled at her, and had spoke some what to her, to which she did not advert. This was no wonder, the VVitnesses deponing at the time being closs against Katharin. Margaret Fulton was repute a VVitch, has the Mark of it; and acknowledged in presence of her Husband, that she made use of a Charm; which appeared full of small Stones and Blood. That her Husband had brought her back from the Faries; and her Repute of being a VVitch is of an old date; besides her being named often by the maleficiat Girl. As to the Lindsays they all have the Mark: And were all of a long time re∣puted to be Witches. John Lindsay in Barloch was accidentally discovered by the Girles taking a Fit upon his coming to the House. John and James Lind∣says; were dilated by a confessing Witch in Anno 1687, Which Confession is publickly read before you: And there was Money given to the Sheriff-depute for delaying of the pursute. James Lindsay appeared to William Semple sudden∣denly, and Flew about like a Fowl, for an opportunity to strick him, in re∣venge of the quarrel mentioned in the Deposition, and at last prevailed to strick him dead over a Dyke. And finally which is a remarkable Indication both of Truth and Providence, the very Witnesses adduced in the Exculpation for the Lindsays, deponed so clearly against them, even beyond the Pursuets Wit∣nesses, that their Advocate was stunned thereat; and thereupon desisted from aving any moe Witnesses to be examined on the Exculpation, It is true, some of these Indications may be in One, and others of them in Ather, eier from Nature or Accident; and yet that person not be a Witch:
But it was never heard or read, that all these indications, which are so many discoverys by Frovidence, of a crime that might other ways remain in the dark, did ever concur in one and the same Indi Person that was innocent: Yea on the contrary, they, by the▪ Wisdom and Experience of all Nations, do als convincingly discover a Witch, as the Symptoms of a eptosis confirmed by all Physicians, do unfold the Person affected with the same to be Leprous.  Esto, They are not sufficient of themselves, yet their Tendency and Moanning, be∣ing cleared and applyed to their proper cause, by a liquid and positive Proba∣tion: There wants no more to determine you anent the Pannals guilt. And therefore, 3tio. As to the Third part of the Probation, were  the Positive Depositions of the Confessants, and against whom they do concurr, wholly to your own Perusal and Examination: Only you would be pleased to notice. m. Some things which very much Sustain the Credibility of their Testimonies, arrising from their examination in Court. 2do. We shall explain to you the import of the word Nt, which is added to the Interlocutor of the Judges admitting these last Witnesses. As to the First, Elizabeth Anderson is of sufficient Age; being Seventeen; yet so young and pointed, that her Deposition appears no effect of Melancholly; She accused her Father to his face when he was a dying in the prison, as now there are two of her Aunts in the Pannal, which certainly must proceed from the strength of Truth, since even Dives retain  natural affection to his relations. She went on foot to the Meetings with her Father, except only that the Devil trans∣ported them over the Water of Clyde, which was easy to the Prince of the Air who does far greàter things by his Hurri-canes; she tells that Montgomeries House was, Meallis when his Child was strangled: And she declares that she never re∣nounced her Baptism; but was carried along by the Concussion of a Parent: So that nothing can be objected against her testimony in any Judgement, much less in an Excepted Crime, James Lindsay it is true, is of less import: yet by his Weeping when he came in and was admonished of the greatness of his guilt, it appears that he had an Sense of it: he hath a natural Precipitancy in what he speakes, yet that is com∣monly the concomitant of Ingenuity, as importing his Expressions not to before-thought. He Concurrs in most things with the others, and yet he has declared, that he saw Not Margaret Fulton at Dumbartoun. &c. Which im∣plys that he does not file the Pannals all at Randome, but tells what occurred to his Senses. &c. Janet and Margaret Rodgers are instances of a singular providence, for they did confess the same Morning that the Court did last sit, of their own proper motive, there being neither Ministers nor Judges beside them at the time. Agns Nasmith is Janets Relation, and she tells that she never saw Katharine Campbel, as Margaret declares that she did not see John Lindsay in Bartech: which plainly demonstrats that they tell only the dictats of their Natural Conscience arrising from discretion and knowledge of the true matters of Fact: They both professed their Repentance last Sabbath in the Church: And do per∣sist with a great Firmness, as you see their Department in deponing to be Con∣gruous and Exact. Thomas Lindsay and Christian Shaw, being under Pupillarity, we did not press their being put to an Oath; yet you saw that they did declare in Court against
these Pnals in such an Harmony with the rest of the Deponents, and gave such an cause of their knowledge. That it is certain their own youngness in years Adds, extreamly to the Credit of their Testimony: Because thereby it is incredible, that they could have contrived or executed the acting of concert. As to the Second, Since these Witnesses are admitted by the Judges; it necessarly im∣plyes, that they meant them to be probative; only they adjected the words Cum nota: That is, you must notice, or Notandu est, That there must something else concurr to prove the Guilt of the Pannals, by and attour the De∣positions of any two such Witnesses: But so it is, that all the Adminicles on which you have seen Probation led, for more then Sixteen Hours of your time, are strenghtening evidences, of those Witnesses Credebility, and cannot but have been Notticed by you as Illative of the same things which they de∣pone. Whereby the Nota is fully taken off by the concurrence of four other po∣sitive Testimonys, agreeing with that of two of these VVitnesses: by the Extra∣ordinaryness of the corpora delicti: by the Probability of the Adminicles: And finally by the whole Chain of this Affair, and the Sparkles of an Infernal Fire, which in every place have broke out of it. It is true there are some few of the Adminicles that are proven only by one VVitness. But, as to this, you may consider, 1mo. That a VVitness deponing do facto proprio, is in Law more credited than any other single VVitness. And this is the present Case as to some of the Adminicles. 2do. The Antecedent, Conco∣mitant, and Subsequent, circumstances of Fact, do sustain the Testimony and make the Semi-plenary Probation to become full▪ But 3tio. The other Admini∣cles undoubtedly proven by concurring Witnesses, are perse, sufficient: And therefore you saw us, at the desire of the Judges, forbeare to call the far great∣est part of our Witnesses; because the time had alreadyr to so great a length, and it was thought that there was already enough proven of presumptions: For it may als reasonably be imagined, that the most Regular and Curious Scheme had emerged from the fortuitous concourse of Atoms roving without Rule, as that so many indications should Concenter against each of these Pannalls, & yet they remain Innocent of Witchcraft. Now upon the whole, you will take notice, that Presumptions being ve∣hement make a more certain Probation then Witnesses: Because Presumptions are Natural Emanations of the thing it self, which cannot be brybed. Whereas Witnesses are obnoxious: So in our Law there was one condemned for Thift, on other for falshood, and a third for Murdering of a Child, meerly upon Presumptions, as is related by McKeinzie in his Criminal Treatise: much more may presumptions astruct the faith of, and take off the Nota from, positive Witnesses: For it is a gross mistake, that several proofs, which have each of them some Import, may not be joyned to make a full Evidence, the same way as two small Candles in a Dark room, will not suffice; yet several o∣thers being added to them, will make a sufficient light, to discover the mur∣derrer: Two Boys will be able to carry a Weight which one of them would  be able to sustain; as two units make a full number: One Witness of whatsoever dignity proves nothing; yet out of the Mouth of two or three Witnesses every Truth shall be established. And finally, Tho one Coal make nor a Fire that can do the work; yet several Coals added to it encrease the Flame; which is hoped will be sufficient for the operation.
VVe shall therefore leave you with this Conclusion, That as you ought to beware to condemn the innocent, and ought to incline to the safest fide: so if these Pannals be proven legally guilty; Then quoad bygones, your Eye ought not to spare them, nor ought you to suffer a VVitch to Live: And, as to the future; you in doing otherways would be Accessory to all the Blasphemies, Apostacys. Murders, Tortures, and Seductions, &c. VVhereof these Enemies of Heaven and Earth, shall hereafter be guilty, when they have got out. So than the question seems simply to come to this whether upon your Oath de fideli, you can swear, That the Pannals, notwithstanding of all that is proven against them, are not guilty of Witchcraft? In the Determination whereof we pray GOD may direct you to the right course. The Inquest being inclosed near six Hours, brought in their Verdict to Court, that they found the Libel proven. I am &c. LETTER SECOND. SIR. I Have Collected, according to my Promise, what appeared to me most Specious in the Reasonings, either in Court, or private Conversation, anent the receiving of the Confessants as Witnesses. You are not to imagine, that the Pannals were Condemned on the Faith of these: For I do believe the Probation by unexceptionable witnesses, led antecedent to this last, was so pregnant, that the Pannals might have been Condemned on it, tho' these last had not been adduced. I may have missed the Energy of the Argument sometimes, in a Case which in it self is so abstruse: However, you have it in such manner as I was able to penetrat thereunto; as follows. IN order to the more satisfactory Answering of the Objections made against these last Witnesses, we shall first, lay before you the State of the Case: And, then, clear up the Determination of it. As to the First. The Question is not, whether Partners in the Crime, or others mentioned in the Objections, can be a Concluding Proof of themselves, tho' two of them would concur as to the same Act of Witchcraft: But whether the Corpora delicti appearing already to imply Witchcraft, and the extrinsick Admi∣nicles being so pregnant, to infer that these Pannals are the Witches: there concurring such Characters, as by observance of all Nations and Ages, are the Symptoms of a Witch; particularly the Marks, Fame, not shedding of Tears, &c. which are Discoveries of Providence of so dark a Crime, that like Avenues lead us to the Secret of it. And finally, when six persons of different Ages and Stations, five Confessants, and the Girl, do, when separatly examined, agree in their Answers to every material Question that is put to them, even tho' it be New; so that it could not be concerted: We say, whether or not in such a Case may Witnesses be received to put the Cape-stone on the Evidence by a positive probation, of a Matter of Fact which is the Object of Sense, tho' other∣ways they be liable to exception, if such Extraordinariness of the Corpora delicti, Clearness of the Adminicles, and of the Diagnosticks of Witches; did not preceed them; as you have seen proven before you that they do?
The Case is not, whether these VVitnesses would be Habile in an Ordinarie Crime, which commonly falls to be exposed to other VVitnesses, then those con∣cerned in it: But whether they can be received in this Extraordinary, Occult, and Excepted Crime of VVitchcraft; wherein there are two special Cases to be noticed; viz. Sometimes the Acts thereof are open, and admitt the choise of VVitnesses; such as Charmes used in the Day-time, when the Actor is visi∣ble. But that part of VVitchcraft; whereby VVitches meet in the Night-time, Adore their Lord, contrive their Malefices, and accordingly thereafter execute them, when other VVitnesses are asleep, or the VVitches themselves are cover∣ed from sight: VVe say, that this can be no otherways proven than by these that are Intimat to it, joyned to the positive Proof and Adminicles before-mentioned. VVe do not alledge, that Persons altogether destitute of Knowledge and Na∣tural Conscience are to be admitted in any Case, such as Infants, Furious, Fatuous, &c. Neither do we contend. That Thomas Lindsay and Cliristian Shaw, who are under Pupillarity, should be put to an Oath; for they are only to be examin∣ed separatly before the Court, upon interrogators, by which it may appear, whether or not they coincide with the four other Confessants, that are to de∣pone before them; and this is the Pannal's Advantage in case of Disagreement: But we insist, that any Person above Pupillarity; giving Evidences of consider∣able Knowledge and natural Conscience (which is a sufficient Fond for all the Credit that we need in this Case, that is already almost fully proven) is to be received as a VVitness. As to the 2d. we shall make this as clear as Noon. 1mo. From Reason and the Nature of the thing. 2do. The unanimous Judgment of Lawiers in all Nations and Ages. 3tio. Our own Customs and Decisions. And 4to. The Singularity of this Circumstantiat Case. As to the First. The going to, and coming from Meetings, especially on Foot; the falling down, and worshiping the Devil there, under a Corporeal shape (which he had when he tempted our SAVIOUR to doit) The actual Murder∣ing of Children by a Cord and Napkin; and the Tormenting of Others by Pins, &c. Are plain Objects of Sense: And therefore the Senses are to be beleiv∣ed anent them. For as Reason hath Things Intelligible; and Faith Things Supernatural; so the Senses have Things Corporeal for their Object, where∣anent they are to be trusted, ay and while it be Proven, that the Appearance is Impossible, or that the Witness of it, is an Impostor. It is an part of the Witches Purchase from the Devil, that they cannot be seen at some occasions: So that the Abominations comitted then would remain unpunished, if such VVitnes∣ses were not admitted. It cannot be thought that VVitches (who of all Crimi∣nals are the most obstinat to Confess) would venture the loss of their own Lives, by deponing against Others, against whom they have no special picque; yea, for whom they have particular Affection, as several of the Pannalls are some of the VVitnesses Relations. Nor has the Devil any peculiar interest to Instigat them thereunto: For severals of the Pannalls have confessed other execrable Crymes: VVhereby it cannot be supposed, That Satan would be divided a∣gainst himself. GOD in his ordinary Providence has taken such care of publick Judgments, that the Enemy of Justice his special Power ceases thereabout, as appears by the VVitches not being able either to do more Harm, or escape, after GOD's Ministers begin to counteract Satan's Instruments by Imprison∣ment. And finally, the oddness of the Malefices, the Concurrence of the
Adminicles; and the existence of Matters of Fact, wherein these Confessants (tho' not knowing the same otherways) do agree with other unexceptionable VVitnesses, &c. Do sufficiently astruct their Credibility: For as Falshood being a Crime, is never presumed; so a person found true in many things, is still presumed to continue such, till the contrary be evinced. As to the second, Socius crimicis &c. admittitur fidelictum sit nefandum Men: A J: Q: l. 2d. i. C. cas: 474. N. 27. seq: auto cltum & veritas aliunde haberinon psit Mas: vol: 1. Con: 466. N. 6. aut difficilis probationis Farin: lib. 2. Op: Criminali∣m. Tit. 6 Q. 63. N. 28. Mas: vol. 3d. Con: 1360. N. 4th. Menoch. l. 2d. Cas: 216. l. 1st. Q. 58. nocturno tempore comissa quae dificilis dicuntur probationis Ber: decis. 6 N. 6. Menoch D. Cas: 116. N. 14. Ideoquo non solum presumptiva & conjecturata probatio sufficit, verum etiam in habiles admittuntur sarin. l. 2d. Tit: 6. Q. 55. N. 40. Masc. l. 2. Con: 112. N. 13. idem in dilictis commissis in Eremo, Nemore, Moute aliove loco secreto, Gomez: Var: res, Tom: 3d. C. 12. N. 21. Far: D. Tit: 6. Q. 62. N. 55. sed occultum non dicitur quod actu non intervenerint, at quod de Natura delicti vel ratione loc & temporie ali testes habitu intervenir non potuerint: ist est Maleficium in quo socius criminis &c. admittitur. Men: l. 2d. Cap. 5. Cas. 474. N. 33 Campeg: te test: Reg. 86 Fallen. 6. Cotus de Test. part 4th. N. 97. Oldindorp. de Test. Til. de personis testtum N, 21. In a word all Lawiers who wrot particular Treatises on Witchcraft in Germany, Italie, Loven, France, and Spain, &c. Do conclude, that inhabile Witnesses; and particularly Socii are to be admitted in Witchcraft; only the strictest of them do think, that this Ad∣mission is to be cm nota; or as Delrio in the place cited for the Pannals expresses it ex his solis, the Judge is not to Condemn, nor do we require it. As to the Third. we have the Testimonie of our Famous K. Ja: 6th. Demon: lib. 3. C. ult. telling us, That it is our Law, that Boys, Girls, infamous Per∣sons, &c. Are not to be rejected any more in Witchcraft, than in human lese Majesty, even tho' they assert others to have been present at Imaginary Meetings: Because this Supposes their having entred into a Pre-contract: He sayes that Satan's Mark, and the want of Tears, are pregnant Aids to the Discovery, Quod Dens prater natura ordinem voluit esse secret a imanitatis judicium, & o non permittenes ut fecissimi criminis pertinatiam dissimulent. He gives an instance of a Girle, who having named several Witches in her Fitts; they were all Condemned upon other concurring Adminicles. This is not a common Author, but a Man who as Curious, was Exact: As Prudent did not publish such things without the Approbation of the best Divines and Lawiers; as a Prince, is to be Credited anent the Law of His own Countrey; and as a King has determined any Dubiety that might have remained in this Point, also farr as the Law of our Government will permitt. But further our Judges and Lawiers have followed His Majesty: For in all the Processes in the Journals; Fame, and Delation, and the Mack, are still sus∣tained, as most pregnant Presumptions; whereupon, and a very small Pro∣bation besides, Witches have been frequently Condemned. So in the Processes against the Bewitchers of Sir George Maxwel of Pollock, and Hamilton of Barns, Anno, 1677. Socius criminis, tho' under Age, is sustained to be a Witness: And witnesses are adduced before the Inquest for proving, that the Mark was found upon some of the VVitches. Women and Minors have been received by multi∣tudes of Decisions cited by McKenie. Tit. prob: by Witnsses, and Tit: Witch∣craft. And he also cites Decisions, where, in paralel Cases, Socii Criminis and
others inhabile, were admitted; particularly in Treason and in Falshood: And all Lawiers conclude, That witchcraft is as much an excepted crime as these. As to the 4th. VVhat ever inhability these witnesses might be under, it is fully made up, and they rendred unexceptionably Habile by the Chain of this whole Business It is true one Man throw the concurrence of corrosive Humors, may have an insensible Mark; another be enviously defamed: A Third may through sudden Grief or Melancholy, not be able to weep, &c. A Fourth may be load∣ed with suspitious Circumstances, when extraordinary things fall out in the Countrey: And a Fifth may be deponed against by two false witnesses, tho' neither of these separatly be truely witches. But by the known Observation and Experience of Mankind, none except witches have had the unhappie Medley and Concurse of All or Most of these Indicia, and ordinarly, and for the greater part, Witches have them: So that since the Rules of Judgment are established upon that, Quod plerumque fit, which does obtain till an exception be apparent in a special case, the Conjunction of these in one person, does as plainly give his Character, as the most certain symptoms of the plainest Disease, being universally concerted in all parts of the World, points out to us that the Haver of them is a person truely affected with that Desease, whereof he hath the con∣current Diagnosticks. In a word, one or other of these may concurr, in the Innocent; but no Writers do Attest, that all of them have concentred in any o∣ther person in the World but a witch: And on the other hand, they taking place in Witches, through all parts of the World, must proceed from a common, and not from a peculiar Humor or Cause. The specifick Aptitude; of some of the nicest of the Indicia, which appeared from the Probation already led, to discover a Witch, do serve to clear the ground of the Worldes Observation anent them. Particularly the Devil, as Aping GOD, imprints a Sacrament of his Covenant: Bedes that, commonly this mark being given at the first Meeting, does by its intolerable Pain, force the Witch to a second Randevouz for curing it, at which the poor wretch being under this furious necessity, fixes the Paction by renewing it with eliberation, having been diverted in the mean time from considering the Horridness of the first En∣gagement by the Pain. The inability to shed Tears may be a Charactristick of Hardening, tho' not always in the case of Christians; yet in these who have ceas∣ed to be such; left the Devil giving them such words of Scripture and Prayer as many have, it should be impossible to discover their Hypocrisy; and that is not Satan's own interest, since by this Discovery occasion is given to Buffo on the Profession of Holyness. A Report often arises without ground, but a Constant Ropuce that keeps footing, implyes for the most part a surer Cause; e∣specially when it is of Persons below Envy; and by Persons above Calumny. The Girls falling in fitts at approach of the Pannalls might proceed from Anti∣pathie, arriseing from the poisonous Steems of the witch accustom'd to produce that Effect through a vertue affixed thereto by the Devil, by Conjunction of na∣tural Causes (the same way as the invisible Pestilence does operat) or his promise of casting the Girl in Fitts at the Witches presence, might have been General; where by the Witch was eventually befooled and discovered, as it often falls out: For Satan envies even their temporal Felicity, and fears lest by continuing here, they should be rest out of his hands by Conversion. When they come to per∣ceive the Delusion of his Promises to make them rich and the like, &c. There was one thing further which was tried before your Lordships, viz. None of the Pannals that were tried (tho' most Saggacious and Knowing, and
perfect in Memory, so that it could not proceed from Ignorance or Forgetful∣fulness) could make out the attempt of saying the Lord's Prayer; which may either be a secret Judgement for Renuncing their first LORD, after whom it is peculiarly Denominat, or by restraint of their new lord, who may think that too special an Homage to his Adversary. But we have hindered you too long with that which is not necessary: For this being incontravertible Law and Custom, there needs no Philosophy to support it: Since Legislators do Reason, but Subjects must Obey: And both the Fool and the Lazie (who have neither Read nor Thought enough to understand this Subject) are to be left to their own Chimera's: Yet lest they should insult, we shall Answer in their fashion, such of the Objections as the Pannals Advocate thought any ways worthy to be re∣peated in this place. Whereas it is objected, that Delrio Sect. 5. § 4. says, That Socii are not to be admitted witnesses ad condemnandum; especially considering, that the Proba∣tion ought to be luce meridiana clarior. It is answered, that the place it self confutes this Inference in the present Case: For it says, Ex his solis non est procedendum ad condemnationem, scio contra∣rium communius teneri & in praxi obtinere, &c. So that it is evident, 1mo. That the common Opinion and Custom is in the contrary, even when there is no o∣ther probation, but by the Partners of the Crime. Yet, 2do. we are not so straitned but subsume in his very words, ex his solis we do not desire the Pannals should be Condemned; but your Lordships see these Witnesses we are to ad∣duce are not soli or alone; for the Probation led these last Sixteen Hours, are so many Concomitants and Discoveries of Providence, which astruct and make up any defect in their Credit that can be desiderat. Hence, 3tio. The Meaning of that Maxim (which is Metaphorical, as appears by the words, Clarior luce meridiana, an equal Clearness being sufficient) is fully Answered, and takes place in the present Case: For the Extraordinariness of the Corpora delicti, Preg∣nancy of the Adminicles, and Pointedness of the positive Probation, being conjoined; there is not a Clearer Proof upon Record in any Nation, than that to which, it's hoped, these will amount. Whereas this Alledgance is enforced, by pretending it were of dangerous consequences to allow such witnesses to prove meeting with the Devil, since Satan might have represented others by their false shapes. It is Answered. 1mo That we are not straitned in this; because there are many other Arti∣cles proven, which could not have been falsified. But if we give some scope to Reasoning even in this point; it is to be considered, that the Rules of Judge∣ment are established upon that which for the most part does still obtain; and Rules are to be followed, till an exception be proven in a particular circumstantiat Case. But so it is, by the Experience and Observation of the wisest Divines, Lawiers, Philosophers, Phisicians, States-men, Judges and Historians, at Home and Abroad (that are too wise to be imposed upon, and too Ingenuous to deceive us, when they all concurr in the same matter of fact) beside the Testimony of Witches themselves every where; makes the Apparitions of Witches to be commonly and mostly reall; so Delrio tells us lib. 5. § 16. Illusio rarissime contingit, ita Jaqerius, Comensis, Sprengirus ienffeldus. &c. And therefore the Testimony of the Senses is always to be credited anent them, ay and while it be canvelled. For single or few instances of false Representations to the Senses esteeming them to be true, or a possibility of Appearances being false, can
no ways invalid at the Rule established upon Experience, which is common, and for the most part, whereby no exception is to be presumed till it be proven in a special Case; since a Wonder does not subvert the Proof drawn from the common course of Nature; Logick admits not to argue a Particulari, or from possibility to Existence; Law puts the burden of proving Simulation on the Af∣firmer, and that which seldom occurrs, is not considered by the Legislators. For illustrating of which, it is further to be considered, that for the most part and ordinarly, the Witches are personally existent in the places where they appear; because it's more easy for the Prince of the Air to transport them in his Hurri∣canes which he can raise, as is plain in the instance of Job (who was put in his power, i. e. his natural Power without Delegation) forming a Fene upon their Face, whereby the violence of the Air may be diverted from chocking them: Than to form the curious Miniatur of such various Transactions on their Brain: The difficulty whereof is the greater, that all their Fantacies are not disposed at all times the same way; and they have not the Seeds of this work, unless they had once acted it in reality. It is both the greater Cryme and Plea∣sure to act in Truth; which therefore the Devil & Witches do rather choise (un∣less the Place be farr distant, or the Party indisposed,) and this de facto is attest∣ed o be o, by the Writers and Witches in all Nations and Ages, as said is. 2do. Notwithstanding that the Rule must hold, till an Exception of Excul∣pation be evinced, qu ad a particular Person, by evidencing that the reall Ap∣pearance was in that special Case a true Mistake: yet this Exception is sufficient for safty of the Misrepresented; since the same providence which permitted the the Affliction, will order the Out-gate and Exculpation; either by the Aeriall Bodies not byding the toutch, or some other distinction, as Providence com∣monly allowes the Devil to personat only with cloven Feet; or that the Ap∣parition was solly to one single Witness, who cannot be a Proof; or that the Inno∣cent can prove alibi; or Finally the Notour Charracter of a Samuel, will purge and dispel the Aspersions of Satan, contrived of purpose to discredit the Evidence of Sense, by which alone his Instruments can be discovered. Especially this Char∣racter being joyned to the other Circumstances of the providence; such as, when good men are disguised they are mostly pussive in the Scene and out with thereof: Whereas Witches are personally active in their common Life by such Words and Deeds as (in conjunction with these Appearances) conspire to make us know and distinguish them from the truely Good; since these Witches open Profanity, Naughtiness, or unvailed Hippocrisy, being cleared by Fame, sealed by the mark, and confirmed by the other discoveries of the Ad∣minicles that ly proven before you, do still make an Land mark betwixt the Children of Darkness and Light. So Delrio lib. 5. Sect. 16. N. 5. tells of Athanasius and St. Germanus, against whom Probation was adduced for Sorcery, but Providence did canvel it. It's a famous instance of Susanna, represented by the Elders; which tho not in the Case of spectre, yet agrees in the Rationale. The Representation by Pharo's Magicians had Concomitants, by which they were discovered and confounded. But lastly, suppose that GOD in the deepths of His Wisdom (to Convince the Error of Nimious self Confidence) should per∣mitt all necessar Probation to concurr against an Innocent; yet the Judge fol∣lowing the Faith of Proofs established by Divine and Humane Laws, is alto∣gether Innoxious: Since this Case being very Rae, the Evill is less than the establishing a Principle, by which most of all these Monsters could not be cut off.
Upon the whole, It is certain, That as tho' oft times false Witnesses set on by the Devil, have taken away an harmless Life, by accusing it of other Crimes; yet the Testimony of Witnesses must still be credited till they be redargued; so these Appearances of Witches with the other Specialities before exprest, be∣ing proven, ought to be esteemed Real, till the fallacy be established. Espe∣cially seing there are Examples in Ancient and Modern History of Satan's Representing the best of Men, as committing Murther, Ruggrie, &c. In effigie; so Delri▪ lib. 5. Sect. 16. N. 5. relats, That St. Silvanus was represented by the Devil, as committing a common Capital Crime: And the like of a Monk: whereof there are several Modern paralel Instances; yet this cannot enervat the Rule and Faith of publick Judicaturs, founded on no more but upon the sight of the like Appearances; and any Argument against the Probation in Witch∣craft, will equally hold against the Probation of any other Crime whatsom∣ever: Wherefore the Rules of them both must be common, as to beleiving the Seses fortified, ut supra; till their Error be Individually discovered. Finally, the Certainty is no ways diminished by the extraordinariness of the Appearance to the Senses: For in Law and Nature Reality and not Sila∣tion is presumed, till the contrair be made appear by proving the thing not possible in Nature, or tho' it be possible, that it is actually false. This is an∣swer enough to those who place a great part of their small Wit in nonsensical arguing against all Divine Authority: But writers further illustrate that the extraordinariness of a Matter of Fact, does not exclude it's Reality's being the Subject of the Testimony of Witnesses, in our Saviours Miracles. Trans∣figuration, Walking on the Waters, standing in the midst of the Disciple while the Doors were shut, and arguing Assurance by Their Senses, That a Spirit had not Flsh and Bnes, tho' indeed the surer Word of prophesy did put these beyond doubt. Nor could it be alledged for the Pannals (tho they had the last word, as perhaps they have not, in Objections against Witnesses, since therein rei fit actores by attacqing the Witnesses presumed Hability) That it's not conceive∣able, how the Girl or VVitnesses could see what the bystanders could not behold: Beside the impossibility of the real Bodies entering at closs Doors and Windows, or not intercepting the sight of what is at its back. For to this it would be answered, 1mo. Proven facts must not be denyed, tho' Philosophers have not yet tainly reached the Invisible manner of their Existtence: So in Nature, the Load-stone draws the Iron, the Compass turns always to the Poles, &c. In Scripture the Angels (and the Devil was once such, retaining as yet his Natural powers) smote the Sodomites, that they could not see the Door; tho they saw the House. Baldam's Ass perceived the Angel that stood undiscovered to himself; and the Rod thrown down by the Magicians of Aegipt, was no doubt seen by themselves, tho invisible to the by-standers Which bolding of their Eyes, In∣terpreters explain to have been done by natural Means; and yet the Manner thereof is certainly difficult. However, it is also certain, that if a possible way can be proposed, tho Rea∣lity of a proved Fact is not to be contradicted: Aod this can be done in the the present Case: For, 2do. Satan's Natural Knowledge and acquired Experience, makes him perfect in the Opticks and limning: Besides that, as a Spirit he excels in Strength and Agility; whereby he may sily bewitch the Eyes of others; to whom he in∣tends
that his instruments should not be seen in this manner as was formerly hinted: viz. He constricts the Pores of the Witches Vehicle, which intercepts apart of the Rayes reflecting from her Body; he condenses the interjacent Air with grosser Meteors blown into it, or other ways does violently agitate it which drowns another part of the Rayes: And lastly he obstructs the optick Nerves with umors stirred toward them: All which joined together may easily intercept the whole Rayes reflecting from these Bodies, so as to make no impression upon the common ense; and yet at the same time, by refraction of the Rayes, glydeing alongst the fitted sides of the Volatile Couch, wherein Satan transports them, & thereby meeting and coming to the ye, as if there were nothing interjacent, the wall or chair behind the same Bodies may be seen; as a peece of Money lying out of sight in a Cup becomes visible how soon the medium is altered by pour∣ing in some wer on it. Severals of your number do know, that the Girle de∣clared, that she saw and heard the Doors and Windows open at the Witches en∣ry, when no doubt the Devil had precoudensed a soft stopage on the Eyes and ars of others, to whom that was unperceived. So Aplic escaped Domitians sight; and Giges became invisible by his Magi∣cal Ring. John of Sarrisberrie tells us of a Witch, that could make any thing not to be seen: and Mejerus relates another, that had the like power. Some Itali∣an Witches of greater then ordinary wit confessed to Grillandus the Devils opening Doors and Windows for them, tho the more Ignorant, by a Fascination, think themselves, Actors of this, Whence it ought not to be doubted by any rea∣sonable Man what in all Times and Places is so unconteible, Fact. Finally the Pannals could not insist, that these Confessants are to depone only on their Imagination, which can prove no more against themselves or others them a Dream For still its to be minded, that there are other Proofs to which this is only ne∣cessary as a consonant adminicle. But further Arg. causa It is answered, that the alledgeance is a mistake; seeing they declare plain matters of fact obvious not only to  but several of their Senses: viz. Some of them went the greaest part of the way to these meetings on foot: they there saw and touched their confe∣dets; they heard their Combinations to Destroy and Torture the Infants, Girle and Ministers.: They returned on foot again: and even when they were carried fore or back they knew on the next day that it was no Dream, the same way as all o∣ther Mortals discover the difference. But moreover this is adminiculate by some real effects of a personal Presence, as you have seen in the probation: And it is yet further cleared by the journal of Bargens daughters Sufferings; which was arrested before the former Commissioners, and is nottour in the Countrey; particularly the Glass of Sack and Orange pile; the peices of the clouted Sleeves; the words expressed by the Keeper on the sudden Murder of the Child; which are onstantly told by some of the Confessants; as also the Houses being Meallie that Night. The Girle tho hood winked, her falling in Fits at their approach, &c. And others, which shall be pointed at to the Assyse, conjoyned together, can be as∣crived to no other cause then the real existence of the Witches persons in the places Ʋnless it be said, that Satan might possibly. have foisted and suborned all these; and thence it be concluded, that the Devill did actually so, in which case the Objectors  the Persons that bottom their Opinion on Imagination without a  positive ground of the real of what they fancy; ye against positive grounds of belief in the contrary; which arguing from Possibility to Existene it already suffi∣ently exploded.
Whereas for sustaining the Objection it is likewise alledged, That the ∣fessants having been in the Devils service, and renounced Christ, they are not Ca∣pable of the Religion of an Oath, It is answered, 1mo, In the rules of Charity &c. The Confessants tho once Witches. yet now they, at least the Majority of them have ceased to be such, having had the use of means by the Ministers and Word, and actually declared their Repentance▪ and the Devils ceasing to molest them; particularly Elizabeth Anderson was only carri∣ed alongst violently by her Faer, and stood out to the last against her renouncing to fer baptism, or consenting to these Crimes which were contrived in their meetings. Janet and Margaret Rodgers do testifie a great remorse and avowed he same last Sabbath in the face of the Congregation. So those three are sufficient whatsoever might be said against the other two, especially if we join the impro∣bability either of hazarding their own lives or the Devils sending them out against these Fannals, or their destroying their own relations: as was remarked before, But. 2do, Whether they remain Witches or not; It is certain by Reason and Experi∣ence that the Devils peculiar influence ceaseth in and about judgement: by the common course of providence: And therefore the Authors before cited ad∣mit Witches whether penitent or not. 3tio. All the defects of their hability is supplied, and the intireness thereof compleaed, by their testimonies being so wonderfully adminiculat; particular∣ly the confessants are constant from the first discovery; uniform in so various cir∣cumstances not only with themselves, but with the Girles They declare nothing but what is probable, most of the Pannals having been reputed Witches, all of them having the Mark; and one or other of them (to whom the associa delight vn mischief, never missed to join) having had particular Irritations to take re∣aenge by the torture and deaths libelled; Besides the other adminicles of guilt already proven before you. The confessants were threatened to retract by the Pan∣nals themselves and their Friends: besides the bad usage from others in the Coun∣trey. They concurr with the maleficats testimony, and amongst themselves, even when interrogat singly; and upon new things: as severals of your number have tryed the experiment; on this head Detrio, lib 5. § 16. N, 5. wisely observes, quamvis tam facile foret demoni pluresdecipere quam unum tamen non est cen∣sendus Deus hoc aque permittere ne mnis rati prbandi talia delicta occulta judicibu adimatur; hoc enim est dissentanium providintiae divinae. The Reiteration of the Acts which they declare anent some persons whom they never saw except in these congresses, & yet whom they know now on the first sight, is unaccountable if they were falsarics: And that they are not such is further astructed by some of the Pannals being delated by a confessing Witch in Anno 1687, And you know that others delated by these confessants were lately brought in guilty by the Verdict of a former Inquest. &c. which are so many joint proofs of these witnesses integrity, and makes an chain of evidence and moral demonstration both against Error in themselves and delusion in relation to others, &c, There were some things objected out of the Law of Scotland, of which also I shall give you some touch. Whereas it was alledged, That irretiti criminibus capitalibus, and so under the Pursuers power, cannot be admitted to be Witnesses; Conform to a stature in Regiam Majestaem,
To this it was answered, That we need not say, that these statutes have not the force of Law, except in so farr as they are received by Custom; unless conform thereto. A Laik cannot Witness against a Clerk, or e contra, &c. Not need we make use of that which is Obvious, Viz. That these Statutes are only common Rules in ordinary Crimes; which have their Exception in all Occult and excepted Crimes, such as Witchcraft, &c. Nam omnis regula subverti potest, and particularly this Rule is actually so restricted in the Case of Witchcraft, by the Opinion of Lawiers and Customes before-mentioned, which are the best interpreters of Laws: For if this Application should hold, socius criminis could never be admitted: But we positively deny, that those Confessants are under o Power or Influence; seing Elizabeth Anderson is not Guilty of Witchcraft, for any thing that does appear: The Lindsays were never indicted for it; and the Dyet was deserted against the Rogers; as the whole Commission is to Expyre a∣gainst the first of June, betwixt and which time, they are to proceed no further then this particular tryal. So that this Objection evanishes to smoak. Whereas it is pretended, That the Rogers cannot be received, because not given out in the List of Witnesses; conform to the Regulation, whereby the Pannals might have proven their Objection by their Exculpation. It was answered, 1mo. This Objection ought to be repelled; because, besides that the Act speaks only of Criminal Lybells, and no indictments, which with the List of the Witnesses may be given in farr shorter time then the Additional List has been given to the Pannals, being Prisoners: This Act is interpreted by the common Custom of the Justice Court; of giving additional Lists after the first, upon shotter time then this has been given. As is particularly attested by James Guthry Macer, who has given them, and who being a Person in Officio, his Testi∣mony is to be Credited in what relates to his Office: so that the old Custom confirmed by a Decision. 3. August 1661, where Alexander Forrester was cited apud acta against a Witch, continues quoed this point, as is related by McKenzie, pag. 529. But 2do. Any Objection that the Pannals pretend against these Witnes∣ses, is injure, or may instantly appear. 3tio. The Case is altogether extraordinary and Circumstantiat: For these Witnesses had not Confessed: And so were not existent under that Reduplication when the principall List was given out where∣by the Act of Parliament can only be understood of Witnesses, that we then existent. And finally the Pannals got a general warrand of Exculpation for citing of any Witnesses they pleased, and they have had several Days since they got this additional List, so that they might have cited Witnesses to prove their Objec∣tions, were it not the truth is; they have none besides these that are common and before Answered. Thus I have given you hints that your own resoning (which I know to be re∣fyn'd) may improve and apply, so as to dissolve the quibles which the petryts, who have not Soul enough of themselves to penetrate into the true light of what is recondite; may raise against it: It being their common talent eiher to Skpp over the Surface of Minas, or, otherways, to tear assunder some appurtenan es of a Scheme, and then presently pronunce it Mortally Maimed I must confess that none cold be more scept cal a ent the Truth of such od things as I had heard; nor inuisitive for canvassing the Reality and Explications of them; then I was before my attendances at Bargarrans house, and the reveral dyers of Cot; and in  Cen orsation with some or these concerned therea. But now, after all that I have seen, reasoned, and heard, I do acknowledge my self
entirely captivate by the dictats of natural underanding and common sense, into a sound mind and perswasion, that, as there s such a thing as Witchcraft, so it was eminent in its forementioned Effects; and the seven Pannals were some of the Witches. I have trbled you litle with my proper Observations; yet lest you should think me either too Lazie or Peevish, I shall make one, and it is, that I do not think the greater part of the condemned prisoners will ever fully Confess: Of which Conjecture I have two chief grounds, Viz. That they are neither Ignorant nor Me∣lancholick; but on the contrary, some of them would seem to have been once enlightned before they fell away, so that if this be a Sin unto Death, there is no appearance that they will glorify GOD by acknowledgment. Severals of them are of singular Knovvledge and Acutness beyond the common levell of their Station: Particularly Margaret Lang did make Harangues in her own defence, which neither Divine nor Lavvier could resonably Mend: Yet I thought that when they spoke in a matter of any concern, their Eyes stood Squint & ixd, as if they had been turning their Ears and attentive to a Dictator. Their answers to the trying Interrogators put to them, were Surprisingly subtile & Cautious. Tho indeed, by the industry of some of the Judges and Lawiers, they were at oc∣casions involved in Lyes, Prevarications, and Contradictions; which might have proceeded either from Natural or preternatural Causes. Some of them were esteemed in the Country very Sagatio and Exact in their Bussiness: Margaret Lang having been a Mid-vvise, and one of the Lindsays having acquired a consider∣abl Fortune by his Tillage and Trade: Yet it was noticed, that there did com∣monly break out of their covered Course, something Odd either of Iniquity or Af∣fectation; and Lindsay did finely enough get off from the sherriff when he was formerly accused in 1687. Melancholians are lovers of Solitude; Witches of Society, and Feasts: Those are commonly Pale and Heavy; many of these Corpulont and Voluptuous. Witche are Hard to Confess as knowing their Guilt; Melancholians delight to discover their horridest Dampts, because they think them no Cryme: The ones Confes∣sions Every-vvhere are Ʋniform; the other's Phantasms are as various as their Hu∣mors. Finally, Witches teach their Trade; whereas Conceits would Die with them, and could be no more conveyed then the Humor which is the Specifick caue thereof. As these distinguishing Characters do hold in the General, so in this particular Case there are several others: Such as, most of the Pannals were of Mdle-age, one of them not much above Twenty; and the first Confessats are known to be Young: Whereby Dottage or Melancholy are less to be uspected; yea was morally mpossble in many of the Cases. For the Facts which the Con∣fessants had forerly declared before the Commissioners for Enquiry were sworn  other unexceptionable Witnesses before the Commissioners for the tryal; and te Circumstaes were such, that the one culd not knovv what was to be depo∣ed by the other: As it's already manifest, that the reall Effects in several pas∣sages of Bargarrans Daughter were no possibly producible▪ by any imagination or Humor; and  specall in this Case, that neither the Pannals nor Coufessants were Distempered by being keept from Sleep▪ tortured, or the like, which were too usua in ormer tme; out all the Measures were strictly observed, that are the, requts o a tuely impartil Judgment. nded not o ave sent unto you the Doubles of the Depositions them∣eles▪ Becae it is not dey'd that te Deposiions are such as they re represent∣e  he Pleadings; the chief question being aent the Hability of the last De∣pos.
Neither was you to expect the Defenders part of the Debate, separatly by itself, in respect that what was dispersd here and there for thm is faithfully reped or implyed in what yo have: As to those poits which I thought worth the Notti. Upon the whole I do believe; that there is scarcely a more rare providence of this nature in any true History; a more exact caution in any enquity or Trial of this kind: A ore clear probation, without confession of the Pannals them∣elves, or, a more just sentence, putting together all circumstances, upon record. I am, what you have made me, Yours, &c. FINIS
ADVERTISEMENT AFter printing of what preceeds, there came Intelligence from the Countrey, that a Per∣son who is Rich, and stayes in a publick place, d∣signed in the Natrtive by th first Letters of her Name, has upon hearing that the Nar∣rative was coming abroad, hired an Hackney to bring off her Repute: whereby the Undertak∣ers (who are of the Brutal Cabal of our puny Wits) are to take occasion of obscuring the Truth of the whole History. There was such regard had to the Fame of those whom, as yet, there has not been opportunity to bring to their Trial, that commonly, there are only initial Letters for their Names: And there is such incontestible Evidence for the Facts here Narrated, that it is impossible, without the most effronted impudence and falsehood, to con∣tradict them: Yet if the Root of all Evil, and Spite, a∣gainst Truth, shall so far prevail over natural Inge∣nuity, as to advance bare-faced Lyes against Realitys, and give the World foppish Banter in place of good Reasoning, thereby to delud the Opinion of those who were not Eye and Ear Witnesses; the Authors (whose Names, though told, are not here insert, because the Information may faill) may expect to be Characteriz'd, and otherways taken notice of, according to the demerit of such a Villanous project. The Reader is intreated to excuse such Errors in the Printing, occasioned by the indistinctness of the writen Copie; which are easily corrigible by the Context.
