N1009A [ocm]31355555 187755
News form the Netherlands: Being a full and true Relation of a sharp and Bloody Battel fought betwixt the Prince of Orange, and the French Army, under the Command of the Duke of Luxemburg, at St. Denis, neer unto Mont, in Flanders, the 14th. of this present August, 1678. In which fight was present the Duke of Monmouth, and the Earl of Ossory, with some forces belonging to our King of England, &c. The Prince of Orange after an obstinate Dispute of Six hours, forsing the French to quit their Camp in great disorder, remained master of the ground. There being slain on both sides, a great multitude both Commanders & Private Souldiers, besides a many more dan∣gerously wounded; the number as yet is not certainly known. To the Tune of, A Fig for France, &c. With Allowance. woodcut of two armies marching toward each other BRave English listen whilst I tell, here is good news will please you wel The Highborn Prince of Orange, He Hath thumpt the French couragiously, great Monmouths Duke that royal heart And valiant Ossory bore a part, With others more of High Renown, to relieve Mons that gallant town. In Flanders to St. Denis near, The French they all Encamped were, To block up Mons, without reprieve, That none should dare it, to releive: But now they have no cause to boast, They reckon'd all before their Host; &c The Duke of Luxenburg withal, Was of their Army General, With many more of Courage bold, VVho scorned for to be controul'd; They thought themselves to be secure, And dangers all they could indure: But Gallants brave of high Renown, &c. The Prince of Orange, for to try, Did march his Army speedily, The Garrison for to relieve, Though that it might the Frenchman grive since that they did his fury move, Their Courage he resolv'd to prove: With Gallants brave of high Renown, liv Ms that gallant town▪
woodcut of marching soldiers including fifer, drummer, and standard bearer The French for their security, Were posted advantagiously, And had by reason of the woods, By ten to one the greater odds; But yet the Prince being void of fear, Did give command to fall on there: With Gallants brave of high Renown, to relieve Mons that gallant town. The Battel waxed sharp and hot, And many a Frenchman went toth' pot, The Cannons roared heidiously, And Bullets thick as hail did flye; To speak the truth it was well ply'd, Both on the one, and t'other side: With Gallants brave of high Renown, &c. The Prince to do his Highness right, VVas still in all the hotest Fight, And gave Example to the rest, Expecting all to do their best. VVhilst that the Duke of Monmouth he, Did second him most valliantly: With Gallants brave of high Renown, &c. Brave Ossory, with Sword in hand, The valliant English did command, VVho did behave themselves that tide, Like men that often had been try'd; where e're they came, with courage stout They put the French unto the rout: With Gallants brave of high Renown, &c. For six hours space 'tis not deny'd, 'Twas bravely fought on either side, VVhere such a havock death did make, would cause the stoutest heart to ake, Resolv'd to dye they séemed all, whilst many a warlike man did fall: Who fought like Gallants of Renown, &c. And thus they fiercely did contend, Vntil the night did put an end Vnto their fury, in which fray, The Prince for certain got the day; For in the dark, the French thought fit, Their Camp disorderly to quit: For Gallants brave of high Renown, &c. To tell how many there was slain, we cannot yet the number gain, But without doubt the loss was great, On either side in this defeat, Commission'd Officers great store, And private Souldiers many more: Who Fought like men of high Renown, &c. It's now reported that a Peace Concluded is, and wars shall cease, That Christian blood shall not be shed For some by blind ambition led: Now that it may be so we pray, To see that blessed happy day: Since Gallants brave of high Renown, have reliev'd Mons that gallant town. Printed for
