R2451A 99829510 207073
A SERMON Preached at Lincolns-Inne, July 15th. 1655. At the Funerall of FERDINANDO LEIGH Esq; Son to the Right Honourable THE LORD LEIGH, OF STONELEIGH. And a MEMBER of that Honourable SOCIETY. BY BRUNE RYVES, D. D. and D. of C. Preacher to that Honourable SOCIETY. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Roycroft, 1656.
2 TIM. 4.7. Henceforth there is laid up for me, a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righ∣teous Judge, shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but unto all them also, that love his Appearance. IN the first and second ver∣ses of this CHAPTER, St. Paul layes a strict charge upon Timothy, and that before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, to Preach the Word, to be in∣stant in season, and out of season, to reprove, rebuke, and exhort, with all long suffering and
Doctrine: This charge St. Paul doth in∣force, from three weighty reasons; wher∣of, one ushers in the Charge, and that is drawne from the Terror of that Judge∣ment, which he must undergo, and the strict account, which he must give, at the Judgement Seat of Christ, who shall Judge the quick and the dead, at his appearing, and his Kingdome, ver. 1. The two other Reasons follow the Charge, the first is drawn from the op∣position, which Timothy was like to meete withall, in his Ministry; For the time will come, saies the Apostle, when they will not indure sound Doctrine, but after their own lusts shall they heape to themselves teachers, having itching eares, and they shall turne a∣way their eares from the truth, and shall be turned unto Fables, ver. 3, 4. which gives the Apostle occasion, to enlarge and double his charge, But watch thou in
all things, endure afflictions, do the work of an Evangelist, make full proofe of thy Mi∣nistry. ver. 5. The second Reason is drawn from the destitution of any help, that might be expected from him, long had he fought under Christs Banner, but now, his war∣fare was drawing towards an end, but so, not to desert his Colours, but to die un∣der them, For I am ready (saies he) to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand, ver. 6. But not to leave his Sonne Timothy, sadded with the apprehension of his martyrdome, he comforts him against those sad thoughts, and the Arguments of his Consolation, are two, the latter depending upon the former. The first is drawn from his holy course of life, constantly continued, and comfortably finished, I have fought a good
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, ver. 7. The second is drawn from his , or fulness of assurance, of a blessed and happy life, after death, and this is in my Text, Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, &c. In which words, we have St. Pauls Confidence, first laid down, in relation to himself, and is his certitudo Subjecti; the certainty of the Subject, as the Schools call it, Henceforth there is laid up for me, a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the Righ∣teous Judge, shall give me at that day. Se∣condly, we have St. Pauls Confidence en∣larged, in relation to others, and this is his Certitudo objecti, the certainty of the Object, And not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing. Both these confidences are amplified by three Circumstances, as first the Do∣nor,
or Bestower of this Crown of Righ∣teousness, and that is, the Lord, the righte∣ous Judge: Secondly, The Time of conferring, or the Time of bestowing of the Crown of Righteousness, It is laid up to be given at that day. Thirdly, the Qualification of the Per∣sons, that shall receive this Crown, None shall receive this Crown, but those that love the appearance of the Donor, And not to me only, but unto them also, that love his appearing. I begin with St. Pauls Confidence, laid down in Relation to himself, the Certitu∣do subjecti, the certainty of the ubject, Henceforth there is laid up for me, a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, &c.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness. A strong Confidence this, and a com∣fortable, but what Evidence hath S. Paul for this confidence? had God by a special revelation assured him that this Crown of Righteousness was laid up for him? or when he was rapt up into the third Hea∣ven, when he saw things not to be utterd, was any such thing told him, that he con∣cludes thus confidently, Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness? Certainly neither the one, or the other, but reflecting on his former conversation in the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and his con∣science bearing him witness, That he had fought a good fight, that he had finished his course, that he had kept the Faith; from these premisses he warrantably inferrs this Conclusion, Henceforth there is laid up for me, a Crown of Righteousness.
Such a thing then there is in this life, as Assurance of a Crown of righteous∣ness, Assurance of salvation, and this not only confessed, but strongly asserted by a considerable part of the Members of the Councel of Trent: In discussion of which point, they were so divided, some being for the Affirmative, others for the Negative, that it gave occasion to the wisdome of the Legates, to draw up the Decree, concerning the certainty of sal∣vation, so warily, that while the Coun∣cel yet sate, Dominicus Soto, wrote a Book, and intituled it, De natura, & Gratia, wherein, he possitively affirmes, That a man cannot be certaine, that he is for the present in the state of grace, and con∣sequently, not certaine of his salvation, Sine Revelatione privelegiatâ, without a special, particular Revelation from God, to settle him in the perswasion: And
Ambrosius Catarinus Bishop of Minori, ha∣ving before defended the contrary, pub∣lished another Book, wherein he main∣taines, against Dominicus Soto, that, with∣out the Indulgence of a perticular special revelation, a justified righteous man, re∣flecting on his own soule, may be cer∣taine, Certitudine fidei, cui non potest subesse falsum, by the certainty of faith, not sub∣ject to error, that he is in the state of grace, and that persevering he shall un∣doubtedly arrive at eternall glory; And that which was matter of wonder, and amazement unto the world, in this flat contradiction of Opinions, they both, not only in their Books, appealed to the Decree of the Councell, in this Controversie for Patronage of their contrary Tenets, but afterwards pub∣lished Apologies, and Antiapologies, complaining to the Synod mutually
one of another, for imposing on the Councell, their respective Opinions, ascribing that Sense to the Decree, which it never meant: and indeed the Decree, accommodating it self, as much as pos∣sibly it could, to satisfie contrary Interests and displease none, speaks as Aequivocally, as the Oracle of Delphos, so that what the meaning of it is, is hardly known at this day; for upon the reassuming the debate of the Decree, we find the Coun∣cell divided into four Opinions: First, some sided with Dominicus Soto, others stood neutrall, ingeniously confessing, that they understood not the difference, but did acquiesse in the Decree, in that forme of words, in which it was publish∣ed, the Legate Santa Croce, Hist. of the Councell of Trent. pag. 230. testified for Catarinus, Monte, the other Legate open∣ly professed himself of a fourth Opi∣nion.
Now the controversie in this point of Assurance of being in the state of grace, as it is at this day disputed, between the Church of Rome and us, is not, First, Whether a wicked man remaining a wicked man, may believe the pardon of his sinnes, whether he may be confident of his interest in God, that he hath his part in the merits, and sufferings of Christ, and consequently, can, on this false ground support his spirit against the terrours, and fortifie it against the wrath to come; for the deniall of this truth, hath given our Adversaries of the Church of Rome, too great occasion, not only to harden themselves in their own error, but to in∣sult, and triumph over the Reformed Churches. I confess, no wicked man, In sensu compo∣sito, can believe the pardon of his sins, or hath such a faith to which pardon of sins
is promised, yet that he may believe his sins are pardoned, and that as seriously, and firmly, as a true believer, is evident from experience. For, as true faith doth afford the soule, a true and well grounded support, and con∣solation, and enableth us to look unto Eternity, with undaunted courage, so a false ungrounded faith, doth afford a false, ungrounded comfort, which quells, and suppresseth, the horrour of the appre∣hensions of damnation and Judgement to come: for while the Antinomians teach, that justifying faith is nothing else, but a believing, that God doth love us, and that our sins are already pardoned, through Christ, that every man ought to believe this, and no man ought to question his faith, whether it be true or false; How greedily do the giddy, undis∣cerning vulgar, receive this Doctrine,
as the very life, and soule of the Gospel? which Doctrine, imposing no hard taske upon flesh, and blood, no mortifying of our earthly members, no self-deniall, no resigning up of our selves to the dis∣posall of Christ, and submitting our selves to the Scepter of his Kingdome, (no more being required by their Do∣ctrine, to make a man happy, but only to beleeve that he is happy) they find it a farr easier taske, to Preach up this Doctrine, then we, to Preach it down. This makes many a poore seduced soul, to go on in a full assurance of Heaven, unto the very minute, that he drops into Hell. Who doubts of this, when he heares Korah justifying himselfe, and his fellow Rebells, as the only Godly Party, say∣ing, All the Congregation are holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them, Num. 16.3. See! none but Saints, Holy
Rebells, even then, when the earth was cleaving asunder, and opening her mouth to swallow them up alive, that so they might go down quick into Hell: Or who can doubt of this, when he heares the Pharisee, stand praying and saying, I thanke thee, O Lord, that I am not as other men, St. Luke. 18.11. Nay, so strong are these mens perswasions, that they will dispute the case with Christ himself at the day of Judgement, and plead their eating, and drinking in his presence, their preaching in his Name, and cast∣ing out devills, untill Christ destroy their confidence, by passing that dread∣full Sentence of condemnation against them, Depart from me, ye cursed into ever∣lasting fire, prepared for the devill and his Angels, St. Mat. 25.41. It is much to be feared, that many have thanked God, for pardon of sins,
that never received it, and blessed him, for justification, and assured hope of glory, who are now shut out of the inheritance of the sanctified: So true is that of Solo∣mon, When a wicked man dieth, his expe∣ctation shall perish, and the hope of unjust men perisheth, Prov. 11.7. And, The hope of the righteous shall be gladness, but the expectati∣on of the wicked shal perish, Pro. 10.28. That, cannot perish, that is not, had not the wicked Hope, their Hope could not perish. If any man say, that the Assurance of the wicked, doth differ from that of the Godly, I answer, that differ they do, in their Ground, That of the Godly being built upon a Rocke, that of the wicked be∣ing built upon the Sand: And therefore as they differ in their Ground, so they shall differ in their End: The Assurance of the Godly shall end in Glory, that of the wicked shall end in confusion; yet as
both these are Assurances, considered bare∣ly in the Nature of Assurance, abstracted from their respective Basis, whereon they are built, so considered, they differ not at all. Lastly, if any man Object, that the Assurance of the wicked, doth not bring forth fruit, I readily grant it, yet withall affirm, that this bringing forth fruit, is but an extrinsecall difference in the effects, and no intrinsecal difference in the nature of the Act it selfe, of Assurance: An Assurance it is, though it be Infidelis fiducia, as Saint Bernard stiles it, an Assurance, having no true faith to support it: for it is pos∣sible, for a man to believe a Lye, with as much perswasion, and Assurance, as any man believes a Truth. Secondly, the Thing Controverted, is not, Whether we are bound, immediatly to believe, that we are justified, and in speciall
favour with God: for no man of any com∣petent measure of Knowledge in the Scriptures, will affirme this: for if every man must believe this, then not only most men, but all men at first, must be∣lieve a Lie, for they are not justified, untill they believe, and the bare be∣lieving that they are justified, is not that faith, which doth justifie them, for to be∣lieve unto Justification, is not a matter of meere faith alone, but a Conclusion drawn from Faith and Conscience toge∣ther: God hath not promised Justificati∣on to any man, Immediately, but under a condition, and whether the Condition be performed, every mans own conscience, is the best Judge to resolve him: This is known only by a Reflection, on our Habits, Works, and Actions, from whence do issue those two Soveraigne Acts of the conscience, either to condemn or to ab∣solve.
Thirdly, the Question is not, concer∣ning the certainty of Election and Perse∣verance in grace and the favour of God, for though there be some affinity, and Cognation, between that Question, and this, of Present Assurance, yet they are really distinct, in their own natures, and therefore ought to be of distinct, and se∣verall consideration. Fourthly, the Question is not, Whe∣ther the last resolution of the Assurance of Gods favour, be terminated in the sincerity of our Graces, the condition of our being in Gods favour, or in the beliefe of the free mercies of God in Jesus Christ, for it is founded, on the mercies of God in Christ as the efficient, meritorious Cause, and on the sincerity of our Graces, as the Condi∣tion which God requires on our part. Fifthly, the Question is not, Whether this certainty of Salvation and the Feare of
God be compatible and may consist in the same Subject, for these are not at odds, but meete, and live together in the same soule: Nay, there is no greater preser∣vative of this Assurance, then walking humbly in the feare of God: The feare of God, doth make us to walke closely, and exactly before Him, and this exact, walking before Him, is a maine ground, and Basis of our Assurance, and there∣fore in the Scriptures, we are frequently commanded, to make God, the Object, both of our Trust, and Fear. Lastly, the Question is not, as I con∣ceive, of such a Certainty, as excludes all doubting; for Assurance there may be, though not in the highest degree: Some there are, I confess, that thinke, that no Assurance, can be called Assurance, but that which triumphs over all mixture of doubting, and to this purpose affirme
Saint Pauls , or fulness of Assu∣rance, to be this highest degree of Assu∣rance, and that some Christians, do in this life, attaine unto it: But, Saint Paul, calls it full Assurance, in comparison of lower degrees, and not because it is per∣fect, for if Assurance be perfect, then our Knowledge, our Faith, our Obedience, our Repentance, may be perfect also, and if some graces may be perfect, why not all graces? and so we turn Novatians, Ca∣tharists, Perfectionists, whose Tenets in this kinde, have been condemned as He∣reticall, by the Catholike Church in all Ages. But the Question is, whether a Chri∣stian, reflecting upon his own soule, and exa∣mining the Quality of his graces, and the sin∣cerity of his Obedience, may, without an ex∣traordinary Revelation, attaine unto an in∣fallible Knowledge of the sincerity of his gra∣ces
and his obedience, which are the Conditi∣on of the Covenant of Life, and consequently be assured of his Justification here, and his title to Glory hereafter? This they of the Church of Rome deny, and this we affirme, and we affirme it on these grounds: First, from the Testimony of Scrip∣ture; We have received, not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things which are freely given us of God. 1 Cor. 2.12. The Spirit it self bea∣reth witness with our spirit, that we are the sons of God, Rom. 8.16. Hereby know we, that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit, 1 Joh. 4.13. Faith, is like Light, which renders, it selfe, as well as other things, manifest. Secondly, the Commands of Faith, Repentance, Obedience, Charity, and the like, were given in vaine, especially
as the Condition of the new Covenant, if it were impossible for a Christian, to know whether he doth performe these Conditions or no. The end of Evange∣licall promises given in the Gospell, is, That we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge, to lay hold upon the hope set before us, Heb. 6.18. now the generall faith of the Papists, that he that believes and repents, and obeys the Gospel shall be saved, which is the Certainty of the Ob∣ject, can bring no Consolation to a parti∣cular person, that knows not, that he himselfe, doth repent, and believe, and obey the Gospell, which is the certainty of the Subject: this generall Faith of the Ob∣ject, is so farr, from giving any strong Comfort, or Consolation, without the particular certainty of the Subject, that without this, the certanty of the Objest may consist with desperation: Nay, there
is no doubt, but the devills themselves, do certainly believe, That he that re∣pents, and believes shall be saved. Thirdly, this is evident from those Commands, which the Holy Ghost layes on every member of the Church: Examine your selves saith Saint Paul, whe∣ther you be in the Faith, prove your selves, know you not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates? 2 Cor. 13.5. will any man search for that, which he is sure he shall never finde? Againe, Give diligence, saith St. Peter, to make your calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. To what end are these Commands, if the subject matter of them be impos∣sible, beyond the power of man to obey them? No certainly, the God of mercy, and wisdome, commands nothing, which absolutely transcends the power of man to obey him in what he Commands.
Lastly, without this Assurance, how can we obey those Commands and Precepts, which require us, to rejoyce al∣wayes? 1 Thes. 5.16. to call God, Father? Luk. 11.2. to live in his praises? Psa. 49.1, 2. to long for Christs comming? Revel. 22.17. and 2 Thes. 1.10. and to comfort our selves, with the very mention of it? 1 Thes. 4.8. All which are consequents of As∣surance, for who can do any of these heartily, that is not in some measure sure, that he is the child of God, and in the state of salvation? Certainly a man that hath not some assurance, that God is reconciled unto him, in Jesus Christ, can no more desire the second coming of Christ, and his appearance in the Clouds, to judge the quicke, and the dead, then a Malefactor in chains, whose guilt hath made him, the son of death, doth desire the hastning of the Assizes,
or rejoyce that the time draws nigh, wherein he shall be called to the Barr, and arraigned before the Judge, for the crimes that he hath committed. Yet, though a Christian, reflecting on his own soule, and examining his graces, actions, and obedience, may, with∣out a speciall Revelation, attaine unto an infallible knowledge of the sincerity of his graces, and his obedience, which are the conditions of the Covenant of life, and consequently be assured of his Justi∣fication here, and his title to glory, here∣after; yet this Assurance, is neither so gotten, nor so kept, as some men have dream't; what therefore I shall deliver in this point of Assurance, I shall bound in these Propositions. First, Impenitency living in any known sin, and this Assurance, are incompatible, and cannot consist together: when thou dost
but attempt, to promise thy selfe Eterni∣ty, and to gather assurance unto Life to come, thy sin, will presantly look thee in the face, and tell thee, that Heaven, and Salvation, belong not unto thee, every willfull sin that thou livest in, will be to thy comfort, as water, to fire, to extin∣guish, and put it out: If Heaven, and Hell can meete together, if God can be∣come a lover of sin, then maist thou have thy confidence in Heaven, and yet nourish thy corruptions on earth, then mayest thou live in sin, and yet be blessed with the tastes of Glory: and this is evident from the Text, for if thou canst not begin with Saint Paul here, I have fought a good fight, I have fini∣shed my course, I have kept the Faith, ver. 7. Thou canst not go on, and conclude with him in my Text, Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousnese.
Beloved, Saith Saint John, if our Heart condemne us not, then have we confi∣dence towards God, 1 Joh. 3.21. He whose conscience condemns him of living in Adultery, Fornication, Pride, Cove∣tousness, Rebellion, Treasons, or any other work of the Fesh, can have no As∣surance of Gods Favour, no assurance of Salvation: Every one that hath this hope, (viz. that he is the Son of God) doth pu∣rifie himselfe, as he is pure, ver. 3. of the same Chapter: And we know that whoso∣ever is borne of God, sinneth not, but he that is begotten of God keepeth himselfe, and that wicked One toucheth him not, 1 Joh. 5.18. What may we then thinke, of those men, who teach for Gospell, that if a man have once the sense, and feeling of Gods favour, afterwards do what he will he cannot loose it? Certainly as in the 23. of Jer. Non misi, God will owne, neither
the Message, nor them that bring it: The old Divinity was, that Actions did qualifie Persons, these men have quite inverted it, and made Persons to qualifie Actions, and morall actions, to differ, not according to their Specificall Formes, but according to the Subject, from whence they flow, Sen. de Tranq. An. cap. 15. Et crimen honestum quàm tur∣pem Catonem, will rather inrowle Vice in the Catalogue of Vertue, then reckon one of their owne Sect and Facti∣on, in the number of sinners: So that as with them, all actions of the Ʋnregene∣rate, are all Sins, so all Actions of the Re∣generate, are, if not vertues, yet no sins, or if sins, yet not so sinfull as in others: Else how should this Doctrine, be delivered, and received with applause, that Adul∣tery in David, was but a work of the out∣ward man, he, being as deare to God, in Bathshebah's, arms, as when he was dan∣cing
before the Arke: Judge, if these men, be not in a faire way, to improve their impure Positions, to the monstrous Blasphemy of the Libertines, and may in time, come to Preach with them, That to lay aside all sense and feeling of conscience his regeneration, Bellar. de Amis. Gra∣tia li. 2. c. 1. To do every thing without scruple or hesitation, is Christian Liberty, To profess that we transgress, and sin in nothing, is Repen∣tance from dead works, and mortifica∣tion of the Old Adam: And Lastly, to acknowledge no distinction, no diffe∣rence between good and evill, is to be like our first Parents in their Innocency, and is true Christian perfection: But what∣ever these filthy Dreamers dream, Cer∣tainly David, in that pleight, found o∣ther thoughts in his soul: He found, that his Sin had unfenced his conscience, and laid it waste, he found that by his sins,
he had grieved the Spirit of God, and put the Holy Ghost to flight, who for his sins of Adultery, and Murder, was departed from him, with all his retinue; all that comfort, and consolation, and joy, and peace, and confidence, which lodged in him before his commisson of these sins: So that in the bitterness, and anguish of his Soule, he prayes for the comfort of that Spirit, of which his sins had deprived him: for heare him pray, Make me a clean heart, O God, and renue a right Spirit within me, cast me not a∣way from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me: O give me the comfort of thy helpe againe, and stablish me with thy free Spirit, Psal. 51.10. &c. Certainly he that reads that Psalme of Davids penned up∣on that Occasion, most, whether he will or no, subscribe to this first Proposition, That Sin, living in any knowne sin, and this
Assurance of Salvation, are incompatible, and cannot consist together. Secondly, the second Proposition is this, Though this assurance of Salvation be possible, yet it is extremely difficult to be at∣tained unto, and that in a double respect; First, in respect of the Work it self, which requires much labour, and paines, deepe mortification, earnest endeavours to per∣fect holiness in the feare of God, a long uninterrupted course in Righteousness, not broken off by the commission of any worke of the flesh, or pollution of the World: Secondly, in respect of the diffi∣culties and oppositions, that oppose us in the way, and that both from the devill and our own corruption, being subject to many delusions, both from the Devill and our own Hearts: Saint Paul therefore, is faine to double his Exhor∣tation to the Corinthians, Prove your selves
whether you be in the faith, examine your selves, 2 Cor. 13.5.  and  prove, and examine both, aye, and both little enough; Justly therefore may we won∣der, at their arrogancy, who being but Novices in Religion, dare prattle of a , a fulness of assurance of Gods favour, to them in Christ: That, which others of longer standing, and farre grea∣ter progress in Sanstity, dare not to attri∣bute to themselves, these yesterdayes men, proclaime to have attained: To whom I may say as Isaac did to Jacob, in an other case, Gen. 27.20. How is it, that ye have found it so quickly? for Gods love, is not presantly shed into our hearts, but after many Conflicts with doubtings, com∣bates with corruption, and experiences of Gods Favour, we gather firmeness ra∣ther then fulness of Assurance. Thirdly, the third Proposition is this,
Though assurance may be obtained, yet all that have it, have it not in an equall measure: for as the children of Israel, gathered their Mannah, some more, some less, every man ac∣cording to his eating, Exod. 16, 17, 18. So the children of God, gather their Assu∣rances, some more, some less, every man according to the measure of his Sanctifi∣cation. for the assurance of Gods Favour is experiementall onely, and the evidence no other, then what ariseth from Sancti∣fication, so much as we are Sanctified, so much experience, and sense we may have of his Favour, it is proportioned to our Sanctification, and since this is not in an equall measure, and degree in all, so neither is this Assurance. Fourthly, the fourth Proposition is this: As all Sanctified men have not an equall measure of Assurance, as one Sanctified man is compared with an other, so there is not the
same measure of assurance at all times in a particular Christian, the same man being com∣pared with himself: If we look upon the Saints of God, we shal find some doubting, blended with their purest faith: we are not as pillars of Brass, or as the deaf rocks of the Sea, or as Mount Sion, never to be removed, the faith of a Christian, is sometimes in fight, and conflict, in ago∣ny, and passion, in sweating and bleeding, resisting to blood shall I say? Nay, even unto Hell it self, he knew it well enough who said, Thou bringest down to Hell, and bringest back againe: we neede no other proofe of this, then that experience, which the best of Gods Children, finde in their own souls: That prayer of Saint Augustine, may some time, or other, Conf. l. 1 c. 5. be very seasonable, and beare a part in the devotions of the best resolved Christi∣an: Dic animae meae salus tua ego sum, sed
dic ut audeam: Say, O Lord, unto my soule, I am thy Salvation, but speake so that I may heare thee: for God may say unto my soule, I am thy Salvation, and yet the noyse of Temptations, and the molestations of Satan, may so drown that voyce, that I may not heare it: we do not alwayes finde an equall presence of Gods Spirit, not an equall measure of those ravishing Joyes, and unspeakable consolations, which the Holy Ghost breathes into our Soules, there may be a time, wherein God may seeme to estrange himselfe from us, so that we may complaine of his absence, and with the Church in the Canticles, inquire af∣ter him, Quo abijt, quo se vertit dilectus me∣us? Whither is my beloved gone, whither is my beloved turned aside? that I may seek him, Cant. 6.1. and yet even then, when God seemes to absent himselfe, to have turned
his backe and not the face as in the day of Ca∣lamity, Jer. 18.17. we may conclude with the Church, even then, when we feele not his presence, I am my Beloveds, and my beloved is mine, ver. 3. of the same Chapter. One while Davids faith is so strong, that he will not feare though the earth be moved, and though the Hills be carried, into the midst of the Seas, though the waters thereof rage, and swell, and though the Mountaines shake at the tempest of the same, Psal. 46.1, 2, 3. At an other time, he is so amazed, so dejected, with feare, and diffidence, that while others say unto him, he is like to say as much to himselfe, Where is now thy God? Nay, he will say unto the God of his Strength, why hast thou forgotten me, and why go I thus heavily while the enemy oppresseth me? Psa. 42.11. One while he is so confident, that
he resolves he shall never be removed, be∣cause God of his goodness hath made his Hill so strong, and yet presantly, God did but turne away his face and he was troubled, Psal. 30.6, 7. Troubled? and that so farr, that you would judge him to be in de∣speration, utterly to have lost his hope, for, heare him, pray, shall I say, or mur∣mur? Will the Lord absent himselfe for e∣ver, and will he be no more intreated? Is his Mercy cleane gone for ever, and is his Pro∣mise come utterly to an end for evermore? Hath God forgotten to be gracious, and will he shut up his loving kindness in displeasure? Psal. 77.7. &c. Origen, was well acquainted with these Accesses and Recesses, these Hea∣venly fits of favour, and disfavour: De∣cedit Deus meus, sed expecto, iterum venit, sed dilabitur, dilapsus redit, sed non teneo: My God (sayes he) forsakes me often,
but still I waite for him, again he comes, and againe he vanisheth, being vanished he appeares againe, but I cannot hold him: and in his ebbing, and flowing of this heavenly consolation, De accessu, & recessu Lucraris, as Saint Bernard speaks, Thou art a gainer by his comming, and thou art no looser by his going: for Tibi venit, aye, and, Tibi recedit, as the same Father goes on, For thy sake he comes to thee, and for thy sake he departs from thee: he comes for thy Consolation, and he departs for thy Caution: To conclude with the same Author, Paulisper per∣mittit nos gustare quam suavis sit Deus, &c. God permits us a little to sip of the Cup of Consolation, to tast how gratious the Lord is, and to taste how sweet his Comforts are, and before we can relish them fully, he withdraws himselfe, and as it were with stretched out Wings,
mounts up, purposely to provoke us, to take wing, and soare up after him: And this may be a Reason, why there is not the same measure of Assurance at all times in a particular Christian, the same man being com∣pared with himself. Fifthly, The fifth Proposition is this, The particular Assurance of Remission of sins, and reconciliation with God, which just men attaine unto upon their Repentance, O∣bedience and Faith, when it is strongest, ne∣ver amounts to that firmeness of assent which we have about the common Objects of Faith, to wit, the Articles of Creation, the Trinity, the Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection, and Ascention of Christ, and the like: for 'tis true what Medina observes, Nullus the∣ologicus discursus est tam certus quàm assensio principiorum: There is a fuller assent due to Principles, then to Conclusions inferred from them, for no man can be so certain,
that he is the Son of God by Grace, and Adoption, as he is certaine that Christ is the Son of God by Nature: And the reason is, because these Articles are totally, and immediately revealed in the Scriptures; But that this or that mans sins in particular are remitted, that mine or thy sins are forgiven, depends upon a Practicall Sylogisme, whereof the major Proposition only, is the Word of God, the Minor, or Assumption, is a collection, arising from the reflection, and observa∣tion of a mans own Qualities, and Acti∣ons, and the Conclusion, is more, or less certaine, according to the Truth of the Assumption, according to that of Saint Bernard, Quantum crescis in gratiam, Ser. 3. in Cant. tan∣tum dilataris in fiduciam, according to the measure of thy Grace, so is the measure of thy Assurance. Sixthly, The sixth Proposition is this,
Though a man may be confident of Gods Fa∣vour, and his being in the state of Grace for the time present, yet he cannot have any As∣surance of any such Assurance for the time to come: I speake not here of falling from Grace, but of Assurance, which is a Re∣sult, or fruit springing from our being in the state of Grace, And this, though we may have it for the present, yet, I say, we have no Assurance, of any such Assu∣rance, for the time to come: Not that God will be wanting to us, in supplying us, with all helps, conducing to our sub∣sistance in so comfortable a condition, but, because we may grow secure, and negligent, and be wanting to our selves, in the use of those meanes, which may establish us in this Spe Roboratâ confir∣med strong hope: when Benhadad King of Siria, boasted much of his power, A∣hab King of Israel, returned him this
Answer, Let not him that girdeth on his harness boast himself as he that putteth it off, 1 Kings 20.11. The success of warre is doubtfull, and therefore he that fights for the victory, most not boast, as if he had already won the day: The like Judgement is every one to make of the warfare of the soul, which while it lives in this mortal body, cannot assure it selfe for the future, so various, and doubtfull is the success of the Spirituall Warfare: when Jacob had some contestation with his father Laban about the Idols which Rachel had stolne from him, he tells La∣ban, Except the God of Abraham, and the feare of Isaac, had beene with me, surely thou hadst sent me away now empty, Gen. 31.42. Comentators generally, inquire, why Jacob, should not call God, the God of Isaac as well as the God of Abraham, but the God of Abraham and the feare of
Isaac; and Paulus Burgencis, out of the Opinion of the Rabbins answers, That God was seldome called the God of any man while that man was living, because he doth not enjoy a secure and certaine condition; and therefore because Abra∣ham was now Comprehensor, dead, and in the state of Bliss, and Isaac wat but Via∣tor living and travelling towards the same Happiness, having not yet finished his course, Jacob stiles God, the God of Abraham, but the Feare of Isaac: Terret me Apostolus dicens, Qui se putat sta∣re, Erar. in Psal. 41. videat ne cadat saith Saint Augustine The Apostle affrights me, he startles me, when he sayes, Let him that standeth take heed least he fall: and if this tall Cedar in Libanus were afraid, how should the Shrub presume? I shall conclude this Proposition, with that admonition of St. Peter, and comend it to your Obser∣vation,
Pass the time of your sojourning here in feare, 1 Pet. 1.7. Seventhly, and lastly, The last Pro∣position is this, Though we grant that it is possible, though difficult, for a man to attain to this confidence towards God and Assurance of Salvation, yet we deny it to be absolutely necessary: Though every man ought to labour for it, yet it is no Evangelical promise, that every Justified person shall certainly attaine unto it. For a Christian, of an humble, contrite Spirit, believing that his sins are remissible, if he earnestly desire remissi∣on of sins, by the Passion and Merits of Christ, and joyneth with this Faith and Desire, the exercise of all Morall and Theological virtues, this man, this woman, do certainly receive forgiveness of sins, although they be vexed, with scruples, and doubts, and want Assurance, and perswasion in themselves, that their sins
are remitted: So that when we say, a man may be assured, we confess a pos∣sibility, and when we teach that by the studdy of Piety, and perfecting Holi∣ness in the feare of God, men ought to labour for this Assurance, we acknow∣ledge a duty, yet it doth not from hence follow, that such Assurance is of absolute necessity; Necessary it may be, to the well being of a Son of God, but not ne∣cessary to his being, as if no Son of God without it: Necessary, it may be to Solace and cheere us up in the way to the end, but not necessary to the end it selfe, as if there were no Salvation without it. For, for the guilt of sin, grating upon the con∣science, or for some other reason, best known to God (whose wayes with the soules of men, are unsearchable, past finding out) a man may be deprived of comfort, even to; and at his death, and
for this go mourning to his Grave, and yet at the last day find a joyfull Resur∣rection: So that, though he be more hap∣py, that hath Grace and Peace, yet he may be as holy that hath Grace without Peace. How then do they bruise the broken reede, and quench the smoaking flax? nay, how do they intangle and ensnare the consciences of poore Christians, who teach, that Justifying faith, is nothing else, but an Assurance, of our present being in the state of Grace here, and future glo∣ry hereafter? for what Balme of Gilead? what word of Comfort? what Gospel more remaines to be Preached to him, who not finding this Assurance in his own soule, concludes himself to be vvithout faith, and consequently in the state of damnation? Shall vve tell such a man, as some do, that desire of Assurance, is in Gods acceptance, as Assurance it selfe?
He will tell us againe, (and I profess I know nothing that we can reply,) that by the Covenant of Grace, in Adultis, in those that are of age, Actuall Faith it selfe (Questionless) is necessary to Justifica∣tion, and therefore Actuall Assurance, if Justifying Faith, be Assurance, which doubtless it is not: I may safety affirme, that this one Doctrine, thus unwarran∣tably taught, together, with their Marks, Signs, and (as in their Canting Language they call them) Tokens of a child of God, what with Presumption on the one side, and Desperation on the other, hath endangered, if not lost more soules, then any one error, that hath prevailed in the Reformed Church: And therefore, O my soule, come not thou into their secret, unto their Assembly, mine Honour be not thou united. Having thus briefly, Asserted Saint
Pauls Confidence, and stated the Con∣troversie with the Church of Rome in the Point of Assurance of Salvation, and bounded the Affirmative with such Pro∣positions as are necessary to preserve this Truth from abuse by Presumption, or any other way, I shall now in a word or two, make Ʋse and Application of the Point. Since then by the practice of Piety, and labouring to perfect holiness in the feare of God, we may attaine to some Assurance of Salvation, we may do well, to retire into our own breasts, descend into our own hearts, try our own wayes, and see how vve stand in the judgment of our own consciences, vvhether vve can say vvith Saint Paul here, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, and so conclude vvith him, Henceforth there is laid up for
me a Crown of Righteousness: If thou live in sin, if that reigne in thee, I must confess vvith Anselme in his Meditations, That it is Gravis angustia, a hard streight: If thou dost looke into thy selfe, thou vvilt not indure thy selfe, if not, Thou vvilt not know thy selfe; If thou consider what thou art, thy guilt vvill affright thee, if not, damnation steales upon thee, To see thy selfe is horrour, not to see thy selfe is death: Hence some are as much afraid to enter parley vvith their consciences, as Ahab vvas vvith Michaiah: because they never speak good but evill unto them, 1 King. 22. or as Job speaks of God, Because they write bitter things against them, Job 13.26. and therefore like a troublesome guest, they turne it out of doors: They do not only through vvant of vvatchfulness, and advertencie, let it slip, or steale a∣way, but as Saint Paul speaks of Hyme∣neus
and Alexander, and others, as if it would not be gone soone enough, , 1 Tim. 1 19. They drive it away, they expel it: men deal with their consciences, after they have defi∣led them, 2 Sam. 13, 15, 16, 17. as Amnon did with his Sister Ta∣mar eject them, as he did her, Arise, be gone, and if the conscience stay, and plead, as she did, not to be ejected, vaine thoughts, or worldly, like Amnons Servants, put out the conscience, aye, and bolt the doore af∣ter it; we may a while thus deceive our selves, & cast out one devil with another, or as Saint Jerome speaks, vitium vitio, Pec∣catum peccato mederi, Silence the guilt of one sin by worldly avocasions, from the consideration of the wages of sin, or by the commission of another sin, vve may for a vvhile, dance, or drinke, or sport away the thoughts of Hell, and the Day of Judge∣ment: the noise of the Harpe, and the Vi∣oll may drowne the voyce of the Consci∣ence,
and suspend its Opperations, but first, or last it will be heard, and the longer we stay, before we give it audience, the more terrible, will her accusations be, when she doth speake. What is that which makes men die in despaire? strangers to all Spirituall Com∣fort, void of all consolation, all confidence in God, but the want of often arreigning our selves at the Barre of our own consciences: what makes our account to appeare so great, at the day of death, but the not casting it up in our life? How many such discon∣solate soules do we meete withall in our Pastorall Charges, anxiously crying out, as in the Prophet, Is there no Balme in Gi∣lead? Is there no Phisition there to admi∣nister a word of Comfort to a wounded Spirit? Alas, we cannot Oleum de Petra, extract Oyle, out of your Flints, nor sweete Wine, out of your soure Grapes: If you spend
your dayes in excess, and riot, in cham∣bering and wantonness, in the profits, or pleasures, or the vanities of this world, and when you come to die, you then seek to us for comfort, what comfort can we give you, what can we say to you in this your distress, but as Ruben did to his brethren in their distress, Did we not warne you, saying; sin not? Gen. 42.22. If you, while you have blood in your veynes, strength in your sinewes, marrow in your bones, milke in your breasts; in a word, If you in the dayes of your youth, before the evill dayes come, Ecces. 12.1. and those yeares draw nigh, when you shall say, I have no pleasure in them, do not by repentance from dead works, and a lively faith in the blood of Christ, get your hearts sprinkled from an evill Conscience Heb. 10 22. and pu∣rified from dead works, Heb. 9.14. As he an∣swered, to an importunate suitor, when it was not in his power to grant her request,
so must we, If the Lord do not helpe you, whence should we? 2 King. 26.27. That therefore you may make the work of the last day comfortable, make every day a preparation to the day of Death; Do with the works of your Conversation, as God did with the works of his Creation, He, not only surveyed at the sixt dayes end, the work of the vvhole weeke, but at the evening of every day he made a parti∣cular Survey: Every day vvas closed up vvith a vidit quod Bonum; He saw that it vvas good: I expect not that the same Ver∣dict should be given up, yet, do you the like, at the evening of the day, examine the works of every day. Beleeve me, 'tis too unweildly a task, to be adjourned un∣to the end, and vvorst part of our life, to have the vvorke, of a vvhole life to do, vvhen perhaps you have not an houre to live: it is the vvorke of a vvhole life, to
survey the actions of a vvhole Life, and therefore not to be posted off, to the weak∣est part of it: In the middest therefore of all your great and weighty affairs, redeeme some time, to be imployed in this worke, upon which depends your Eternity, when you come to die, and die you must, you will prize one houre, spent in this holy worke, more, then, all the rest of your life, Gen. 5.27. though you should live Methu∣salahs age, and that dedicated to ambition, pleasure, wealth, and honour. Seneca tells us of a Romone, that had a∣way to keepe his soule as clean, as good Housewives keep their Plate, for every e∣vening, he vvould vvipe it over vvith this Interrogation, Quod malum hodie sanasti? cui vitio, obstitisti? Quâ parte melior es? Tell me, O my soule, what sin hast thou conquered to day, what vice hast thou resisted? how much art thou improved since the morning, how much bet∣ter
