P52 [ocn]625106312 211245
A Fairing for Maids. Being the honest Maids Councel to all other, Better then she had given her by her Mother, She wishes Maides in time for to be wary And with what Young-men they intend to marry, A single life is gallant she doth say For being bound perforce they must obey. To the Tune of, He that has most mony, &c. woodcut of a man woodcut of a woman ALl you brave Damsels come lend your attention, I a brave Fairing unto you will send The councel is honest of which I make mention the Verses are witty which here I have pen'd Some young-men are honest, and some are deceitful and some with fair spéeches wil lead you away. Then chuse not a young-man the which is ungrateful for when you are bound, then you needs must obey. First I advise you all that hear this Ditty with due admonishion in time to be rul'd For Youngmen are cunning in Country and City then sée that by policy you be not fool'd Some wil speak you most fair, thinking to insnare you and many cunning baits for you will lay. But I wish all Maidens in time to be wary for when you are bound, then you needs must obey You that are single and in haste would marry thinking you have staid your time over-long Let me advise you forthwith to be wary, for hasty marriages oft produceth wrong, When you are wedded then comes care and trouble then farewel single life and Maidens joy If Husbands be dogged then woes do redouble for when you are bound, then you needs must obey What if they promise and vow they do love you, yet ne'r the sooner do you them beléeve For it is but policy some waies to prove you or by some flattering waies you to deceive Some are so skilfull and crafty in wooing, that they will follow you both night and day, But when they have gain'd you it proves your undo∣ing for when you are bound, you needs must obey. Some young-men are civil and wooe so demure butter would not melt in their mouths you would think But when they have won you they are crabed & sowre and from their old promises straight they wil shrink He that looks most civill as often is spoken when he weds a Maiden her bones he will pay, Then let this to maidens be still a true token for when you are bound, then you needs must obey
The second part to the same tune. woodcut of a man woodcut of a woman THer's many wil promise you shal live most gallant until they have brought you unto their own bow But when they have gain'd you they will spend your talent this by experinece some maidens do know Some do not wooe for love nor for beauty, but séek after riches as much as they may Then maidens néer yéeld unto such men in duty for when you are bound, then you needs must obey. Whilst you are single there's none to curb you, go to bed quietly and take your ease Early or late there's none to disturb you wlk abroad where you and when you please A single life is frée from all danger, then maids imbrace it as long as you may,, And never yéeld to neighbor nor stranger for when you are bound, then you needs must obey. When you are wedded then farewel all pleasure And lest your Husband be loving and kind, Marrie in haste, you will repent at leasure, this by experience too many doe find Children procéeding must have cloaths and diet and Nurses wages oft times you must pay When Maids from such Taxes do stil live at quiet for when you are bound, then you needs must obey Yet I will not any Maiden disparage if she a constant Youth chance for to find Then let her joyn with him in lawful marriage if he unto her be loving and kind, Where love remaineth it is a great blessing but if men be froward and sullen I say There the womans woe is alwaies increasing for when they are bound, then they needs must obey Now in love I wish all Maids to consider, These witty Verses which here I have pen'd. Though the gift be smal yet except of the giver this Fairing through all parts to maidens I send, And so for to end with my old Resolution the which is both honest and true I dare safe All Maidens be rul'd by this Song in conclusion for when you are bound, then you needs must obey FINIS. J. P. London Printed for Fra. Grove on Snow-hill.
