P598A [ocn]690986710 211648
A Particular RELATION of the great VICTORY obtained by Their Majesties Forces over the Irish Army, at Aghrim in Ireland, on the 12th of July, 1691. THE 11th instant we encamped on this side Ballinaslo, along the River Suc: It was once this day resolved to have passed the River, and to march three Miles farther to Aghrim-Castle, where the Enemy was encamped, and to at∣tack them, but the great Rain that fell this day, with other Obstacles, as of not perfectly viewing the Roads and Passes thither, occasioned our stay here. This Night Orders were given, that all our Arms should be discharged, and put in good Order; That the whole Army should be at their Arms by two of the Clock the next morning, with∣out either beat of Drum or sound of Trumpet; Powder, Ball, &c. was delivered the same night to them. The 12th, According to this Order of last Night, the Army marched through Ballinasloe, leaving only at the Camp Two Men of a Company to guard our Tents: After the Right Wing of Horse and Foot had passed, our Artillery, consisting of 30 Field-pieces, march∣ed in three Divisions, (viz.) Two Demy-Culvering, Two short 6 Pounders, and Five 3 Pounders, for the Right Wing; Two long 6 Pounders, Two short 6 Pounders, and Five 3 Pounders, for the Left Wing; and Eight fortified 12 Pounders, and Four short ditto, for the Center or Body of the Army. It took some time to draw the Army up, which about 11 a Clock at Noon was done, and every thing put in order to attack the Enemy in their Camp: 'Twas resolved to atrack them on the Right, Left, and Center, as the Three Roads in this Paper mark'd A. B. C. but the Road C. running so much to our Right, and taking so great a Turn about the Bog, with the Consideration of the Enemies Left Wing not extending farther than D. (their Right was E.) 'twas resolved to attack only by the Road B. leading to their Right Wing, and the Road A. leading to the Pass; this made some small Alteration in the Order of Battel, as the sending Three Squadrons from the Right Wing of the Se∣cond Line to the Left of the First Line, joyning the Right and Left Guns together for the Left: By 4 in the Afternoon the Duke of Wirtembergh marched the Left Wing by the Road B. which was much disputed him, the Enemy having all enclosed Ground to defend: At 7 a Clock he gained the Ground F. and the Enemy drew down to him; at the same time Four Battalions passed over the Bog, and met with great opposition, the whole Body of the Enemies Foot pressing them very much; Lieutenant-General Macoy, Major-General Talmash, with the Right Wing of Horse and Foot, pushed through the Pass under the Fire of the Castle; 'twas disputed half an hour, then we gained the Top of the Hill at H. which took the Enemy in the Rear, who now begin to be in some Confusion. The Fight lasted about two hours, sometimes with Advantage to the Enemy, they having once pushed the Four Battalions that went over the Bog, but in a quarter of an hour rallied again, which, with the Two Lines, advancing, put the Enemy in such disorder, that they entirely broke, and each made the best of their Heels; the Horse got off best; we pursued them four Miles, with a great Slaughter of the Foot, which in all probability is intirely ruin'd: By Computation, there lies dead upon the Field of Battel upwards of 5000 Men, with about 15000 Arms which they flung away; their whole Artillery, (sent them out of France,) consisting of Nine Guns, with all the Tents and Baggage of their Army, is ours. Of their General Officers, Sarsfeild is only escaped; St. Ruth is killed; Major-General John Hamilton, Major-General Dorington, Brigadier Tute, Lord Bellew, Colo∣nel Connel, Brigadier Gordan O-Neile, Lieutenant-Colonel Roberts, Lord Slane, Lord Kilmure, Lord Bussin, Colonel Butler, Colonel Grace, Major Lawless, Colonel Walter Bourke, Lieute∣nant-Colonel John Baggot, Lieutenant-Colonel Jo. Braodier, Major William Bourke, Major Edmund Bulter, with a great number of inferiour Officers, both of Horse and Foot, are Pri∣soners: We took also a great many Standards and Colours. Printed by Edw. Jones in the Savoy, 1691.
A DRAUGHTFigure (1) is the Irish Army. Figure (2) Squadrons of Horse, and Figure (3) Battalions of Foot, of Their Majesties Army. of the Incampment of the Irish Army at the Bat∣tel near Aghrim in Ireland, and the manner of Their Majesties Forces Attacking them. By Colonel Richards, First Engineer of Ireland, being present at the Engagement. Published by Authority. map of the site of battle and the location of the armies
