R527 [ocn]625260894 211327
REASONS Humbly offered Against the CLAUSE intended in the ACT for the Establishing the LAND-BANK for Denizing or Naturalizing of all Aliens that shall subscribe 500. l. to the said Bank. IT has been the Prudence of the Princes of this Nation, always to take care to make a Distinction be∣tween Natural born Subjects and Aliens of other Kingdoms, and have never incouraged, nor indeed tollerated them in any thing further than that which migh directly or collaterally be judged and esteem∣ed for the Interest of their Natives: Neither were Aliens, in any Age, for any proposed Advantages, favoured and eased in any thing, but Experience immediately discovered many great Mischiefs to attend. Some of which are enumerated in an Act made for redressing these Grievances, Anno Henrici septimi, Cap. 2. and are hereafter mentioned. First and Principally, The advancing Aliens in Riches and Honour, and impoverishing the Mative Subjects. Secondly. The exhausting the Treasure of the Nation, and remitting the same into Forreign Nations, Thirdly. The great hurt in imparing and lessening the King's Customs, the Publick Revenue of the Nation. Fourthly. That Marchants Aliens colour the Goods and Merchandizes of other Strangers (not Naturalized or made Denizons) and Export great and considerable Substance in their Names. Herewith agree the Statutes of 11 H. 7. cap. 14. and 22 H. 8. cap. 8. pursuant to the design of which Laws, few or no Aliens were Naturalized during the Reigns of King Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, and King James. And how greatly the Trade and Wealth of the Nation were thereby increased, during the posperous Reigns of the two latter of the said Princes, none that are conversant in History can be igno∣rant of. Besides which Mischiefs, Experience hath discoverd further Inconveniencies, in admitting Aliens and Strangers to have and enjoy a free Trade upon equal Terms with his Majesties Native Subjects: As, That the Trade, by Commission would be by Aliens taken out of the hands of his Majesties Subjects, both at home and abroad, and the English Merchants would be under sold in the Prizes of their Commodities by Aliens, who can live more hardly, and at less charges, in Lodgings, &c. than the King's Subjects, to the discouragement of the Gentry, in training up their younger Sons in Trade, which was formerly esteemed and proved a good Pro∣vision for them, and many arrived thereby to great Estates and Preferment, which few now do. By the second Rule in the Book of Rates, annexed to the Act of Tonnage and Poundage, Goods Importe and again Exported by English in Twelve Months, and Aliens in Nine Months, draw back from Their Majestie half the Customes paid by them on the Importation; and in some Cases more than half. By the Act of Tonnage and Poundage, Merchants English sustaining loss in their Goods Exported, by Enemies Pirates, or perishing in the Sea, draw back the whole Custome from his Majesty, which Prejudice his Majesty will sustain from Aliens Naturallized. Now upon serious Consideration, If all Jews and Roman Catholicks (that are Enemies to our Faith and Religi¦on) are (for such subscribing 500 l. to this Land Bank) to receive equal Priviledges with our own Natives, i will render this Bank a very Weak Fund, and give good Cause of Suspicion to our Allies and Enemies of our Poverty That we our selves cannot raise present Supplies to his Majesty without these Mean Helps, which in the end will be none at all, but a great loss to his Majesty in his Revenue, aising by Petty Customes, upwards of 40000 l. per Ann. wherein by Law they are obliged to pay more than Natives, which will be a great disappointment to those, that have advanced Mony on that Fund in the Customes, and bring a further Charge upon our selves, instead of a help. But if it shall be thought fit still to continue this great favour to Strangers, it is humbly desired that it may be with this Provisoe; (That they may not be in etter Circumstances than our Natives, Freemen, Viz. Provided alwayes, and be if further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That nothing in this Act contained shall ex∣empt, or be construed to exempt any Forreigner? who shall ubscribe the sum of 500 l. or more as aforesaid from the pay∣ment of any Tolls or Duties heretofore lawfully enjoyed, o received by any Body Corporate or Politick, but the same shall still be paid, as if this Act had not been made.
