R2259a [ocn]625261313 211333
THE Rules of the Schools AT THE SAVOY. I. THE Intention of Opening these Schools is, to Teach Youth Vertue and Learning; They shall be Taught Gratis; Nor shall they be at any farther Charges or Expences than the buying of their own Pens, Ink, Paper and Books. II. These Schools, are common to all, of what condition soever; and none shall be Excluded, when they shall be thought fit to begin to learn Latin, and Write sufficiently well: And in these Schools, shall be Taught, Greek and Latin: As also Poetry and Rhetorick, as they shall rise to higher Schools. III. And altho' Youths of different Professions, whether Catholics or Protestants, come to these Schools; yet in Teaching all, there shall be no distinction made, but all shall be Taught with equal Diligence and Care, and every one shall be promoted according to his Deserts. IV. There shall not be, either by Masters or Scholars, any tampering or medling, to perswade any one from the Profession of his own Religion; but there shall be all freedom for every one to Practice what Religion he shall please; and none shall be less esteemed or favored for being of a different Religion from others. V. None shall upbraid or reproach any one, on the account of Religion; and when any Exercise of Religion shall be Practised, as hearing Mass, Catechising or Preach∣ing, or any other, it shall be lawful, for any Protestant, without any molestation or trouble, to absent himself from such Exercise, if he please. VI. All shall be Taught to keep Gods Commandments, and therefore none shal be permitted, to Lye, Swear, or Curse, or talk uncivil Discourse; Nor shall figh or quarrel with one another; And he who shall be observed to fail in these Duties shall be punished according to his Demerit: And when any one for these or othe Faults shall be adjudged to any Chastisement, if he shall refuse to receive such Chastisement quietly, or be stubborn, he shall be Expel'd the Schools, and not be readmitted again, until he shall have given satisfaction for such his Fault. VII. All shall be in their respective Schools, by a Quarter after Seven in the Mor∣ning, and shall there stay until Ten: Again at a Quarter before Two, until half a Hour after Four. Yet by reason of the shortness of the Days in Winter, the Mornin time of the Schools, shall be Half an Hour later: Thus from All-Saints Day to Cadelmas, they are to be in the Schools a Quarter before Eight, and stay till Half a Hour after Ten; but in the Afternoon at the time before mentioned. VIII. The other Hours of the Day, they shall Study at their own Homes, a prepare those Exercises, which the Masters in the Schools appoint to be brought, their next coming to the Schools. And therefore, all Parents are desired to allo their respective Scholars, such conveniency for their Studies at their own House that they may comply with those Duties which are appointed them. IX. All are required to be exact and diligent, in dayly frequenting the Schools and being there, none are to go out without leave of their Master; and when any on shall be absent from School, he shall the next Day he comes, bring from his Parents Ticket, of the lawfulness of such his Absence: Yet they shall have every Week tw Afternoons of Recreation, in which they come not to School; unless a Holy-da happen that Week, which shall then be their Recreation-day. These Schools shall begin on Monday after Whitsun-week, May 23. 1687. London, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, for His Houshold and Chappel: For him and Matthew Turner, at the Lamb in High Holborn. 1687.
