S1197A R176597 767618639 212659
Coppie of an Act to be presented to his Grace, his Majesties high Com∣missioner, and to the Right Ho∣nourable Estates of Parlia∣ment, anent Gun-Pouder and Allom. OUR Soveraign Lord, Considering the great Encouragements, of∣fered and given for the Erecting of Manufactories, by several Acts of Parliaments, Specially by the Act 1661, Entituled, Act for Erecting of Manufactories, and the Act 1681, Entituled, Act for Encouraging of Trade, and Manufactories; And that in pursuance thereof, and upon the Experience of the Benefit and Advantage redounding thereby to this Kingdom, particular Acts of Parliament have been made and past in favours of Manufactories, alreadie set up. As also, That this Kingdom having at present no Pouder-Mill, or work for making of Gun-Pouder, nor having ever had a Work for making of Allom, both which may nevertheless be very Advanta∣gious as well for Export, as for necessary inward Consumption. Several persons have ingadged in a Co-partnarie for setting up and carrying on the said Works, which may be so useful, as said is. Therefore, His Majestie, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Statutes and Declares in Favours of Sir Alexander Hope of Kerss, Sir Robert Dickson of Sornbegg, George Clerk, Junior and James Balfour, Merchants in Edinburgh, and their Co-partners, either already assumed, or to be assumed, and their Successors, Undertakers, of the said Works, That the said two Works for making of Gun-Pouder, and for making of Allom, when set up and Erected, shall be Manufactories, And that the foresaid Partners and Societie engadged for carrying on the said Works, shall be a Free and Lawful Incorporation, with all Priviledges usual, and shall have Right to, and brook and enjoy all the Priviledges and Immu∣nities provided in Favours of Manufactories by the foresaid Acts of Parliament; And particularly, and for the more special Amplification hereof, the hail Pri∣viledges, Liberties, and Immunities, granted to the Cloath and Linnen Ma∣nufactories, which are here holden as exprest. And farder, Because the said Allom-Work was never before erected in this Kingdom, and that the Un∣dertakers must necessarly at first be at great pains and Expences. Therfore, His Majestie with Advice and Consent foresaid, Statutes and Ordains, That the foresaid Undertakers thereof, shall have the sole power and Priviledge of making of the same, for the space of twenty five years, from and after the date hereof, and that it shall not be Leisom during that space, for any other person or persons to make Allom within this Kingdom, providing alwayes that the said Undertakers do set up the said Allom work with due Diligence. As also, That these Presents shall be without prejudice to the Importation of Allom from Forraign parts by Merchants, as they have been in Use to do before the making hereof.
REASONS FOR Passing the Act in Favours of the UN∣DERTAKERS for the mak∣ing of Gun-pouder and Allom. 1mo. Because the need of both Gun-pouder and Allom for the use of the Kingdom, is evident. 2do. Because we have formerly had Gun-pouder Mills; But thorow the want of due incouragement, they have long since been neglected and gone to Ruine. 3tio. Because the foresaid works when set up, will not only hinder the necessary im∣port of both Gun-pouder and Allom; But this Kingdom having within it self the most of the Matterials necessary, the works may be quickly improven to furnish a good export. 4to. The setting up of the said work at first, where such works are quite out of use, will evidently require great pains and charges. 5to. If set up they would entertain a great many Idle and Poor people both in Work and Bread. 6to. The Allom work being wholly new, and which will need great pre∣parations, and if once set up, would imploy and maintain at least a hundered per∣sons, deserves the incouragement of the sole power of making Allom for twenty five years after the Grant of the Act; Specially when the same is sought with the provision; that in the mean time this priviledge shall not hinder the usual import. 7mo. There is also a special reason for the Pouder-work; because it may not only fur∣nish Pouder for the Kings Forces and Magazins; But if at any time thorow accidents which often happen the Pouder in the publick Magazins should be spoiled, or grow weak, the foresaid Pouder-work would recover it from time to time, to its full strength, and when Ships of force go abroad they may be furnished by our own Mills. 8vo. It is found by experience of all other Nations, that Manufactories do Enrich those Kingdoms, where they are unanimously carried on.
