10314.7 23026953 26106
ARTICLES To be inquired of, in the st Metropoliticall visitation, of the most euerend Father, GEORGE, by Gods pro∣ence, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and Primate of all gland; in, and for the Dioces of Peterbury, in the yeare of our Lord God, 1613 and in the third yeare of his Graces Translation. HEB DDIM HEB DDIEV printer's device of William Jaggard LONDON, Printed by William Iaggard.
The Tenor of the Oath, to be Ministred to the Church-wardens and Side-men. YOu shall sweare, that you, and euery of you, shall dulie consider, and diligently enquire, of all and euery of these Articles giuen you in charge; and that all affection, fa∣uour, hatred, hope of reward and gain, or feare of displeasure, or mallice set aside; you shall present all and euery such per∣son, of, or within your Parish, as hath committed any offence, or made any default mentioned in these, or any of these Arti∣cles; or which are vehemently suspected or defamed of any such offence or default: Wherein you shal deale vprightly and fully; neither presenting, nor sparing to present any, co to truth: hauing in this action God before your eyes, with an earnest zeale to maintaine truth, and to suppresse vice. So help you God, and the holie Contents of this Booke.
¶ Concerning the Church, the Ornaments thereof, and the Churches possessions. IMprimis, whether haue you in your seuerall Churches and Chappels, the whole Bible of the largest volume, and the Booke of Common Prayer, lately set forth by his Maiesties authoritie, both fairely and substantiallie bound: a Font of Stone, set vp in the auncient vsuall ace: a conuenient and decent Communion Table, with a Carpet of ilke, or some other decent stuffe, continuallie laide vpon the Table at ne of Diuine seruice, and a faire Linnen cloath vpon the same, at the ne of the receiuing of the holy Communion. And whether is the same ble placed in such conuenient sort within the chancell or church, as that he Minister may be best heard in his Prayer and administration, and hat the greatest number may communicate: And whether is it so vsed  of time of Diuine seruice, as is not agréeable to the holy vse of it; as atting on it, throwing Hats on it, writing on it, or is it abused to other phaner vses: and are the Ten Commaundements set vpon the East∣d of your church or chappell where the people may best sée and reade un, and other sentences of holy Scripture, written on the walles like∣se for that purpose? 2 Item, whether haue you in your said church or chappell, a conueni∣ seat for your Minister to read seruice in, together, with a comely pul∣ set vp in a conuenient place, with a decent cloath or cushion for the e, a comely large Surplice, a faire Communion cup, with a couer of uer, a Flaggon of Siluer, Tinne, or Pewter, to put the Wine in, hereby it may be set vpon the Communion Table, at the time of the essing thereof, with all other thinges and ornaments necessarie for the bration of Diuine Seruice, and administration of the Sacraments? nd whether haue you a strong Chest for Almes for the poore, with thrée ckes and Keies, and another chest for kéeping the Bookes, and Orna∣ents of the Church, and the Register Booke. And whether haue you a egister Booke in Parchment, for Christnings, Weddings, and Buri∣, and whether the same be kept in all pointes, according to the Can∣nons
in that behalfe prouided? And whether haue you in your saide Church or Chancell, a Table set, of the degrées wherein by Law Men are prohibited to marry? 3 Whether are your Church and Chappels, with the Chancels ther∣of, and your parsonage or vicarage house, your Parish Almes-house and Church-house, in good reparations: and are they imployed to godly, and the rght holy vses? Is your Church, Chancell, and Chappell decently and comely kept, as well within as without, and the seats well maintai∣ned, according to the 85. Cannon, in that behalfe prouided? Whether your Church-yard be well fenced, and kept without abuse: and if not, in whose default the same is, and what the defect or fault is? and whether any person haue incroached vpon the ground of the Church-yard, or whe∣ther any person or persons, haue vsed any thing or place consecrated to ho∣ly vse, prophanely or wickedly? 4 Whether haue you the Terrier of all the Gleabe Lands, Medowes, Gardens, Orchards, Houses, Stockes, Implements, Tenements, and portions of Tiths (whether within your Parish or without) belonging vnto your parsonage or vicarage, taken by the view of honest men in your said Parish? And whe her the same Terrier be laid vp in the Bishoppes Registery, and in whose hands any of them are now. And if you haue no Terrier already made in Parchment, you the Church-wardens & Side∣men, together with your Parson or Vicar, or in his absence, with your Minister, are to make diligent inquiry and presentment of the premises, and make, subscribe, and signe, the said Terrier, as aforesaid? Concerning the Ministers. 1 VVHether doth your Minister, distinctly and reuerently say Di∣uine seruice vpon Sundayes and Holidaies, and other daies appointed to be obserued by the booke of Common Prayer: as Wednes∣dayes, and Fridaies and the eeues of euery Sunday and Holiday, at si and vsuall times? And doth your Minister duely obserue the Orders Rites, and Ceremonies, prescribed in the said Booke of Common Pray¦er, as well in reading publike prayers and the etany, as also in admi¦nistring the Sacraments, solemnization of Matrimony, visiting the sick burying the dead, Churching of Women, and all other like Rites an Offices of the Church, in such manner and forms, as in the said Book of Common prayer he is inioyned, without any omiss on or addition And doth hee read the Booke of the last Cannons once yearely, and wear a Surplice according to the said Cannons? 2 Doth your Minister bid Holidaies and Fasting-daies, as by th
Boke of Common Prayer is appointed? And doth he giue warning be∣fore hand to the Parishioners, for the receiuing of the holy Communion, as the 22. Cannon requireth? And whether he doth administer the holy Communion so often, and at such times, as that euery Parishioner may receiue the same, at the least thrice in euery yeare: whereof once at Ea∣ster, as by the Booke of common Prayer is appointed? And doth your Minister receiue the same himselfe, on euery day that he administreth it to others, and vse the wordes of institution, according to the Booke, at euery time that the Breade and Wine is renewed; accordingly as by the Prouiso of the 21. Cannon, is directed? And doth hée deliuer the Bread and Wine to euery Communicant seuerally? Whether hée hath admitted to the holy Communion any Offendor, or Schismaticke, con∣trary to the 26. and 27. constitutions, or receiued any to the communion beeing not of his owne cure, or put any from the Communion, who are not publiquely infamous for any notorious crime? Doth hée vse the signe of the Crosse in Baptisme, or Baptize in any Bason, or other Vessel, and not in the vsuall Font? Or admit any Father to bee God-Father to his owne child, or such which haue not receiued the holy Communion: or Baptise any children that were not borne in the parish; or wilfully refuse to baptise any Infant in his Parish beeing in danger, hauing béene enfor∣med of the weakenesse of the said child: and whether the saide child dyed through his default, without Baptisme? 3 Whether hath your Minister married any without a King, or without Banes published thrée seuerall Sundaies or Holidaies in time of Diuine seruice, in the seuerall churches or chappels of their seuerall a∣bode, according to the Booke of common Prayer, or in times prohibited, albeit the Banes were thrice published, without a License or dispensati∣on fom the Arch-bishop, the Bishop of the Diocesse, or his Chancellor; first obtained in that behalfe? Or not betwixt the houses of eight and twelue in the forenoone, or haue married any in any priuate house, or if the parties be vnder the age of twenty one yeares, before their Parents or Gouernours haue signified their consent vnto him? 4 Doth he refuse to bury any, which ought to be inferred in christian burial, or deferre the same longer then he should, or bury any in christian buriall, which by the constitutions of the church of England ought not so to be interred? 5 Is your Minister, a Preacher allowed? If yea; then by whom, if not? Whether dooth he procure some who are lawfully licensed, to preach monthly amongst you at the least?
6 Doth your Minister (being licenced) preach vsually according to the Cannons, either in his owne Cure, or in some other church or chap∣pell néere adioyning, where no Preacher is, and how often he hath béene negligent in that behalfe, and doth he preach standing, and with his hat off? Or whether doth he or his Curate vpon euery Sunday, when there is no Sermon, read an Homilie, or some part thereof, according as hée ought to doe; or in case he be not licensed to preach, doth he take vpon him to Preach or expound the Scriptures in his owne Cure, or else-where; If so, then you are to present the same, the time and place, when, and where he did it? 7 Doth your Minister vse to pray for the Kinges Maiesty, King Iames, and for the Quéenes Maiesty, the Prince, and all their Royall Progeny, with addition of such stile and Titles as are due to his High∣nesse, and exhort the people to obedience to his Maiesty, and all Magi∣strates in authority vnder him? 8 Is your Minister continually resident vppon his Benefice, and how long time hath he beene absent, and in case he be licensed to bee ab∣sent; whether doth he cause his Cure to be sufficiently supplied, accor∣ding to the Cannons: or in case he hath another Benefice, whether doth he supply his absence by a Curate, sufficiently licensed to preach in that Cure where he himselfe is not resident. Or otherwise, in case the smal∣nesse of the Liuing cannot finde a Preaching Minister, doth he preach at both his Benifices vsually? 9 Doth your Minister or Curate, serue any more Cures then one: if yea, then what other Cure, dooth hee serue, and how farre are they di∣stant? 10 Doth your Minister euery Sunday and Holliday, before Eue∣ning Prayer, for halfe an houre or more, examine and instruct the youth and ignorant persons of his Parish, in the Ten Commaundements, Ar∣ticles of the Beléefe, and in the Lords Prayer, and the Sacrament, ac∣cording as it is prescribed in the Catechisme, set foorth in the Booke of Common Prayer? 11 Doth your Minister in the Rogation daies, goe in perambulati∣on of the circuit of the Parish, saying and vsing the Prayers, Suffra∣ges, and Thanksgiuing to God, appointed by Law, according to his du∣ty, thanking God for his blessinges, if there be plenty on the earth; Or otherwise, to pray for his grace and fauour, if there be a feare of ssitie? 12 Hath your Minister admitted any Woman, begotten with child in Adultry or Fornication, to be churched without license of the ordinary?
13 Hath your Minister or any other Preacher, baptized Children, churched any woman, or ministred the holy Communion in any priuate house, otherwise then as by Law is allowed? 14 Doth your Minister, being a Preacher, endeuour and labour di∣ligently to reclaime the Popish Recusants in his Parish from their er∣rors, (if there bee any such abiding in your Parish.) Or whether is your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, ouer conuersant with, or a fauourer of Recu∣sants, whereby he is suspected not to be sincere in Religion? 15 Hath your Minister taken vpon him, to appoint any publique or priuate Fasts, Prophesies, or exercises, not approued by Law, or pub∣like authority, or hath vsed to méete in any priuate house or place, with any person or persons, there to consult how to impeach or depraue the book of common prayer, or the Doctrine or Discipline of the Church of Eng∣land: If yea, then you shall present them all? 16 Hath your Minister stated the publication of any excommuni∣cations or suspitions, or doth he euery halfe yeare denounce in his Pa∣rish-church, all such of his Parish as are excommunicated, and perseuer therein without seeking to be absolued, or doth he wittingly and willing∣ly kéep company with such as are excommunicate: And hath he admitted into your Church, any person excommunicate, without a Certificate of his absolution from the Ordinary, or other competent Iudge? 17 Doth your Minister carefully looke to the reléefe of the poore, and from time to time call vpon his Parishioners to giue somewhat, as they can spare, to godlie and charitable vses, especially when they make their Testaments? 18 Whether your Minister or any, hauing taken holy orders, be∣ing now silenced or suspended, or any other person of your knowledge, or as you haue heard, hold any conuenticles, or doth preach in any place, or vse any other forme of Diuine seruice then is appointed in the Booke of Common praier: If yea, then you are to present their names, and with whom? 19 Whether is your Curate licensed to serue, by the Bishop of this Diocesse, or by any other, and by whom? 20 Doth your Minister vse such decency and comelinesse in his ap∣parrell, as by the 47. Cannon is enioyned: and is he of sober behauiour, and one that doth not vse such bodily labour, as is not séemely for his sun∣tion and calling? 21 Is your Minister noted or defamed, to haue obtained his Beni∣fice or his orders, by Symony, or any other way defamed, to be Symo∣niacall
person, or any way noted to bee a Schismaticke, or scismaticallie affected or reputed to be an incontinent person, or doth table or lodge any such in his house: or is he a frequenter of Tauernes, Innes, or Ale-hou∣ses, or any place suspected for ill rule: Or is he a common Drunkard, a common Gamster, or player at Dice, a Swearer, or one that applyeth himselfe not at his study, or is otherwise offensiue and scandalous to his function or Ministry? 22 Doth your Preacher or Lecturer read Diuine seruice, and Mi∣nister the Sacraments twice a yeare at least in his own person, according to the Cannons? Schoole-Maisters. 23 DOth any in your Parish take vpon him to teach Schoole, with∣out License of the Ordinary, and is he conformable to the Reli∣gion now established? And doth he bring his Schollers to the Church, to heare Diuine seruice, and Sermons? And doth he instruct his Shol∣lers in the groundes of the Religion now established in this Church of England, and is he carefall and diligent to benefit his Schollers in lear∣ning? Parish Clearkes and Sextons. 24 HAue you a fit Parish Clark, aged twenty yeares at least, of ho∣nest conuersation, able to read and write? whether are his and the Sextons wages paid without fraud, according to the ancient custome of your Parish: if not, then by whom are they so defrauded or denyed? By whom are they chosen? And whether the said Clarke be approued by the Ordinary? And hath he taken an Oath, as in such cases is fit and re∣quired: And is he diligent in his office, and seruiceable to the Minister, and doth he take vpon him to meddle with any thing aboue his Office: as Churching of Women, burying the dead, or such like? 25 Doth your Clarke or Sexton kéepe the Church cleaue, the doores locked? Is any thing lost or spoyled in the Church, through his default? doth he suffer any vnseasonable ringing, or any prophane exercise in your Church? Or doth he (when any is passing out of this life) neglect to tole a Bell, hauing notice thereof. Concerning the Parishoners. 1 VVHether any of your Parishoners, béeing sixtéene yeares of age or vpwards, or others lodging or commonly resorting to any House within your Parish, do wilullie absent themselues from your Parish-church, vpon Sondaies or Holidaies at Morning and Euening Prayers? Or who come late to Church, and depart from church, before
ruice be done vpon the said daies? Or who doe not reuerently behaue emselues during the time of Diuine Seruice, deuoutly knéeling, when e generall confession of sinnes, the Letany, the ten Commandements, and all Prayers and Collects are read, and vsing all due and lowly reue∣nce, when the blessed name of the Lord Iesus Christ is mentioned, and tanding vp when the Articles of the Beleefe are read; or who doe couer heir heads in the Church during the time of Diuine seruice, vnlesse it be a case of necessity, in which case they may weare a Night-cap or coye? Or who doe giue themselues to babling, talking, or walking, and are ot attentiue to heare the word preached, or read; or reading, or praying, ring the time aforesaid? Whether any of your Parish being of sixtéen yeares of age or vpwards, doe not receiue the holie communion in your hurch thrice euery yeare; whereof once at Easter, and whether they e not deuoutly kneele at the receiuing thereof? 2 Whether any of your Parishioners, being admonished thereof, e not send their Children, Seruants, and Apprentizes, to the Minister,  be catechized vppon such Sondaies and Holidaies as are appointed? Or whether any of them doe refuse to come; or if they come, refuse to ne those instructions set forth in the Booke of common prayer? 3 Whether any of your parish doe entertaine within their house, y soiourner, common guests or other persons, who refuse to frequent iuine seruice or receiue the holie communion, as aforesaide? present eir names, their qualities, or conditions. 4 What Recusant Papists are there in your parish? present their nes, qualities, or conditions? whether kéepe they any Schoolemaister  their house, which commeth not to church to heare Diuine seruice and trine the Communion? What is his Name, and how long hath hée ght there, or else-where? 5 Whether any of the said popish Recusants, doe labour to seduce  withdraw others from the Religion now established? Or instruct  Families or children in popish Religion: or refuse to entertain any, cially in place of greatest seruice, or trust, but such as concurre with  in their papistry? 6 How long haue the said Popish Recusants abstained from diuine uice, or from the communion, as aforesaid? 7 Is there any in your parish that retaine vndefaced, or sell, vtter,  verse, any popish Bookes or writings, or any Bookes, Libels, or ings of any Secturies, touching the Religion, State, or Gouern∣nt Ecclesiasticall of this Kingdome of England, or kéepe any Orna∣ments
of superstition vncancelled or defaced? 8 Whether haue you any in your Parish, which héeretofore being Popish Recusants or Sectuaries, haue since reformed themselues, and come to Church to heare Diuine Seruice, and receiue the Sacraments: If yea, then who they are? And how long since haue they so reformed themselues? And whether they still remaine and abide in that conformi∣tie? 9 Is there any in your Parish that refuse to haue their Children Baptized, or themselues to receiue the Communion at the hands of your Minister, taking exception against him, and what causes or exceptions doe they alledge; or haue any married Wiues refused to come to church, according to the Booke of common Prayer, to giue God thankes after their Child-birth, for their safe deliuerance? And whether doe any of, or in your Parish, refuse to haue their children Baptized in your parish-church, according to the forme prescribed in the Booke of common Pray∣er? 10 Whether any of your Parish hauing a Preacher to their parson, Vicar, or Curate, doe absent themselues from his Sermons, and resort to other places to heare other Preachers? Or whether any of your parish doe communicate or baptize their Children in any other parish? 11 What persons within your parish, for any offence, contumacy, or crime, of Ecclesiasticall Conusance do stand excommunicate? present their names, and for what cause they are excommunicated, and how long they haue so stood, and what parson or persons doe wittingly and vsualli keepe them company? 12 Whether any, not being in orders, doe execute any priestlie o ministeriall office, in your Church, Chappell, or Church-yard, and wha be their names? 13 Whether any in your parish, that hauing héeretofore taken vp∣on him the order of Priest-hood or Deacon, hath since relinguished th same, and liues a Lay-man, neglecting his vocation? 14 Haue any person in your Parish, quarrelled, or stricken, or v¦sed any violence to your Minister, or haue strucken or quarrelled with a¦ny other person within your Church or Church-yard, or demeaned him selfe disorderedly in the Church, by filthy or prophane talke, or any othe leud or immodest behauiour? Or haue disturbed the Minister in time o Diuine seruice or Sermon, or haue libelled or spoken slanderous worde against your Minister, to the scandall of his vocation, or diffamed an of his Neighbours, touching any crime o Ecclesiasticall conusance?
15 Whether any of, or in your parish, without consent of the Or∣dinary, or other lawfull authority, haue caused any to doe pennance, or  be censured or punished for any matter of Ecclesiasticall conusance, by any Vestry meetings, or otherwise by their own authoritie? Or haue ta∣en any Money or commutation for the same? Present their names that ue done it? And who haue beene so punished? In what manner, and vpon what cause? 16 Whether any person in your parish, doe exercise any Trade or bour, buy, or sell, or keepe open Shoppes or Ware-houses vppon any Sunday or Holliday, by themselues, their Seruants, or Apprentizes, r haue otherwise prophaned the said daies, contrary to the orders of the hurch of England? And whether there bée any Inne-kéepers, Ale-house-kéepers, Victulers, or other persons, that permit any persons in their Houses, to eate, drinke, or play, during the time of Diuine Ser∣uice or Sermon, or reading the Homilies in the forenoone or afternoone, pon those daies? 17 Whether the fift day of August, and the fift day of Nouem∣ber, beacute;e kept holie, and thanksgiuing made to God, for his Maiesties and this States happy deliueraunce, according to the ordinance in that be∣halfe? 18 Whether any of your parish, hold or frequent any conuenti∣cles or priuate congregations, or make or maintaine any constitutions, agréed vppon in any such assemblies? Or any that doe write, or pub∣liquelie or priuately speake against the Booke of common praier, or any hing therein contained, or against any of the Articles of Religion agréed vpon, in Anno 1562. or against the Kinges Supremacy in causes Ec∣clesiasticall, or against the Oath of Supremacy, or of Alleagiance, as pretending the same to be vnlawfull, and not warrantable by the word of God? Or against any of the Rites or ceremonies of the Church of England now established? Or against the gouernment of the church of England, vnder the Kinges most excellent Maiestie, by Arch-Bishops, Byshoppes, Deanes, Arch-Deacons, and other Officers of the same: affirming, that the same is repugnant to the Word of God, and that the saide Ecclesiasticall Officers, are not lawfully ordained? Or whe∣ther there be any Authours, Maintainours, or Fauourers of Heresie or Scisme, or that be suspected to be Annabaptists, Libertines, Brownists, of the Familie of Loue, or of any other Heresie or Scisme? present their mes?
19 Whether any in your Parish haue married within the degrées by Law prohibited, or any couple in your Parish being lawfully married: liue apart one from the other, without due separation of the Law, or any that haue beene diuorced, which keepe company with any other at Bed and at Boord, and when and where were they married? Phisitions, Surgeons, and Mid-wiues. 20 HOw many Phisitions, Chirurgions, or Mid-wiues, haue you in your parish? How long haue they vsed their seuerall science: or offices, and by what authority? And how haue they demeaned them selues therein, and of what skill are they accounted to be in their profes∣sion? 21 Whether do any persons administer the goods of the dead with∣out lawfull authority, or suppresse the last will of the dead? Or are there in your parish, any Wils not yet prooued, or goods of the dead (dying intestate) left vnadministred? By authority in that behale, you shal not faile to present the Executors, and all others faulty therein; and also how many persons beeing possessed of any Goods and Chattels, haue dyed w thin your parish, since the xvij. day of Aprill 1613. 22 Whether any with-hold the stocke of the Church, or any goods, or other thinges, giuen to good and charitable vses. 23 Whether your Hospitals and Almes-houses, and other such hou∣ses and Corporations, founded to good and charitable vses; and the lands, possessions, and goods of the same, be ordered and disposed of as they should be? And doe the Maisters, Gouernours, Fellowes, and o∣thers of the said Houses and Corporations, behaue and demeane them∣selues, according to the godlie Ordinances and Statutes of their seueral Foundations? 24 Whether haue you any in your Parish to your knowledge, or by common fame or report, which haue committed, Adultry, Fornicati∣on, or Incest; or any which haue impudentlie bragged or boasted, that he or she haue liued incontinently with any person or persons whatsoe∣uer: or any that hath attempted the chastity of any woman or sollicited any Woman to haue the carnall knowledge of her bodie, or which are commonly reputed to be common Drunkards, Blasphemers of Gods holy Name; common Swearers, common Slanderers of their Neigh∣bours, and owers of discord, filthy and lasciuious Talkers, Vsurers, scmonicall persons, Bawds, or Harborers of Women with Childe, which be vnmarried, or conueying or suffering them to goe away before they haue made satisfaction to the Congregation, or any that hauing
heretofore béene presented, or suspected of any the foresaid crimes, haue or that cause departed your Parish, and are now returned againe? Or any which haue vsed any inchantments, sorceries, incantations, or witch asts, which are not made fellony by the statutes of this Realme, or any which haue committed any periury in any Ecclesiasticall Court, in an Ecclesiasticall cause, or which haue committed any lorgerie, punishable by the Ecclesiasticall Lawes, and the procurors and abettors of the saide fences: You shall truely present the names of all, and singuler the said Offendors, and with whom they haue committed the saide offences, in ase they haue not beene publikely punnished to your knowledge for the me crimes? Touhing the Church-wardens and Side-men. VVHether you and the Church-wardens, Quest-men, or Side-men, from time to time, doe, and haue done their diligences,  not suffering any role person to abide eyther in the Church-yard, or Church-porch, in Seruice or Sermon time, but causing them either to me into the Church to heare Diuine Seruice, or to depart, and not di∣urbe such as be hearers there? And whether haue they, and do you di∣gentlie see the Parishioners duely resort to the Church euery Sundaie and Holidaie, and there to remaine during Diuine seruice and sermon? nd whether you or your predecessors, Churchwardens there, suffer any places, Feasts, Drinkings or any other prophane vsages, to be kept in ur Church, Chappeil, or Church-yards, or haue suffered to your and ir vttermost power and indeuour, any person or persons, to bée tip∣ng or drinking in any Inne or Victuling House in your Parish, du∣g the time of Diuine Seruice or Sermon, on Sundaies and Holie∣ies? 2 Whether, and how often haue you admitted any to Preach thin your Church or chappell, which was not sufficientlie licensed? nd whether you, together with your Minister, haue not taken diligent e and care, that euery of your Parishioners, being of sixteene yeares ge or vpwards haue receiued thrice euery yeare, as aforesaide; and  that no stranger haue vsually come to your church, from their owne ish-church? 3 Whether haue there béene prouided against euerie communion, sufficient quantity of fine Wh te Bread, and of good and wholesome me for the Communicants that shall receiu? And whether that wine brought in a cleane and swéete standing Pot of Pewter, or of other r Mettall?
4 Whether were you chosen by the consent of the Minister and the parishioners? And haue the late Churchwardens giuen vp a iust account for their time, and deliuered to their Successors the Money, and other things belonging to the Church, which was in their hands? And are the Almes of the Church faithfully distributed to the vse of the poore? Concerning Ecclesiasticall Magistrates and Officers. 1 VVHether doe you know or haue heard of any payment, compo∣sition or agreement, to, or with any Ecclesiastical Magistrate, Iudge, or Officer, for winking at, or sparing to punish any person for any offence of Ecclesiasticall Conusance, or for suppressing or concealing of any excommunication, or any other Ecclesiasticall Censure, of, or a∣gainst any Recusant, or any other offender in the cases aforesaid? what summe of Money, or other consideration hath béene receiued or promised, by, or to any of them, in that respect, by whom, and with whom? 2 Hath any person within your parish, paide or promised any sum of Money or other reward, for comutation of pennance for any crime of Ecclesiasticall Conusance? If so, then with whom? When, and for what, and how hath the same beene imployed? 3 Are your Ecclesiasticall Iudges and their substitutes Maisters of Artes, or Batchellors of the Lawes at the least, learned and practised in the Ciuill and Ecclesiasticall Lawes: Men of good Life and Fame, zea∣lously affected in Religiō, and iust and vpright in executing their offices? Haue they heard any matter of office priuately in their Chambers, with∣out their sworne Registers, or their Deputies presence? 4 Do you know, or haue you heard, that any Ecclesiasticall Iudge, Off cer, or Minister, hath receiued or taken any extraordinary Fées, or otheir rewards or promises, by any waies or meanes, directly or indirect∣lie, of any person or persons whatsoeuer, either for the graunting of the administration of the Goods and Chattels of those that haue died inte∣state, to one before another, or for allotting of larger portions of the goods and Chattels of those who haue died intestate, to one more then to ano∣ther: or for allowing large and vnreasonable accounts, made by Execu∣tors or Administrators: or for giuing them Quietus est, or discharges without Inuentory or account, to defraude Creditors, Legataries, o those who are to haue portions. And what summes of Money doe you know, or haue you heard, that any Ecclesiasticall Iudge or Officer hath taken out of the state of any dying intestate, vpon pretence to bestow th same, in pios vsus: And how haue the same béene bestowed? 5 Hath any Ecclesiasticall Magistrate, Iudge, Officer, or any othe
exercising Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction within this your Dioces; or any Ad∣uocate, Register, Procter, Clarkes, Apparators, or other Minister be∣longing to the same Ecclesiasticall Courts, exacted or taken by any waies or meanes, directly or indirectly, extraordinary or greater Fées then are ue and accustomed? And whether is there a Table for the rates of all fées, set vp in their seueral Courts and Offices? and whether haue they sent or suffered any Processe to go out of the Ecclesiasticall Courts other∣wise then by Law they ought? Or haue they taken vpon them the office if Informers of Promoters to the said Courts, or any other way abused themselues in their Offices, contrary to the Law and Cannons in that behalfe prouided? 5 What number of Apparators hath euery seuerall Iudge Ecclesiasti∣call? And wherein, and in what manner is the Country ouerburthened by them? And wherein haue they caused or summoned any to appeare in the said Courts, without a presentment or Citation first had? Or whe∣ther haue they threatned any to prosecute them in the said Courts, if they would not giue them some rewards, and what bribes in that behalfe haue they taken? If you know of any other default or crime of Ecclesiasticall Conu∣sence, you are to present the same by vertue of your Oaths? The Minister of euery Parish, may, and ought to ioyne in present∣ent with the Church-wardens and Side-men, and if they will not pre∣sent, the Minister may and ought himselfe, present the defaultes and mines aforesaid: and there must be seueral presentments made to euery seuerall article: and the Minister, Church-wardens and Sworne-men, are to méete and conferre about the said presentments, and answering of euery of the aforesaid Articles. FINIS.
