10684 S114626 99849851 15023
Fancies Ague-fittes, Or Beauties Nettle-bed: Wherein, one nightes lodging, will cost nine monethes Nettling. Handled in sixe Discourses, pithie, pleasing, and profitable. Patere, aut abstine. LONDON, Printed by G. Simson for William Iones, dwelling at Holborne conduit, at the signe of the Gunne. 1599.
To the right worshipfull Master William Basset Esquire, one of her Maiesties Iustices of the peace, in both the Counties of Derbie and Stafford, Likewise, to the most vertou Gen∣tlewoman his wife: all health and happinesse most hartily wished. DEbtes, of what antiquitye soe∣uer, are not by delay dischar∣ged, neither promises, by long protracti∣on, impeached from performance. How iustly both these (right worshipfull) appertaine to me, though happilie out of date in your too long expectation: I may be sory for no sooner compassing, and you in fauour wil I hope receiue what comes at last, excusing all errors with
the common addage, better late then neuer. When your worship was high sheriffe of Stafford-shire, as some-way to expresse thankfulnesse, for the fa∣uours then founde, I promised you, that in such forte as this I would ere∣long salute ye. But being hindred by a long sicknesse, as also conuenient meanes to discharge my promise: I could neuer till this instant be so for∣tunate, as to greete you with any thing woorthie your viwe, or sufficient to plead the least parte of performance. And though my conceite heerof may be greate, yet how you shall thinke therof may well be doubted, because oppinions are as varyous, as mens hu∣mours are diuers: yet the sound be∣leefe I haue in your euer-affable na∣ture, makes mee hope, that the meannes of my gift, shall be shaddow∣ed
with the intire depth of great good will, and what wantes in this, in some other heerafter will be better suppli∣ed. Nor seek I to be free from my former bond of promise, by this sillie trifle, in respect of so great deseruing: but ra∣ther that your worship would take this onward, to arme ye with some hope of attayning to the rest, and that withal to expresse, I am willing to con∣tinue yours in dutie, till the very vt∣termost be discharged. Both this, my selfe and what else remaynes in me, I intreat your wor∣ship kindely to conster on, for you shal finde them readie on the least oc∣casion to vse them. In meane while, praying for all happie blessings to at∣tend and follow you, as also the most vertuous Gentle-woman your wife, whom heauen enritch with blessed
sight of her hopes ioy: I humbly commend ye both to his protection, who hath hitherto had care of you, and will euermore comfort you.
The Argument of each seuerall discourse. Of Beautie. Dis. 1. Of Loue. Dis. 2. Of the meanes to compasse fauour and acceptaunce. Dis. 3. Of the considerations of Loue Dis. 4. Of Iealosie. Dis. 5. Of the passions of Looue. Dis. 6.
Of Beautie. The first discourse. I Knowe not if among those benefits bestow∣ed vppon the body, beauty deserue to haue any such account made of it, as we do, of halth, agilitie, strength, and disposition: because Beautie is not any thing at all felt by the person indued there with, neyther serues but to such as see it, and to them whom it giueth delight. Now to know, if by Beautie there doth ensue any commoditie, the question is proble∣maticall, and may be debated as for the af∣firmatiue, so likewise for the negatiue, for it appeares, that nature bestowing beau∣tie on any, did it to make them beloued, and that which possesseth the hartes of men, may be good right be termed migh∣tie, and drawes all sortes of commodities to it, not hauing neede of any thing in
the protection of others. Briefely, it is well knowen, what good those famous courtezanes got by it, as Flora, Layis, Lamia and their like, moreouer, it is necessarie we should remember, that Beautie is such a gift of nature, as all the gold in the world cannot giue vs the like; for eloquence, science, and gentilitie, are attayned only by studie and diligence. If then no small estimation be to be made of the fauoure, good grace, and loue of men; we must confesse Beautie to be a be∣nefit, at least the cause thereof, in winning and procuring vs such frendes. But when (on the other side) I consider, that those frendes which are followers of Beautie, be rather louers of their owne pleasures and voluptuousnes, so that they loue not indeede the beautifull body, but better may be called enemies, yea traitours to the honor and good renowne of Beautie, then any true freendes or well willers: I rest in my former oppinion, and dare not repute beautie to be a benefit.
VVhen likewise I call auncient histo∣ries to memorie, I finde how hurtful beau∣tie was to Lucretia, albeit she was most chast and vertuous, to modest Susanna, al∣so, and discreet Penelope, mirrours and ex∣amples of perfect loyaltie: both they and an infinite number of their like, had bene most happie, if their beauties had not beene so much coueted and desired. In like manner I consider, that such as are followers of beautie, haue no respect but of their owne passions, and no care at all of beauties reputation, because if beau∣tie in some sorte doth bring commonditie to such as are adorned therewith, as per∣haps to commaund mens goodes at their pleasure: yet can they not for all that ouer∣rule their harts and willes, for many times they giue their goods away to enioy their pleasure, and they that yeeld thereto, make sale both of their bodies and honor, sub∣mitting themselues to base prostitution onely for monye. Such women therefore cannot iustly terme themselues mistresses
when to haue a little power of their goods, they make their owne persons as seruantes to me, so for the bare title of Lady of their money, they make men Lords of their affections, nay, of them selues so much as may be. We may now see if beauty be a benefit to such as delight ther∣in, when it cannot be in her that is indued therewith, because she can neyther feele or see it any way, and in trueth, I may here speake as Epicurus did of pleasures, when one demaunded of him, whether pleasure were a benefit or no, and he thereto re∣turned this answere; that he hath but little wit, who when his finger is in the fyre, wil aske of other if he feele payne or no, whe∣ther the fire be hot, and Ice cold: meaning thereby, if a delight be pleasing to a mans own self, why should he question whether it be a benefit or no, since himselfe both feeles and makes experiment thereof. In like manner I say, that he who hath a fayre wife, knowes well if he haue delight or pleasure, for were not beautie expected
and desired, it would not be so generally sought and purchased, which makes mee to coniecture, that a man hauing a fayre wife or friend, esteemes beautie for a be∣nefit and cheifest pleasure, and therefore Plato giues no other definition of loue, but that it is a desire of beautie, as very am∣ply he deliuereth in his dialogues called Phoedrus. For this matter therfore, the testemo∣nies of so many Poets shall suffise mee, who expresse in their writings, that gene∣rally beautie hath beene magnified, exal∣ted and honoured, as a great gift of God, and, but that I finde beautie to be enui∣ronned with many perillous discommo∣dities, I should consent with them in opi∣nion. But I considder that which many great personages haue done before me, of whom I could alledge authorities most notable, which might serue to satissie the greatest loubters; only I wil rehearse the reason that hath moned them to such say∣ing, and in declaring the reason, none can
contradict me, but that the proofe is cleare and apparant. For if I should auouch but the alegation of Poets, it myght the be sayde, that they speake according to their passions, and women might refect them as their aduersaries and enemies to their sex, whereas if I show the grounded reason themselues may then receiue blame in not giuing credit thereto, or els they dare not tearme themselues reasonable when they will giue no place to reason. Fyrst then I say, that beautie hath this discommoditie, it is coueted by euery one, it is most hard to be kept and defended, being a thing sought after by so many per∣sons, (as it were) continually besieged. For as a garden that is replenished with all faire flowers and fruites, or a treasurie stored with riches most precious, is in dayly dan∣ger, and needeth especiall guardance: e∣uen such and no otherwise is the beautie of women. This is the first reason alledged by Po∣ets, whereto they further adde, that beauty
begetteth in women great pride and o∣uet-weening, as Ouid in this verse testefi∣erh. Fastus inest pulcris, sequiturque superbi formam. That is. Beautie makes women to bee wonderous proude. In beeing then so proud and loftie min∣ded, they imagine that their beautie should serue them to some end or purpose, and say, that beautie had not bene giuen them, but both they must and ought to make some vse of it. And as we note one loue to be∣get another, so do we likewise behold, that a woman often solicited if she be not ver∣tuous, and strong in resistance, she is in dan∣ger to make shipwracke of her beautie, by those entisings which her beauty procured. Perhappes some will denie, that wo∣men are subiect to loue any other then their husbandes, but then they must confesse
withal that they are apt therein to be sus∣pected, especially if they be indued with admirable beautie, yea many tymes it comes so to passe, that such beautie hath bene verie hurtfull to their husbands, and extended to the losse of their liues. The example of Vrias may serue, the husband to Bersaba; but if we shall neede any more allegations, it is too well knowen how da∣mageable Hellens beautie was to her hus∣band Menelaus, to Paris, and Deiphoebus, who lost their liues, and made the earth drunke with effusion of their blood. It is likewise as euident, that which is written of Abraham, who had a fayre wife named Sara, and because he went with her into Aegypt, he sayd; thou art fayre, and if it be knowen that I am thy husband, I shall be slayne, that they may enioy thee, it will be best therefore to call me thy brother. Afterwarde, when Abimelech sawe her, Abraham was constray∣ned to denye he was her husband. The historie of Gyges and Candaulus is as nota∣ble
with infinite others that might be re∣hearsed. All which notwithstanding, I will not say as some haue doone. Cumque pudicitia rara est concordia forma. Beautie with chastitie is sildome found. For I can proue them liers by number∣lesse examples, of very beautifull and ver∣tuous Ladies, that haue and yet liue in ho∣nor to this day amongst vs, and so shall do for euer, to their confusion, who haue so shamefully slaundred them. But for confirmation of my former speeches, that womens beauties is dange∣rous to their husbandes, I will not let slip in silence, what wise Bias, a man so much re∣nowned spake, saying: Beautie much mar∣ked and gazed at, is no assurance to the husband, for though vertue be conioy∣ned therewith, yet is the man in euident danger, wherefore, the very wisest haue beene of this opinion, that such beautie as is most requisite in women, is to be indif∣ferently fayre, or as we say in Latine, Stata
forma, aut vxoria forma. They adde more∣ouer, since beautie is a thing which decay∣eth and weareth old by time, that it is more yrkesome to him, who hath seene his wife beautiful, to note her now depriued there of, and dispoiled of that flower, euen as the trees of their leaues in winter. In like manner can I assure ye, that not∣withstanding the declaration of such as are not pursued and followed, but by the im∣modest and shamelesse: yet beautie is ne∣uer alone, but often tymes accompanied with many good graces, and my reason is, that we vsually shewe our selues to others, as they declare themselues towardes vs, and the beautifull beeing imbrased, and wel wished by all: shewes themselues like∣wise reciprocally ssweece, curteous, and af∣fable to all. But perhappes you will al∣ledge some faults vnto me, as making them selues proude, when they heare one praise or reprite them to be fayre. Such haue no desert to hold place with honorable dames, because the more vertue is extolled, the
more humble it makes the person endued therewith. I wall say, as an anncient and great perso∣nage councelled young Ladies in his time, to veiw themselues diuers times in a glasse, to the end (quoth he) that finding them∣selues fayre, they should endeauour to be as beautifull in their mindes, shaming that their bodies which are vile and cor∣ruptible, should be more goodly then their soules, which are deuine and immortall. In like case, if they descerne themselues to be foule and mishapen, they should labour to recompence that difformitie by their good mindes, and such goodly graces as best beseemeth them. Such ought to be the dayly practise of those which are fayre, because it seemes a thing very odious, to see a beautifull body not adorned with good graces and ver∣tues, which want procureth great greife in many beholders, pittying so fayre a crea∣ture should be in such sorte blemished, where others are quite contrarie, that de∣serue
serue lesse loking on. Therfore, when such shall request fauour at mens handes, well may they in scorne and derision be answe∣red, that their owne imperfections makes them not regarded, and so they continue chaste, because none cares for them. It is the nature of a woman, the more one importunes her, the lesse she regardes what she would gladliest haue, which makes them to obserue it as a general rule, to despise them most that chiefest sue to them: for the loue which they beare to them selues, hinders all loue els they should bestowe on others, then which there can be nothing more contrarie to loue, name∣ly this Philaftia, selfe loue, or vayne opini∣nion of our selues. But I mind not here to to alledge those inconueniences, because the argument would haue but a bad foun∣dation, only I say, that if a wife addict her selfe to loue any one, it is not in regard that her selfe is fayre, but because she es∣teems him faire whom she loues, for we see the hard fauored to be as amorous, & stand
vpon termes to be intreated, as they that are fayrest, and best may brag of beautie. Wherfore it is a thing most certaine, that nothing els but the fayre forme of the countenaunce, the beautifull cullour and pleasing looks of yong personages, such as are in the only flower of their age: is that which doth attract affection, set open the windowes of good opinion, and by little and little kindles the fire, which afterwarde breakes into loues cheifest flame. Now many tymes it happens, that di∣uers (through the folly of their parentes) striuing to quench this affection and pas∣sion, by force and without reason, do no∣thing els aduantage themselues thereby: but growe into more trouble, as conten∣ding with smooke, whereas if they would giue them head or libertie, before such wretches as are lewdest and most voluptu∣ous, they would ouer throw them in their owne naughtinesse. Hereby may we then perceiue, that where∣as
loue should make such personages gen: tle kinde and affable, to them which fre∣quent their companie, it turnes to the con∣trarie, making them melancholique, fro∣ward and out of all order. Then let vs not maruaile, why our elders described loue to be inconstant and variable, or like to the sunne, which dayly seemes to quench it selfe, and yet euery morning renewes his light agayne: for this is my conceite of loue, that as it is mortall and perishable, so it cannot be constant in one and the selfe same kinde. But to come to the conclusion of that be∣fore rehearsed, concerning Beautie, I will conclude with Aristotle, that of two vertu∣ous women, the one beeing fayre, and the other hard fauoured she which surpasseth the other in beautie, shall be more pray∣sed and esteemed then the other can be. And the like may be sayd of two perso∣nages vertuous and wise, the one beeing rich, the other poore: most certayne is it, that the rich man shall be in more account
then the poore, because the one will be more contented then the other. But if beautie or riches shall necessarily bring their vices with them, then I wil conclude otherwise. Orif any one will obiect vn∣to mee, that he hath occasion of offen∣ding, eyther by beautie or riches: then wil I like wise answere him, that he hath the more neede of vertue to make resistance.
Of Loue. The second discourse. LOue hath bene of all men so extolled & esteemed, that antiquitie made a god of it, as being the most forcible passion in vs, to wit, the only cause of all our actions. It was not then without reason, that they of elder time did so worthily celebrate the same, and that not onely men subiected themselues thereto, but the Gods likewise were vnder loues controlement. And not to vse but this argument one∣ly, to shewe how it is combined with our sences, and that it is the efficient cause of whatsoeuer we do: in mine oppinion may be deemed sufficient in this case. All our actions are to some end or pur∣pose, as Aristotle expresseth, to some ap∣parant good; why then you will confesse, that each one is amorous and desirous of
that end, purpose and apparant good, then consequently whatsoeuer is doone, is done for loue: for eche man looues and desires that which is his, because he thinks it good, profitable, and needfull for him, as the couetous man, he is amorous of his riches, the enuious, of his reuenge, the inconti∣nent, of his beastly pleasure, the vertuous: of his vertues, and consequently, each man doth frame and leuell all his endeuours, to the end of pleasing him selfe, which ti∣tle or more Plato giueth vnto it. I will not here trouble my selfe in collec∣ting anthorities from our elders, who haue so highly exalted the powre of loue, only I must say, that there is no passion in vs more strong and piercing, as may be discer∣ned in them that affect and loue honor who dare boldely oppose their liues agaynst the cannons mouth, as valiant enemies and dispisers of death: others for the looue of their Mistresses, to doo such things as else were impossible, euen desperate hazard of their goods and liues
Now herein make I no iote of diffe∣rence, betweene the loue which a man beares to a woman, and the loue he caries to any goodly thing: for I stand vpon those tearmes of definition, which Plato himselfe hath giuen to loue, namely, that it is a de∣sire to enioy whatsoeuer is beautifull. For I call that beautie, which a man thinkes to be good, and (as he in the beginning of his Ethicques calles it) the apparant good, which is the end of al our actions. Likwise Plato, speaking of this beautie disputes it ingenerall, as the beauty of a vertuous man is nothing els but his vertue: which (sayth Cicero) if it appeare to the eyes of men, we may easily presume, how louely it makes him to them that beholdes it. But to particularize this matter, we will speak of the loue of man toward a womā, and then must we say in trueth, that it is a thing so naturall, as there is no neede of other proofe, seeing by common sence we vnderstand & call that naturall, which by nature is as vsual to beasts as men.
And therefore let me say of him that feeles not this passion, as a Courtezane did of one which made loue to her, who shewed himselfe so cold and dull in his amorous blandishmentes: that though (quoth she) I haue moued many men, by much lesse kindnesse then I haue shew∣en to thee, yet I finde all this fauour lost which hath beene bestowed on thee, be∣cause thou appearest to be no man, but ra∣ther a hard and insensible stone. And verily the phisitions doe shew by the anotamie of our bodies, that a man being composed of flesh, blood, and his o∣ther partes, must necessarily be subiect to the humour wherewith he is borne: as he is to yeeld to hunger, thirst and other appe∣tites, which pertake with the disposition of our blood. Plato speaking of Hermaphro∣ditus, that is both man and woman, sayth, that man at the first was made both male and female, which semes to haue some cor∣respondence with others holding the same opiniō. But man (saith he sone after being
deuided into male and female, hath euer since had the appetite of reoyning & cou∣mting himselfe togeather agayne, (as we discerne by desire of kissing imbrasing, & such like,) as he was at the first created. But Aristotle telles vs an other reason, which seemes more true and likely, be∣cause the vnion whereof Plato speakes, is not to be so agayne conioyned, neyther can man likewise haue any hope thereof. He sayth, that for the conseruation of ey∣ther sex and kinde nature hath giuen a de∣sire of ingendring, as wel by men as beasts. Hereof may we say, as Cicero doth in his booke of olde age: that man sowes, plantes, grafts, buildes, leaues his bookes for his posteritie, not bauing any thing in∣citing him hereto, but that nature would haue all thinges preserued in the kinde, wherein first of al she brought it into the worlde. And this is an influence as common to beastes as men, issuing from the proui∣dence of nature, as hunger and thrist is gi∣uen
to man as well as beastes, to the end he should maintayne his body, which takes alteration by euapored norishment, and desireth continuall: new fomentati∣on, and so hunger mstructeth man when is meete time to feede himselfe. But leaue we this loue or indignation naturall, which rather is beastly then hu∣mane, and let vs speake of that loue, which addresseth it selfe to the minde, when a man loues a fayre person, wise and of good grace. And to speake ingenerally of beautie, it ought to be as well vnderstood of the minde as the bodie: for one is a∣morous of the minde, to acknowledge in the other person, somewhat or other a∣greeing with our nature, such as is liking and agreeable with vs Now to know what ioy one minde hath of an other, we may answere, that as one bodie is glad of an o∣ther bodie, so one minde of an other, so the fruition & delight is in the same man∣ner simpathized. Then he that loueth, de∣sires that the thoughts of his mind, may v∣nite
& ioyne themselues with the thoughts of the person beloued, and as the body of the one receiues the others bodie in cor∣porall pleasure, so the minde might meete with another minde, and giue it selfe ther∣to, as in communication of hartes, so of willes, seruing one anothers vse, and taking on eyther part a mutuall concord in de∣sire, and no greater delight can be spoken of, then when one findes himselfe as well beloued, as he doth loue. This may we fur∣ther discerne, in that God desireth our loue of vs, vrging it to be giuen with all our hart, by reason (on his behalfe) he loues vs infinitely: we must then confesse, that pleasure goes before loue, which is a de∣light conceiued in the minde, as he which desires the pleasure of a woman, apprehen∣deth in his mind and imagination the de∣light he is to moy, and so sometymes, as if he had performed it, is he pleased & ful∣ly satisfied, which is the thing that we call to loue. In like manner, he that loues a vertuous
body, desires to be in her good grace, and so reciprocally to be beloued. Behold then wherin the benefit of loue cōsisteth, nor cā any assigne other cause of the good which is felt by delight of the mind, then that we find of our selues, which makes euery man well borne, desire to be reputed, esteemed & loued of euery one, especially thē whō he loueth & reuerenceth, as of his prince, of honorable gentlemen, and al his other wel willers beside. Neuerthelesse, because it happeneth often times, that when one speakes of loue, we rather vnerstand the loue which a man beares to a woman, then that which one man caries to another: so may I well saye, and that by good right, a man loues a woman more then he can doe any man whatsoeuer, for there is no one but will confesse, that two cords or strings binde and hold more strongly then one can do. If then it be so, this must necessarily be likewise graunted, that man and woman beeing ioyned together in body and minde, their loue is more firme
and strict, then that of man to man can be, beeing lincked together but in minde onely. Yet will I not denie for al this, but that a stable and firme bond is found in one mans minde to another, for their ver∣tues: if then the vertues in a womā are not such, as may answere and agree with them in her husband, then doubtlesse I must confesse, that the loue betweene men is much more great, then the other of a man toward a woman. But in equallitie of vertues, I say a man loues a woman better then he can doe a man, because man is not a mind onely, nor a bodie onely, but a mind and bodie ioy∣ned togeather, and while the mariage of the minde to the bodie indureth, there is such societie betweene them, that the one suffers the others infirmitie, reioyceth and pertakes in contentment or other∣wise. It appeareth then, that the mind depen∣deth altogether on the bodie, as is playne∣ly noted, because the bodie is the organe
and instrument of the mind, and as the me∣morie of man looseth it selfe, when the vessell of the brayne is offended or abu∣sed: so likewise doth iudgement and com∣mon sence, for we see there is no diffe∣rence betweene a foole and a wise man, but the health & disposition of the braine and not of the minde, as the minde being made of one and the selfe same matter, but performing their functions by the bodies organes. So we see, that a man distempered by wine fuming vp into his brayne, becomes like a foole or a frantique man: then here∣by may we well perceiue, that there is a agreat simpathie and coniunctiō betweene the minde and the bodie, wherevpon, I conclude the loue of men toward women to be great, when the minde and bodie de∣light and meete together by coniunction. And because some will say, there is not found so great amitie betweene a brother and sister or kinsman, as with her that en∣ioyeth more prte societie: euen so the
delight is better agreeable, man being no no way participating of any thing, then by meanes of the bodie. And if we should neede to produce diuinitie, we know that God requires aswel the seruice of our bo∣dies, as of our mindes, the sacramentes are applyed to the body aswel as to the mind, and the body aswell as the minde, must participate (after this life) of good or euill in the other world, in briefe, without the body, a man were not a man, neyther could be capable of knowing any thing: which may be gathered by the dispositi∣on of our common sence, wherto all the other sences apply themselues and that by sight, hearing, and the other as helpers, the soule receiues enstruction, which sight, & hearing being taken from man, he is then no other but as a brute beast & insensible. But it is true, that I make great difference betweene the delight of loue in a beast, and the other propper in a man, for that in a beast, it goes no further then the bo∣dy, with out any more matter, and is not
moued but by nature onely to ingender, but man hath the delight of the minde and did such pleasure of the body serue to no other end, but to expresse the content∣ment of the minde, yet were it as necessa∣rie, as our speech to be an instance of our thoughtes, neyther can a man declare his good will and intents, but by the minis∣trie of the mouth, and other signes of the body. In like manner, the greatest affecti∣on is made apparant by kisses, mutuallim∣bracings, and other apt instances of the body and I dare affirme, that the man which truely loues, neuer findes the de∣light of the body so pleasing, as when he sees his Lady (on her behalse) dehuer like teshmonie of her loue to him, and that with a cheareful hart she entertaineth him, which makes a man take more pleasure in her he loueth, and by whom he is beloued agayne, then in any other whatsoeuer, be she neuer so beautifull. For (as saith one, and very well too) when a man receiues a present from a Lord, he regardeth not the gift, how faire or rich so
euer it be, as he doeth the good will and courtesie of the giuer: so God acknow∣ledgeth not our presents, neither careth for them, but our intents and good wils only. Therefore we may say, that when a man sporteth, the pleasure of the body likes him not so well, as that of the hart: for if plea∣sure be had against the good will of any, it serues not to him as anye contentment. Contrarywise, although he delighted but his body only, yet if he were assured of the others good liking, it would suffise, being loued againe as himselfe dooth loue. Moreouer, if it be granted, that the body is in such sort espoused to the minde, as be∣ing one with the other, it cannot be but an extreame paine, if they delight not one in the other: why then it would seeme most hurtfull to them, if they should be forced to abstaine frō a ioy so vehement, or abide separation thorowe constraint, not daring priuatly or publikly be seen together: who so thus offēdeth, or seeketh to force nature, cannot auoide falling into great danger.
Why then I must say, that strict and in∣tire amitie, cannot long continue between a man and woman, without the delight of the bodie, if amitie be bred of one and selfe same will, not able to endure sinister con∣traries: why then such parties shall as hard∣lie command and vanquish their passions, as they receiue good by being in one ano∣thers sight. and harme when they may not be so together, or as during not to speake but before witnesses. This is the reason, why loue is said not to continue long be∣tweene a man and woman, except it be in such as are tyed by the bands of mariage: for betweene others it cannot be, either without great danger, or without suspiti∣on and scandale, especially such secrecie and communication, as is required in loue, which makes of two hearts one, and ioy∣neth them inseperably together. As for others, because our lawe giues vs a conscience, if kindnes be had, hardly can it be durable: but betwene maried persons, because the wise haue made a vertue of
necessitie, alliaunce is more certaine, to wit, more lasting, hauing made a commu∣nion and societie together, of all fortunes whatso uer good and bad. But concerning loue, it is very hard to be demeaned with a woman, if she be not his wise or freend in delighting: because nature inuites vs to those imbracings and secrecies, which follow one another in sequence, not to be named among such persons as intend to liue chastely. And this I speake, because discoursing now of loue, I meane not amitie, which I reserue for man to man, or brother to syster, or a sonne to his mother, which cannot well name it selfe to be loue, neyther the de∣syre of beauty, distinct and seperated from amitie and good will: for in trueth, the focietie among amourous persons is such as the body is but a meane of vniting the soules, and heere vpon diuers I hisitions discoursing, haue made a communication of the complexions, taken from the braine, the heart, the lyuer, and in breefe from all
the animall partes in man, the lyfe of an insant being disposed and formed therby, which is the cause why men are heere so mooued & prouoked wheras other beasts enter as by a kinde or violence: And hence proceedeth the passions of the amourous, expressed so liuely by Poets both Greeke, Latin, Italian, and others beside auncient and moderne, especially when they haue set downe nothing, but hane evther felt or experimented the same sufficientlye in themsciues. so that it is very needfull, if a man will make resistance, to vse such ex∣tremities, as we read the most holye per∣sons did, who led their liues in the solita∣rie deserts, and heere I might alledge what they haue written, but that it is sussicient∣lye knowne already. But all this notwithstanding, I set it not downe as a generall rule, that a man cannot loue a woman but in this manner, and for the delight before rehearsed: for well might I be ashamed thereof, besyde, I should doo iniurye to infinite honest
and chaste looues. But I sav, that keeping the one and other from following has na∣ture, therein consists the paine and the me∣rit, since (as I lately spake) the most holye persons being in the wildernes, liuing on fauage rootes, punisinng their bodies with hard garments, drinking water, and slee∣ping little, but lying on sharpe stones, in breese, not admitting any remedie: yet haue they in such serte beene assaulted, as they in theyr writings haue been constrai∣ned to expresse it. Now concerning our selues, who are trained and brought vp in softe and deli∣cate manner when we haue perticuler and priuate conference with her whome we best looue, being fayre and gracious, and requiting vs with loue: if we could then ab∣staine, the glory would be found the grea∣ter, by how much the payne and resistance was difficult, checfely, when in regarde of the affection we beare our freend, we feare to vrge any thing might be vnhonorable. And heerein may the power of looue be
discerned, which making the louer forget his pleasure, defrauds his desire, to content her in al he may whom he so dearly affec∣teth. Of such loyal freends are many to be found, whose louers haue had such autho∣ritie ouer them, as, being vertuous, by per∣swasiue reason they let passe the pleasure, for the great daunger which followes and ensues thereby. His guide herein, as in all thinges else is, that the action of a man is  his election, and the election betweene two goods, ac∣cording as it is sayde, a man for his plea∣sure leaues the following of honor, which is but the minde of a cowardly souldier or Saile like house keeper, timorous to follow the renouned exercise of warre: where contrariwise, the braue Souldier, beeing iealous of his honor, beguiles him selfe of his ease, and the pleasure he takes in his house with his wife, making the hard field his bed, mountes on the ram∣partes, shuts himselfe into a towne, where he suffers extremitie of famine, makes his
body a wall agaynst the cannons batterie, and doth all this for the loue of his honor. In like sort can I say, that he which tru∣ly loueth, will abstayne from his owne de∣sire, be it but to satisfie the chast and mo∣dest inclination of his beloued. As she likewise that lookes for answerable looue to her owne, will endeuer by al meanes she can deuise, that the grace of her mouth, namely her breath and speech, may besweet pleasing and agreeable to her louer. But as for such as are vnited by the bonds of marriage, they remem bring the induce∣ments of their former loues, & how they laboured by al courses, to congratulat one another in al chast and cordiall kindnes: so much the more ought they to vphold their coniunction, & heedfully haue an eye from the very beginning, to shun all occasions of discention and discord; as considering, that pieces of wood greenly cōbined together, will be disioynd and misplacd by the least occasion in the worlde: but contrariwise, when the ioynts are well knit and assured
by long proofe of time, hardly can they be sunderd, or seperated again by force or fire. And as we see strawe doth easily take fire, so may it as quickly be quenched again, ex∣cept some sudden matter be added to help and mantaine it: euen such should we e∣steeme the loue of new maried folks to be, which is not kindled but by the heate of youth, especially the sweete beauty of the body: so that it cannot be firme or durable, if it be not grounded by conformitie of good and honest manners, which begets a riciprocall affection of one to the other. Now as for such as cannot endure the first frowardnes & riotes of their new matches: I may properly cōpare them to those, that deeme a raisin grape like to another, because perhaps before they saw vergis made of it. And so concerning the new married, who disdain their husbands at the first meetings they do neither more or lesse, then like him that because the Bee stūg him a little, casts away the quātity of hony which she then left in his hand. Al things therfore, especial
as concerne our affections, ought to be common in marriage, and contrariwise, all outrages and iniuries to be vtterly bani∣shed. For if Cato depriued a Romane Senatour of his office & dignitie, because in the pre∣sence of his daughter he kissed his wife, (which in mine opinion was sentence too seuere:) what imagine you should be done to such as offend, iniurie and strike their wiues, Say she be hard fauored & dif∣formed, it is lesse praise to kisse, embrace and toy with her in companie, then the shameis reputed greater, to strike, abuse, & mistear me her, be it neuer so secret or how soeuer, and this hath bene the fault of very many, as I could make knowen by sundry examples. The delight of loue and benesit thereof, according to the opinion of the wisest; consisteth in foure things: viz. sight, speech kissing, and feeling, which is last of all and though each of them doth merit a most ample discourse, yet he that would know
their seuerall particularities: let him search the Poets, who haue al spoken like most skilful maisters, likewise let him per∣use the Philosophers, and among the rest, Plato in his Conuiuium, where very largely he hath set downe his minde, and not one∣ly haue they written liberally hereon, but proued the force of loue, & witnessed the same by their owne endured passions. As for the first and second poyntes, they are the two sences, wherby all knowledge enters into a man, to wit, sight and hearing, and it seemes that our soule taketh her forme by these two sences, for whosoeuer is depriued of them, hath no difference at all from a brute beast. The Philosophers talke of a common sence at the beginning of our brayne, whereto all the feeligs of the fantasie do addresse themselues, & so doth iudgement and memorie likewise. Loue then beget teth it selfe by the eyes, which are the gates whereby our conceites do enter & they drawe our inclination ac∣cording to their iudgement, raising a desire
which is called loue, appoynting it to the mansion of the hart, which is the reason, that in loue we talke so much of the hart: not because the hart is an onely member that hath life, but in regard of the soule, which woorks not but by the organes and instruments of the hart, conuaying all our other partes to the hart, as the httle fin∣ger cannot stirre it selfe, but by the op∣peration of the hart, and the hart by our will, which principally abydeth therein. Why then, when the eye hath brought to our common sence the sigure of beauty, fancie (who is nearest neighbour to our common sence) is immediately moued, and sendes a message thereof to the hart, which foorth with desires delight and fru∣ition of that, which to him appeareth so beautifull. Now concerning hearing, it likewise greatly helpeth loue, for commu∣nication of the mindes together: for the beautie of the minde consisteth in reason, which by speech imparteth it selfe vnto vs, and hearing carieth all things from the
sence common, to fancie and iudgement, imprinting so much in the memorie which afterward succeedeth, as prouokes both desire, appetite and will. Virgill hath most excellently described, how Dido became amorous of Aneas, sa∣ing, that hauing heard of himselfe his wor∣thie and famous deedes, as also what daun∣gers he had escaped: his height of valour (which he seemed to haue made good proofe of) by little and little entred her minde and opinion, and vrged her to this induction by her self. It is not possible, but he must needs be descended of very good place, for a villaine neuer could performe such enterprise: his vertue, his race, and al else so much moued her, as in the end she was caught fast in the snaries of loue. Vertue, beautie, and honestie are the true allurers of loue, and therfore Terqum was not so much mooued with the beauty of Lucrece, as her chastity & honest demeanor, finding her well exercised & busied in her house, not idle & slothfull as he had done
many other, amidst their pleasures, bon∣quets and vanities. Comunication and speeche declare what a man is, his wisedome and learning is not knowen but only therby: now knowledge is in mē according to the thing which best sitteth their honor, and wherby they game most the loue and fauour of men There∣fore speech (by good right) is most requi∣sitem loue, to testesie how & what a manist for it is written, that Soerates seing a han∣some young youth, sayd to him; Speake, to thee & I may both see and know thee. Next vnto speaking is placed kissing, and truely, if the pleasure were not felt which ensueth therby, my selfe would deeme it strange, why there is sometime such for∣bearaunce from kissing, and why we loue rather to kisse ones mouthe, rather then any one thing as faire and sweet: but expe¦rience teacheth vs, that especially among the rest, kissing is a great parte of delight, a mother kisseth her son, a brother his si∣ster, and in Fraunce it is most cömon, be
cause it is counted as a saluting, chiefely when one comes from any farre place. Some say, that the minds doo cōmunicate therby, and haue written wonderfull mat∣ters of kisses: but what is knowen by sence, hath no need of further proofe; as when we see a thing black or white, it is vaine to de maund any other proofe; when we handle a thing hard or soft; when we heare a sound lowd or lowe; when we tast a thing sowre or sweet, in al these other reason is not re∣quired And so say I of kissing, it is need∣lesse to demaund if it be pleasant or no, for in kissing it maketh proofe of it selfe, & so much the more, because we touch the per∣son whom we kisse, the pleasure is great, & then is the benefit refered not to the bodie only, but to the minde: witnesse those kisses which men in times past gaue to one another, the father to the soune, and the mother also, apsayne demonstration of courtesie and kindnesse. I will unsist no other pointes then are ex∣pressed, but leaue them as reserued to ex∣perience
perience, for many thinges are therby done honestly, which are not to be named, and many things like wise might be named, which were better to be kept in secret: as cicero said to the seuere and stoicall iudges, and because it dependeth vpon the sence. Now to know what is the cause of loue, as also by what bayts and allurementes he ouertaketh himselfe: this may not wel be discoursed ingeneral, neither am I of their opinion, that say a conformitie and resem∣blance procureth loue betweene vs: for we haue scene the difformed loue the fayre, the ignorant the wise with admiration, the infirme and weake magnifiyng hardy and valiaunt men. Briefly, what so is faire, what so is vertuous, generally in all, at all tymes, and in all places, is praised & esteemed, & that which is vice, is by the vicius thēselues reproued. It were an absurd thing then to say, that loue ensueth by resemblance, and as Aristotle sayth (reciting the authority of Euripides) the earth desireth rayne when it is drye, the sicke the Phisition. True
is it, that it is another manner of matter, the amitie which reconciles it selfe be∣tweene persons of selfe same complexion and inclynation, then in other cases, and the reason is euident: namely, as he that loues an other for his vertue, is likewise in selfe same manner beloued of him againe, if he be vertuous. He that loues a woman for her beautie is loued agayne reciprocal∣ly by her, because he hath the like perfec∣tion: and then is it tearmd amitie between persons, when loue is mutual and in equa∣lity; not when an hard fauoured or bad complexyoned man, loueth a fayre and gracious Gentlewomen, for there may be loue in him, but none in her: euen so loue (not being actiue and passiue in these two kindes) is not amitie. To giue then the reason of loue, it behoueth to consider the complection, humour and affection of eyther partie, for I am of this mind that no other but mutual loue can be cōtracted betweene beautifull persons: but then we must consider, that beauty in a woman is
gentlenesle, sweetenesse, affabilitie, and a pleasing disposition; beautie in a man, is al∣so, dignitie, valour, wit, and dexteritie in vertue, thus the beautie of eyther, is di∣uersly appertayning to the sex. So some do say, that if gentlenesse and beauty in a woman pleaseth a man: valour, vertue and wisdome in a man, liketh a woman, which conduceth to the permutation and most auncient contract among men. In like manner, to make a generall rule of affectiō in men or women, it is imposible, because so many men so many seueral sen∣ces and complexions. One loues a blacke eye another a gray, in briefe, one sayth, and that most truely: Loue maketh more store of faire women found out, then their beau∣tie confirmes them to be amiable or woorth desiring onely through our owne pursuing of vulgare actions, which each one tearmes his best apparant good, in re∣gard he followes and adicts himselfe ther∣to, although very diuers and vnlikely. This makes such abundance of frowarde
natures, and is the fountayne of all teares, sighes, complantes and greeuances among them that loue, forcing them to such extre∣mitie and violence on them selues, that not teares alone, but blood is sluiced foorth, euen in the middest of their desperate siginngs and complaintes. which ensueth, because they that loue are not so pleasing in their louers eves, as they appeare to them, neyther find they like enterchange of will, but quite contrary. I or while they agree together, delight is equally imbraced, as if a hard fa∣uoured man affect a fayre woman, and re∣compence his want by comly demeanour, valour and wisdome: here hence ensueth the onely nourishment of loue, when to delight and please a mans choise, he becom∣meth gentle, debonaire and vertuous, as Plato sayth in his Conuiuium, and Boccace likewise witnesseth, deciaring the historie of rustical: Cynon, a clowne and badly nur∣tured by nature, yet to compasse the fauour of a Lady which he loued, in short while he
became so ciuill gentle, conformable, valiant and renowned, as no one could equall him in all graces and good partes beseeming a Gentleman. And though loue serud vs for nothing els, but to encourage and spurre vs onward to vertue, yet were it worthy al praise and co∣mendatiö. And to approue that it doth so, how many histories haue we which teach vs, that loue hath beene the cause of vertue and gentlenes, in such persons as haue don reuerence therto? I referre my selfe to the wise and cūning decei: of the Tuscanes, who declared a singuler kindnesse to their husbands, in making hazard of their liues for them. For they beeing taken and com∣mitted to prison by them of Sparta, where they were kept very strictly, to trie if they could conuince them by certaine and vn∣doubted proofes, in those matters wherof they stood accised: they cōpassed the me∣anes to visite their husbands in prison, pre∣uayling so effectually with their keepers, that they admitted them entrance, only to
and salute their husbands. When they were within the prison, they coū celled them to put off of their owne garments, and being clad in theirs, they should issue forth mour ning and hyding their eyes, in signe of grief, according as they hadentred to them, which beeing done, the women remained there shut vp in their sted, entēding to suf∣fer what soeuer was mean: against their hus¦bands, whome the keepers let scape, no o∣therwise imagining, but that they were the women. See now how on the one side, ardent affec¦tion found sufficient help in need, but for the other parte, let vs not passe in silence the loyaltie of these men, in acknowledg∣ing the good and kindnesse thus receiued by their wiues. For beeing thus got out of prison, they went presently and engirt the mount of Tangeta, raysing the inhabitants & neigh∣bouring people to take Armes, entring into an open rebellion. Which they of Spar∣ta fearing, sent a herald to them, by whom
they grew to such a conclusion: that their wiues were restored to them, with monye and their goods beside, as also diuers other aduantages. This example may serue for a mirrour of cordiall and vehement loue in women toward their husbands, and the like in men toward their wiues. Let no man then discourage himselfe, how much foeuer he be disgraced by na∣ture or for tune: for there is no hart so hard but may be moued in time to pittie, and may by seruice merit very much, if no o∣ther meanes were left him of desert. And truely if the hart contayne any sparke of vertue it will neuer be ingratfull, or lacke acknowledgement of good will and kind∣nesse receyued: but will recompence if (at least) with fauour and affabilitie. It is true, that (to come to the last poynt of delight) it is not onely very hard, but likewise impossible to gayne any thing, but by such graces as doe subdue the af∣fections of women, albeit some hold opi∣nion, that obstinate pursuit, and continuall
batterie is such, as there is no Cittie how strong soeuer, but will submit therto at last, ye the gayne so gotten, equals not the harme which then hath no helpe. And therefore I would adurse such as are in this case, to consider fust their owne qualities, then of their mist resses, the tyme & place, which are necessarie circumstances. For when a man shall happen to loue a lady, if she exceede him in noblenesse of house, he should thinke with himselfe, that it is as great folly in him to imagine he can preuaile, s in him who would catch at the Moone with his teeth. If his mistresse be such, as taking aduise by his glasse, he shall thereby be councelled, not to pretend any thing to her: then he wil consider likewise, whether there be such matters in him selfe as may recompence the graces he beholds in her, not ouerweening himselfe in con∣ceite, for he shall suffer what he deserues, and reape as he is regarded. A man ought likewise to be so discreet, as to vse tyme
apt and meete for his purpose, and as the place shall agree with his mistresse: aboue all, to haue a speciall regarde of her com∣plexion and humour, that he may serue according to her appetites: otherwise, he shalbe like them that but lose their labour, and become ridiculous, in aspiring hygh∣er then doth beseeme them. If their be any so infortunate, that they cannot compasse what they would, whereby to reach the heyght of their in∣tentes: let me sende them to Ouids lesson in his remedy for loue, shunning the place and such occasions, minding other af∣fayres or (as one sayth) driuing out one nayle with another, and such other reme∣dies as are there to be found. For there is not loue so forcible, but time will weare it out, by reason at first it was engendred by Idlenesse: then may a man follow other important occasions, which more dooth concerne his owne good and honour. But contrarywyse, if hee see that time
may soften her rigour: let him beare him selfe so wisely in all his behaui∣our, that he receiue no crosse through his owne indis∣cretion. Thus much I deeme sufficient to be sayde of Loue.
Of the meanes to compasse fauour and acceptaunce. The third discourse. THe onely thing which makes mee be∣leeue, that such as meddle with the af∣fayres of loue, do fayle in many matters, is, because the more part are often euill in∣treated, & then publishing abroad the dis∣dayne, refusall, and hard vsage sustayned by their mistresses, doth but diuulgate their owne defects, and the small or no de∣sert remayning in them. For if they were such as might merit entertaynement, they would not be in such extremities, as dayly they are to be seene A disease is apparant, but the cause thereof being not vnder∣stoode, makes the remedie to seeme impos∣sible: therefore let vs immitate the discreet Phisition, who first dilligently enquiring of the hurtfull humour, the sourse of the
ill, his progresse, and the qualitie of the person; then applyeth what is most need∣full, and takes away (by the contrarie) the cause of the annoyance. To know that then, which makes a man so repulsed, and giues him likewise accep∣taunce, (being to some the greatest payne, to other the best pleasure in this world) may seeme a matter very hard to be vn∣derstood: for a man may not discourse a thing ingenerall, which is knowne but in perticular, and is likewise as diuers, as the circumstances are contrarie, euen as one receipt may not be giuen to all kindes of Feuers, because they are not of one salfe same condition. Gladly would I learne of Ladies, how a man ought to carrie himselfe in loue, by what meanes he might insinuate into their good graces, how he may be most welcome to them, and briefely, which way he may soonest please them: according as Horace speaketh of one, who was to enter∣tayne diuers persons neare him, one for
one taste, another for another, and there∣fore he should conforme himselfe to each ones appetite. Neuerthelesse, because that which is good & honest of it self, seemeth no other to all, in all places and at all times, seeing that which is cōformable to al, doth naturally teach vs what is vice, what is ver∣tue, euen as may be said by right of nature: therefore euery one may purchase to him∣self, those things which best may make him beloued. True it is, that many thinges do change of themselues, because the rellish of men are diuers, and in regard that which is good at one tyme, is reproued and con∣demned at another: herein then let vs say with the wisest, there is a right way in na∣ture which neuer changeth, for reason is e∣uermore reason, and trueth, trueth. Ther is another way that is tearmed possi∣tiue, which concerneth onely ceremo∣nies, meanes and enstructions, to mayne∣tayne this first way of nature: but that varieth & chaungeth of it selfe, according to the occurrences and occasions, as dooth
the fashion of garements, the defence of armes, and such like matters. So may we say, that vertue is immoueable, and euer∣more such as it hath beene: but the out∣ward, thing as speach, the countenaunce, grace, close conceites, and other perticuler matters, must be vnsterstoode according to the persons, tyme and place, which are the circumstances, whereby each man ought to iudge of his affaires, least he fal in∣to such offence as the ill aduised often do. VVhy then we will deliuer, what all men ingenerall should haue, and what in perticuler each man ought doe: for, to be in fauour with people ingenerall, he must haue that which is generally esteemed, and the regard which a man makes of one per∣son onely, begetteth loue; the one necessa∣rily preceeding, and then loue following, which proues it selfe by the disinition of beauty, being indeed the desire of beauty. Now this beautie is not onely taken for that of the face, but it consisteth likewise of the minde in women: beautie appeareth in a well adorned countenaunce, a comely
sweete grace, pleasing language, breefely, it hath such amorous gesture and behaui∣our, as steales a mans hart that stāds to note it. The beauty of a man is knowledge, har∣dines, a valiant hart, wise speech, manly behauiour, and not effeminate. This beautie then is but a gift of nature, both in the one and the other, and there∣fore it lyes not in vs to be beautiful, which makes the more vnskilfulnes in giuing any precept, except prohibition of belying those imperfections which we haue, with practise to supply what is best beseeming vs; as in some to speake grauely, others more stearnely, needes no great wit to him who hath studied for it: wheras when one finds himselfe disfauoured by beauty, he cannot brag or boast but stand like one discontēded. And this a thing which iudg∣eth it selfe, according to our knowledge in these cases more or lesse, and as matters in themselues are best seing to vs: for there be some which only take pleasure in things done publiquely when as to others
it is the greatest discontentment in the worlde. To this purpose serues the fable of the Asse, who perseruing the dogge playing with his maister, leaping on him with his feete, and putting his head betweene his his hands: imagined in his grosse braine, that if he did the like, it woold be as well accepted and liked. Wherevpon, one day after he came to his mayster, thrusting his feete in his face, and leaping on his shoul∣ders: his mayster supposing he was fallen madde, commaunded him to haue so many good bastanadoes, as he might fit and repent his forwardnesse at leysure: thus ye may see how it happens to some, who neuerthelesse (perhaps) had a good intention. Therefore it is not to be publiquely re∣perted: Such a Gentlewoman permitted ament kisse her, let him giue hr a greene gowne, and doe other thinges belonging to societie: whereas if another should intrude himselfe to do so much, it might
be taken in very bad part, albeit she were not offended with the other. Familiaritie often tymes is hurtfull to some, as when men take pleasure in doing such thinges, which notwithstanding are vnfitting in others, sometymes by long & priuate frequentation one with another: for it wholely doth depend vpon the will, whether she be contented therwith or no, the absolute power of liking consisteth in her. If one will presse forward by sinister meanes to compasse her fauour: in steed of pleasing, he puts him selfe an hūdred parts the further off. Beside, if a man be thought by some to be scant gracious, ill nurtred, vnworthy societie with persons of honor; yet by others (happily) he is not so reputed for oftē times a man hinders his owne aduā∣cemēt, by not obseruing time and apt sea∣sons, as when he dallies with women o∣uer wantonly before men of respect, or v∣seth his follies in a place not fit for the pur∣pose, or taketh a woman in an vnhappie houre, in all which there are many that mightily offend. There are some houres
better then other, and (as one sayeth) the shepheardes houre is most perril∣lous; when sometimes the most pleasantest womā in the world, finds her self to be cold in dispositiō, & very hardly acquaintable. But to preuent this fault, it is necessarie to obserue time, the place, and person, by slender approches, as, a little and a little, to trye our fortunes: to the end that if a man receiue no profit at all, yet he may auoyd ouer much mocking or deluding of him selfe. For, by refusal of a kisse, or other more priuate offers, may be vnderstood, that he shal not do wel in presuming any further, especially in such cases, which (as it were frō one degree to another) deliuereth ther∣of: sound assurance to a man: & this I dare say, that he who growes carelesle of this precept, shall but harme his owne content, and do himselfe vnrepaireable wrong. For it is lesse dishonour to a man to be denied a small fauour, which maketh entrance to a greater: then to be flatly refused altogea∣ther with a rygorous disdayne, which shall continue him in disgrace, and neuer
more to be kindly lookt on. VVhereas if he had aduentured by little and little, the matter would not haue seemed so strange vnto him, that at the first offer he was de∣nyed possession of full pleasure: who so proceedeth otherwise, will finde it scantly to his owne pleasing. I would aduise each man therefore to censure himselfe, whether he be worthy to receiue such familiarity or no, according to the time of his acquaintance with those persons: there is nothing more vnplea∣sing, then to be ouer-familiar at the first attempt, as seeking to reape before he haue sowne; except he be so graciously fa∣uoured by the heauens, as to finde himselfe so soone affected, as he doth affect: but the more certayne way is, to goe on by degrees step after step, as fearefull of those incon∣ueniences which may follow, and (aboue al) it is most expedient, to know our owne selues, without priuat flatterie; & remem∣bring our imperfections, to amende, or wisely conceale them, seruing our turne
by more apt meanes: as to vse good re∣porte, seeke benefit by study in the best letters: or if he follow armes, to winne this generall reputation that he is hardy, couragious, ready at all seasons, making profit of that wherein he is expert, and not to meddle with any thing whereof he is ignorant; breefely, not to let the worldes eye note his secret desectes. But if a man be slenderly fauoured by nature, let him vse his minde so, as no one may regard but what is commendable in him; for a small vice will be excused by a greater vertue: good grace may be thus ob∣tained, either eloquence, vertue, knowledg, and whatsoeuer els is requisite in a man. If the body second not the minde; then he may say as a certayne great personage did, I am indifferently fashyoned in minde: though I haue no comely forme of body, thus priuate giftes should be respected before externall goods, for the graces of the minde are discerned in such, as haue got more aduantage by their laudable qua∣lities,
then they that deme themselues for∣tunate by beautie. And true it is, that such men ought first to expresse the goodnes of their mindes, before they should lay hold on loues familiarities: for when it shall be knowne what he is, to wit, a graci∣ous, honest and gentle person, he will be accepted for his vertues and desertes. It behoues him likewise to haue a good report: for diuers times we haue hard and seene, that some haue fallen in loue, euen by the good renowne of the parties. To set downe here precept vpon precept, as all those things which are required in a courtier, was neuer my intention, for then I should neuer make an end: only I say, he ought to declare himselfe, in the most com∣pleat and perfect manner that possible he can, he should know all things, especially those that are most for the purpose, he ought boldly to speake, confirming his sai∣ings not by vulgar reasōs, to vse apt exāples, comparisons well formed, meete woords, graue sentences, tempering and managing
all which good grace, be it in speaking, or else in companying, such action and ges∣ture is most beseeming. But beyond all these, to haue an especial care, if he expect profit by what he speaketh, to chuse tyme and place conuenient for it: for any thing looseth much of his grace, when it is not deliuered in as apt a season. Let not his speeches be offensiue to any, if he vse woordes to vrge laughter, let it be doone modestly: that they conuert not eyther to tearmes of flatterie, or tauntes and nippes which may stir the life blood: for the rest, I refer him to Baltazar, who in the passage of his courtier hath written most excellētly Yet to these before rehearsed, I could wish in him humilitie, for gentlenes, courtesie, and honesty are the epithits of humilitie: that he should make account of men, if he will haue men make account of him: not to interrupt or breake of mens cōmunica∣tion to yeeld a reason: for his sayings, with∣outstanding long vpon discourse, or abu∣sing the patience of his hearers: to carrie
himselfe likewise in such sorte, as still to haue his eye on them in company, to see if what he sayth be pleasing or no, or whe∣ther he be sufficiently vnderstood: to think and premediate before on his speeches, because many times one wearies his trends, by vttering conceptions not wel ordered, whereby he is constrayned to stop in the midway, and so with breaking of his tale, driues away his companie. It is likewise necessarie, that his tearmes be vsuall and well known, not farre fetcht or vainely bumbasted: drawne from woordes auncient, or coyned on such new stampes, as very few or none do vnder∣stand them, which makes both them and the speaker ridiculous. He should not lose himselfe in his discourse, or wander to by wayes, but should leuell his speeches to resolued purpose and conclusion, where into it may haue a sweete current and fall, yeelding the whole course queint, easie, and intelligible, least the end be discer∣ned before the, beginning. But this is more
due to a matter of eloquence, and because there are great personages, who haue set downe certayne rules and enstructions thereto belonging: I would counsell o∣thers to ioy in the labours of them that haue so well deserued of vs, deliue∣ring such good courses for our better di∣rection. I reckon eloquence, and a well ordered kinde of speaking, to be nessessarie for a Courtier, as a man who hath some need of perswasion, and speech is mistresse of rea∣son in men, beeing the thing that onely forceth and prouoketh men on: As for gesture and countenaunce, it is very hard (in this meane treatise) to specifie what a Courtier therein is to know: onely this I would aduertise him, that there are two things which may much auayle him; the first is to take example by them that doe well, and are of best enstruction; the other, is to remember the defectes of such as are vicious, and euermore to be warned by their bad courses. For if the first meane of
immitation be not sufficient, there is no man whatsoeuer, who sees a man of leaud demeanour, and worsse lookes; but presently will thinke scorne to immitate him, or resemble him in any condition: to sheeld himselfe from derision, and poyn∣ting at as a weake wit, vnfurnished, and worthie to be excluded all good compa∣nie. Because, when one sees a man commit a grosse fault, he should receiue this as a les∣son for himselfe: for we can more easily discerne blemishes in others, then good qualities in our selues. Let him then make his profit of all, and endeauour to follow the perfection he shall gather by all: of some, modest and dis∣creete speech, of others, ciuill & commen∣dable behauiour, and so the rest as their vertues merit immitation, according as it is sayde the paynter Zeuxis did, who for∣med his Venus by the perfections of diuers choyse maydens. He must chastise him∣selfe by others blemishes, and till he bee assured of very good footing, not to presse
in publique, but attend the houre of better abilitie. To talke of great matters, with waigh∣tie woordes, letting light occasions passe like themselues, not dwelling on any, except it be a matter serious and impor∣tant: for els he will be noted that in small trifles, he makes a very mightie losse of himselfe. Now because he who would shew him∣selfe among others, ought not to be ignorāt of all thinges, which may ordinarily hap∣pen in discourse: he should be very stu∣dious in histories, but especially in mor∣ral Philosophie, out of which (as from the fountayne) is deriued the ground of rea∣son, and no man ought relye so much vp∣pon his owne naturall iudgement, as the boundlesse riches of others labours, whence he may learne experience in all thinges; as examples for gouernment of a common wealth, for warre, deuisions, par∣lees, and other matters concerning the weale publique.
And although it may be thought strange, that discoursing here of loue, I speake of things which appertayne not so much to women, as to men: neuerthelesse it is most certayne, that they who meddle with loue shall most part of their time meete with graue & discreet mē, yea, in the presence of their mistresses, where they haue fit occa∣sion to stirre themselues, by deliuering their knowledge in pollitique affayres, learning and other commendable quali∣ties: besides it is more auayleable to reporte them in the presence of their louers, then whatsoeuer they can say all their life time after to them, concerning loue. For a wo∣man (to whom learning, and knowledge in most important affayres are not vsuall and familar) reuerenceth and makes great reckoning of them indued therewith: as one very well sayth, ignoraunce begetteth admiration, and we grow amorous of such thinges as we haue not, because the know∣ledge of them is straunge and not com∣mō. While then the man hath this aduan∣tage
ouer a woman, he may well serue his owne turne if he be wise, and yet without presumption or affection. For presumptiō is a signe of a mans pleasing himselfe, at∣tributing glorie to his owne actions, despi∣sing and condemning the deedes of others, because himselfe would be exalted aboue them. Presumpion is very daungerous, in language, behauiour or otherwise, wher∣fore it is euermore to be shunned, as much because it displeaseth, as also in regarde it hinders credit of whatsoeuer we saye, for each one would keepe himselfe from an hydden enemie: moreouer I haue heard, that the arte reputed to be most re∣quisite, is it which maketh least shewe of arte, but conceales it selfe with greatest discretion. I would prohibite an other kinde of presumpion, which is, when one discouers himselfe ouer curious in speaking: rather couet to be plaine & honest in tearmes, such as best become nature and true education. Hereto I adde a man in such sorte must
respect his businesse, as he make not his loue knowne, before he be acquainted with the disposition of the person, to whom he hath deuoted his affection: for it is the custome of women, to disire what they least seeme willing of, and despise those things they are possessed of, therfore fore if a man would encrease their desire, he must not come to publique gaze, but seeke occasion of priuate acquaintaunce, as not making expresse intent to her, or her goods: neyther would I haue him to shew too much semblaunce of regarding her loue, because some are of such an humour, to flye when they are followed, and yeeld when they are least sought vnto. I knowe well there are some of so good sorte, as the onely meanes of obtayning them, is to let them vnderstād a mans paine & dilligence imployed for their kindnes, and that loue is like the Adamant, which drawes the y∣ron to it, begetting affection in the partie beloued. But I leaue to mens discretions such kinde of managing their affayres, and
as they shall perceiue the mindes of their mistresses to be ordered. If they be so happie, as to haue well cho∣sen, and euidently discerne themselues in grace, let them be the wiser in keeping and preseruing this fortunate fauour, by ciuill demeanour, and vertuous carriage: for he preuailes very much, that makes himselfe treasurer & secretarie of his ladies nearest thoughts, whereto reason is his best guide, which directs him in effectuall disclosing his loue to her, at such tymes as best yeeldes him opportunitie without euer falsifying his loyaltie or breach of any gentle action. VVho so obserueth these courses, shall find much more contentment, then others doe torments in their vayne and vnfruit∣full passions, but if his quiet be not such as he could desire, let him smoother all with silence, and comfort himselfe by this versse of the Poet. To louers, hard fortune is euermore a common Stepmother.
See now breefely what I haue handled in this discourse, concerning the principall meanes of winning grace with persons of honour: It now remaynes to speake somewhat of that which followeth, where succinctly is handled the consi∣derations of Loue.
The considerations of Loue. The fourth discourse. IN mine oppinion, he that loueth, ought to consider, to what end he loueth, the qualitie of her he loueth, and also the mea∣nes to compasse his intent: least he chaunce to finde his hopes frustrated, as many doe that lose their time, and make themselues ridiculous to the worlde. And for his bet∣ter enstruction herein he must know, that there is both a generalitie and a perticula∣ritie, in our behauiour towarde women. As for the generalitie; it is vsuall to all such as make profession of skill in cour∣ting: that we should be gratious to all, and shew our selues such as we would be esteemed. Which vrgeth a fayre mistresse to particularize her conceite, to shew such regard as is not common or vulgare, and enricheth her with the attendance of ser∣uaunts,
as also causeth the like in men by their mistresses. For whē one addictes not himselfe to one certayne place, but remay∣neth ignorant what may betide him: he can neyther conclude on this or that, but makes a generall carriage of himselfe, not yeelding or denying any one, because he is vncertayne who shall be his loue. In like manner, a mayden not as yet stayed in her affection, being in companie, shewes her selfe gentle and affable to al ingeneral, not reiecting any one, but deliuering good lookes to all: because it may so fall out, that one of them there present, whom yet she least dreameth on may one day be the man whom she shall fancie. For an other reason, a man should shew himselfe generally gratious, as well to con∣forme his minde therto, and so be repu∣ted honest, as also of euery one to be e∣steemed courteous, whereby he may draw the affection to him of all ingenerall: that so beeing pleasing to one and an other in particuler, the one abiding heere, the o∣ther
happily further off, yet still good conceite of him meeteth together, and such vertuous reporte is spred abroade of him, as from man to man his renowne is especially regarded. Moreouer, he is not to abuse himselfe, though he haue the good respect and e∣steeme of others: for honest men are dis∣cerned by their actions, as a graue man said; that the sun disdained not to cast his eie on things scant faire & that which contenteth the eie, is indifferent to all the body beside. Heer to I must ioyne, that he who would haue honor, doth feare the disliking of ho∣nest persons, and willingly would not bee displeasing to any one, to auoyd procure∣ment of the meanest enemie: for him whom we least account of, may perhaps do vs greatest iniurie, if he shal report vs to be proud and desertlesse. Therfore beware of offending any man, rather let vs de∣meane our selues, that cach one may gene∣rally affirme those things of vs, which we would desire should be best discerned in vs.
Nor would I haue a man so amorous of himselfe, that when he hath but once spo∣ken to a woman: because she she wes no o∣ther behauiour but her vsuall kinde of in∣clination: presently he perswades him∣selfe to be the man must haue her, and so growes forgetfull of his owne dutie. And this which I speake to men, may be as well applyed to women, that they should not lightly beleeue the smoothest tongues, but consider, there needeth a lon∣ger course of time, wherby to get acquain∣ted with his hart and intenhtion, and a mat∣ter of so great consequence, is not obtay∣ned at the first attempt: therefore they ought to be discreete and iudge with the time, which is an excellent meane to know one man from an other, who is too much knowen before. And I would haue them to obserue a mediocritie in their profes, to wit, that as at the first motion they should not yeelde, yet not to reiect or cast men off so cruelly, as I know some haue done, who so soone as they are spoken too, will
not abide to heare a woord of loue, but are so ouer-hastie in returning an answere, that immediately they breake into these tearmes: They are not as they take them for, nor should they offer them any such speeches, neyther should a ciuill mayden know any such matters. But men are so apt in discouering their owne follies, and readie to intrapt euerye well meaning mayde, hauing their mouthes full of loue and their harts quite emptie: these & such like are their nice wanton answers. Then must a man needs take it very straungly, to be refused before he haue any thing de∣maunded or spoken of such matters as they impute vnto him: which apparant∣ly declareth, that they long time exercised themselues what answeres to make, as ser∣uing to al purposes, either right or wrong, without discretion or difference of such as speake to them, neyther declaring any other pacience, but that a fit way is layd o∣pen, to make them discouer that they knowe somewhat: whereas if they were
better aduised, they would shape their answers perticularly to the question pro∣pounded, without any iournall course of replying, which seemeth no other then as a common song. VVhosoeuer therefore will be repu∣ted of good minde, and know withall what it is to answere: ought first to vn∣derstande the party that speaketh, euen as if he were an ambassadour, vntil he come to his speeches conclusion, except he grow forgetfull of his owne dutie: then may she well reproue, reprehend or by gi∣uing him to knowe, that she is not igno∣rant in the valliditie of such affayres, yet this care likewise must be had, the answere must not be common or vulgar, as long studied before for windie phrases and fro∣thy circumstances: but in euery part to contayne such discretion, that neyther in the matter or language affection be discer∣ned, because some that are not acquain∣ted with the latine, think it the best course to talke curiously and finnically, flaying
or stripping the latine tongue of choyse and truct woordes, being so ouer daintie in their speaking, as no one vnderstandeth what they say, nor yet themselues neither. It is best therefore to speake what we know, not that we are ignorant of, neyther should we wade further into any matter, then we may get out with credit and ho∣nessie. As concerning men, I find fault with some, who know not how to entertayne a gen∣tle woman, but onely in telling her; that they are so exceeding amorous, as they must needes dye: which often tymes is vt∣tered with so ill a grace, as they are rather scorned then any way pittied. Others there bee that are so shamelesse, as forgetting all course of modestie, vrge their soli∣citings to honest married wiues, who reckon nothing dearer then their honor and reputation: but such ill nurtred gromes, doe I turne ouer to a certayne Ladies answere, which she made to
one who in the like manner moued her, which was as followeth. VVhen I was a childe (quoth she) I learned obedience to my parents, & dayly performed it: since I became a maried wife, I was taught the like lesson towardes my husband. If then the demaund you make to me be iust and honest, goe first and acquaint my hus∣band therewith: and if he like of it, then shall you quickly haue my opinion after∣ward; who can deny, but that this was an answere beseeming a modest and vertuous woman? There are other, who will vse the like speeches to a woman, as they doe to an At∣turney or a merchant, & talke with a young mayden, as if they spake vnto her Grand∣mother: cheefely at weddings, or (which is worsse) in maskes & such like, demea∣ning themselues so sillily, that they open∣ly are noted to be ridiculus, and to couer their faces to no other ende, but least their shamefull blushing should be apparantly discerned. Then are their orations so bad∣ly
ordered, as they well deserue banish∣ment, out of all good companie, and to goe worke out their apprentishippe in other places more meete for them. This ought to be obscrued as well in men as women, not beeing bound to any one, but rather as readie for one as another: wherein they should so wisely gouerne their beha∣uiour, that loue may be more beneficiall then hurtfull to them. But now I come to speake of him, who perticulerly affec∣teth one woman onely, to whom his for∣tunes and vowes are selemnely addicted If his loue be to marrie her, he knowes well by what degrees he must proceed, he ought first to consider both his owne qua∣litie and hers, then to gayne her good conceite in such sorte, as nothing may come to her eare of him, but what may be pleasing, as beeing a man generally belo∣ued and esteemed: for a mayde will neuer let her honor depend on such a man, as in company shal be a shame both to himselfe & her, nor will she elect such a one for her
guide and heade, whom she may imagine of weaker carriage then her selfe, for hard∣ly can she vse obedience to him, that hath no sufficiencie in aduising her, nor man∣hoode to commaund, as indeede he ought to do. Let a man therefore consider, what good partes he hath in himselfe, which ey∣ther may make him regarded, or contrari∣wise despised: els, let it be no greefe to him, if he passe by as not noted and neg∣lected. In like case, a mayden should shew her self such toward a man, as she would desire to be esteemed, loued and sought after. I will not, neyther can I set downe all the rules and precepts, that he or she ought to ob∣serue, who will be pleasing and agreeable one to the other; by reason they are in∣finite, and may more easily, be learned of them they keepe companie withal, by noting in each one, what is good or euill. It remaineth now to say somwhat of him, that loues a woman without respect of
mariage, he must well know the humor & complexion of her, whether she be of that kinde that loues to giue the horne, comon∣ly called a short heeld friend, who are so ingenious, as they raise a slame in the heads of their followers, before they come scarsly to touch their fingers. Such can wel skil of dispencing with affection, making in snew neuertheles, that they would be sought to: but being once entertained into cōpany, they are familiar with euery one, make no spare of their kindnesse, especially where a∣ny commoditie is to be gotten, requiting them with nothing else, but the smoke of hope. Of these there are too many, & they are soone heard of by the rumor that goes of them: with them it is dangerous to coh∣uerse, but euen to learne fashions and dis∣cerne their behaniour, sing them as we do a knife against a grind stone, for no better benefit is to be made of them. But for him who in these affaires would begin his apprentiship, him would I ad∣uise to follow farre better courses, and employ his leysures to more auayling.
True it is, that if he could so much com∣maund himselfe, as to feigne the burden, without bearing it, dissembling to loue, and yet feele no passion: he might enioy all the pleasures in the world, and disco∣uer the cunning of such mistresses, whom he should quickly beguile by counter: masquing with them. For, were it not that a man applies him∣selfe to the best enstructions, and torments himselfe more then is required: he could not but haue pleasure in his loue, making vse of the cōmodities which other gayne thereby. But when in good playe, good monye is stakte downe, eating and drin∣king is forborne, and the nyghts spent in building Castles in the ayre, all day wal∣king sollitarie, one while dreaming on one imagination, then another, now rayling agaynst his life, then curssing his misfortune, and all these complaintes v∣sed priuately to himselfe: then hath he neede to learne true sufferance indeed, for then (the wisest man in the world so afflic∣ted)
shall finde he hath worke inough to to busie himselfe withall. Now as for our fine wanton, that will quickly be courted, she maketh it her li∣uing to deceiue her followers, and hath no other delight, then when by a man (cold in affection) she perceiueth now she must bestirre her wittes, and labouring with her deuises, she somewhat enkindles him, and finding him growen a little more tractable, she beginnes to lift him vp with the windy promises of hope, that afterward when he falles, he may be brused for euer. This is her pastime, euen as the hunter sporteth himselfe in the chase, or as the cat, that playes so long with the mouse she hath taken, vntill at length she deuoures it altogeather. Suth kinde of women take delight to be beloued, onely to haue amorous ser∣uauntes readie at all seasons, as hating to be destitute of companie, albeit they scorne and flout them to their faces, foading them off with delay and dalliance. Sometime
they let them come within two fingers breadth of the place desyred, and then start away, as it were manie a myle off. One while they giue good lookes, then with winckes and noddes appeare highly displeased, and all this is but to make their appetite the more vehement. There be other, who haue seruaunts of diuers sortes, some that they sport withall in secret, others that must fur∣nish them with expences, and these do serue but as shaddowes to the former, who being neuer so little misused by them, will pretend great displeasure, out∣facing the other, to be causers thereof, as hauing spoken to the defame and dis∣grace of their mistresses, and iustifying them with oathes to be right honest wo∣men: then they must slep in betweene them, to allay this tempest, which the pursse-foole well payes for: albeit he reape no other corne for his haruest. The most parte of such women are thus prouided of seruantes, for diuers
diuers respectes and diuers vses, knowing how to drawe monye from euery vayne, although they make no sharpe incission for it. This I speake, because such as haue a∣bandoned them, haue first payde dearely for their acquaintance, as well witnesseth that which is written of auncient Courtezanes, whose couetousnes could not be suffised, with the great treasures of puissant kings and monarches in former tymes: as of Demetrius to Lamia and Flora, who gathe∣red such infinite substance together as they made the Romane people heyres thereof. And that it is no otherwise, note but the foundation of those prostituting places, which onely came by couetousnesse: and if any fauour be had of some other out of that place, it will cost so much the more, and the kindnesse is the costlier, the more shewe of honestie it is shadow∣ed withall. VVith such, a man must deale both wise∣ly and cunningly, not louing any thing
but what is to be solde, that is, the body, not to regard it as any good thing, but only to esteeme her as a Courtezane, addicted to voluptuous pleasure, without bestow∣ing more cost then needeth, or thinking to appropriate that to himselfe, which is common and freely offered to all ingene∣rall. Let their couetousnesse teache thee, that they are onely to be had for monye, howsoeuer subtilly they pretend to loue thee: so by discouering their falshoode and trecherie, thou maist the better learne to detest their leaude liues. For they that make marchandize of their flesh, and will sell themselues to all com∣mers whatsoeuer: it shall be good to shun their companie, except it be to beholde their impudencie, and so to growe in ha∣tred thereof, considering thus to himselfe, while he is with her, that the embracings she vseth to him, is but for a peice of coine: as a waterman for his stipend carries ouer all commers, or as a Parasite in a Comedy,
who practiseth to resemble the partie he presenteth. Ouid hath giuen good store of pre∣ceptes, to such as deale in the courses of loue, to withdrawe themselues with little dammage, as setting before their eyes the losse of their sute, the great displeasure en∣suing diuers wayes, and many other such like remedies in loue. There is another sorte of mistresses that are honest, and contract amitie with such as are like themselues, giuing al pleasure & contentment they can one to another, as in comforting, councelling, visiting, ayding and succouring: and this loue is but among the regarders of honor, meeting with such as are of their owne inclinatiō. With them we ought discreetly to demeane our selues, without giuing occasion to be ill thought or spoken of: For when such payres of af∣fection meete together, they must be en∣tertained according to their esteeme & re∣pute, without offence offered on either side but in all pleasing and perfect agreement.
Of Iealosie. The fift discourse. ALthough it be not so easyly discerned, what Iealosie is to be blamed, and what to be excused, as it is easie to assure, that all Ileaosie, in whatsoeuer person, or for what cause, is euermore an hinderaunce to the minde, and a very great torment: yet is it first to be iudged, whether Iealosie be a vice or no, and to discide the the same ac∣cording to the person and occasion. For to condemne a man so soone as one sayeth he is Iealous, is to be carried away by the common peoples oppinion onely, and blind-fold to follow a rumour in a Cittie, without hauing regard to the matter pro∣posed. Then fgor our entraunce into this case, we will first define Iealosie to be a griese, which a man hath by beeing depri∣ued of some good which he hath loued,
and Iealosie may be applyed to all thinges whatsoeuer. God sayeth, that he is Iealous, and will not haue the honour onely due to him, attributed to any other. The Gentleman sayth, he is Iealous of his reputation: each one is Iealous of that he esteemeth dea∣rest, or is most carefull and charie of. If a husband haue suspition of his wife, that her gouernment is not good or agree∣able to his liking, he is say de to be iealous, that is, he is displeased to see that wronged, which he thinketh onely belongeth to himselfe. If a woman be offended, that her freend or mate keepes not loyaltie with her: she likewise is reputed iea∣lous. Now to know whether Iealosie in man or woman is vnscemely, vicious and to be reiected, it is a matter, depending vp∣pon circumstances. And in trueth, it is a shame and imurie for a man to bee iealous, making him the lesse esteemed, as if the cause thereof thus proceeded, that this
owne consience makes him deeme him∣selfe vnworthie of that he possesseth, or knowes his owne abilitie to be insuffici∣ent, and so procureth a distrust of him∣selfe, as imagining himselfe not to be be∣loued, and that others (more deseruing then he) are better affected, and esteemed by his wife more then himselfe is whereas if he were of desert, an other could not go beyond him, nor carrie that away which onely appertayneth to him: in this sorte, may iealosie be counted a shame and great disgrace to a man. But contrariwise, when I see them that winke at their wiues behauiour, and will take no knowledge that they are cornu∣ted, and yet are mockt and poynted at by others: I cannot chuse but blame them for not beeing iealous, although not of their wiues, yet of their honour. Where∣in I can giue no better resolution, then that which is vsed in all laudable actions, to wit mediocritie, which is an especiall vertue of it selfe. And let me say withall, that as the
vertue of liberally is betweene prodigali∣tie on the one side, and couetousnesse on the other, the one in wanting, the other in abounding, and as the vertue of strength, is betweene timeritie and pusillanimi∣tie: euen so the discretion which ought to be in a married man, should be betweene iealosie on the one side, and negligence or no regard on the other. For, to be so slee∣pie in his businesse, as (not to see at all) that which all the world discerneth, is both beastlinesse and inconsideration: likewise, to take offence, and causelesse to carrie sus∣pition tin minde, declares the want of wise∣dome and discretion. There is no man of so base and abiect spi∣rit, that will suffer one to reproch him, with his wiues giuing him the hornes, for such monsters are infamous bothy by fact and right, euen as a knowen and publique noted baude: so that were it but in this respect, the lawe reputes such as detesta∣ble, if they shall compound and make sale of their wiues addulteries. Here hence it
proceedeth, and by right is permitted as a matter excusable, for a man to kill his wife, beeing found in such an offence, which prerogatiue is no way tollerated in a wo∣man. The reason why the fact is more a∣grauated in the woman then the man; is, because adulterie in a woman, makes doubt of her issue, whether it be by her hus∣band or an other, which cannot carrie like mistrust in a man. Ye shall haue some that alledge an other reason, which notwithstā∣ding I will not defend, and I am certayne, that all they who haue any feeling of rea∣son, wil herein iump with mine oppinion. For they say, that the man beeing the head of his wife, as much to say, as Lord ouer her, she standeth the more obliged in kee∣ping of her fayth and loyalty: If then she fall to violate that strict bond, so much the more shame and damagement dooth the man sustayne in his goodes. The first part of their reason is not to be condem∣ned, neyther indeede doe I so rashly censure of it: but in regarde of the con∣clusion
clusion they make thereof, I say they per∣sume a little ouermuch, and shew them∣selues to be very absurd, euen (as it were) in auouching playne paganisme. For if they will conclude, that because it is so, that a man is the head and Lord of the woman, therefore she hath no power at all ouer him, and so consequently it is law∣full for him, without any contradiction to abandon her and giue himselfe to all vo∣luptuous pleasures: I say such as are of this oppinion differ not at a I from the paganes, who indeede doe mayntayne, that when a lewd quailitied man, subiect to his owne desires, shul offend with some freend of his, or eis his chamber mayd; neuerthelesse his wise must not be displeased there with, or a∣ny way reproue him for it: but rather she should esteeme the better of him, and that this was done in reuerend respect of her, as not suffering lier to pertake in his drunk∣ennesse, beast-like luxurie, and intempe∣raunce at that tyme. Perhaps herein they would immitate the kings of Persia, who when they
feasted and banquetted in ordinarie and comely manner, they would then haue their wiues sit with them at the table. But when they carrowsed and dranke till they were drunke, their wiues were com∣maunded to their chambers, and then their concubines, women singers and dauncers must be with them. Now diuers (at the first iudging hereof) deemed they did well, in that they would not haue their lawfull wiues, participate with their drunken dissolution: but then they might as easily herein haue conside∣red withall, that vnder this pretext of re∣uerence to their wiues, they permitted themselues to runne into all corruption and infamy of their liues; for among ho∣nest people, neuer will a modest wife suf∣fer her husband, to entertayne a strumpet neare her, as well for auoyding discorde, as preuention of iealosie, whereunto women are naturally subiect. But admit that such accidentes should befall them, and their husbandes are so ad∣dicted
to affect strumpets: yet is it great iniustice done them, that for a little vo∣luptuous disorder, they will so much wrong, displease and iniurie their wiues, and not doo at least like the poore sillie Bees, who in no case will themselues touch rudely their proper females, but if any other of their company wrong them, they will warre with them rather then any o∣ther. Notwithstanding all this, there are found too too manie, so bad of minde and disposition, as will not sticke to accom∣panie their owne wiues, comming defy∣led and poiluted from the base association of some others: and then behaue them∣selues in such sort with them, as if all the world were not able to reproue them: ne∣uer remembring how commonly it hap∣pens, that the faults whichment commit a∣gainst their wiues, are more rumoured a∣mong the people, then those of their wiues toward them. As we may ordinarily note in him, that keepes no good gouernement in his house and familie: If he be decei∣ued
by his wife, one of these too occasions are immediatly vrged, either that he is blin∣ded in his owne behauiour, and hath no eyes at all to discerne matters happening: or else himselfe is consenting to the shame, and hath no vertue lefte in him to gainesay it, but, as one ouermaistred by his wife, too basely subiects him selfe, and so is led a∣bout by the nose, as one doth a beaste. There are none more infamous and de∣testable, then such wreched kinde of peo∣ple, who deserue to be publiquely nayled to postes, and of their infamie can neuer be spoken sufficient: such a one may be called Iohn Iohn, that goes for wine while his wife tends her pastime, and if any harme be doone, he lookes through his fingers, for feare he should see it, or (like a kinde foole) sits and watcheth the doore. Contrary wise, when a man is Iealous without a cause, looking with a cloudie countenance, suspitiously discontented, it is a verie great blemish to him: he stirres
others therby to more forwardnes in his busines, then reason accounteth expedient, and happily may so come by some cause for his iealosie, he prouokes his wife to waxe carelesse of him, &c. For there is no readier way to bring a woman to loosenes of life, then in suffering her to see his apparant suspition, that he reputes her as a woman dishonest, grues her hard vsage, watcheth whersoeuer she walkes, wherby she perceiuing, that her husband reposeth no credit in her loyaltie, she presently takes her selfe as little obliged to him, by reason the league of communitie in faith betweene them, is broken by distrust on his behalfe: then she standes vppon her better deseruing, that he is no meete man for her, she too good a wife for him, and so neglects all du∣ty toward him. I could, as fitting this purpose, produce sufficient testimonie, of such as haue beene extreamely iealous, some procuring
their wiues (through their owne bad de∣meanour to ward them) to commence sute in law against them, whereby such shame hath redounded to the men, that the wiues haue beene found of able sufficiencie, and their hushands to be impotent, faultie, and ouermuch to blame, whereby hath eui∣dently appeared, that their own weaknesse and dishabilitie was cause of their iealosie. What comfort or contentment can a poore woman haue, to be accompanyed with such a beast, as is euery houre wat∣ching her, holdes his wife as a prisoner, cannot endure shee should speake to anie one, because he reputes her fraile and easie to fall?  she but list to a question demaun∣ded, she is presently lost, and the deed hath beene dooen, though she stird not out of his companie. Heerein therefore, there must be vsed more wisdome and discre∣tion, and they that will auoide these wic∣ked extremities, must obserue those mea∣nes that are vertuous and commendable. One thing most requisite betweene
them which are loouers, is to carie a good conceit of her he affecteth, to repose such trust in her, as neuer to gaze after her, but let her goe on her owne consciences direct∣ion. heervpon ensueth, that she percei∣uing his vndo inted trust, and how his oppinion is consident in her: she will not doo any thing vnwoorthie of his looue, or seeme so much as in thought to deceiue him, but yeeld him like vertuous & mutu∣all affection In li'e manner, if a husband manifest to his wife, that his trust is abso∣lutely reposed in her, discouerse his secrets to her, & perfectly declareth, that he reputs her fora right good woman: he doth pro∣uoke his wife, to be most loy all and faith∣full to him, and makes her thus conceiue within her soule, that it were most shame full to deceiue him, who is so firme in his oppinion of her. The law imputes it as an infamie, to him that makes deniall of a gadge, in in∣respect it is held as a courtesie to a freend, in whom good conceite & trust is reposed,
and one sayth, that it is a most villainous thing, to deceiue the fayth of another, beeing holy and inuiolable; by much more reason then, if a man bee Iealous and suspicious without cause, dooth he wrong and iniurie to his yoke mate, estee∣ming her otherwise then anhonest good woman. If once he grow to that imagina∣tion, she well perceiues that he loues her not: which makes her breake all fayth and amitie, taking iust occasiō to be at deadly defiaunce with him, hating him as an e∣nemie which hath highly abused her, and so practiseth reuenge on the wronger of her reputation: for she hath nothing dea∣rer then her honour, without which, she dares not shew her face to any. A man must likewise consider, that a woman is not of such a seruill condition, as to be gouerned by feare, for when one thinkes to bridle her, then will she soonest shake it off, and the more she is constray∣ned, the more she resisteth and standeth a∣gaynst it.
He therefore that will shun falling into these inconueniences ought with reason, (which is the onely bridle, whereby to guide a discreet man or woman) to check such bad conceites in himselfe, and doe nothing compulsiuely: for the minde beeing inuisible, and not sub∣iect to sence, obeyes to nothing but rea∣son, and she is the sole gouernesse of al our actions: that if he be a man who swerues from reason, yet let him not be compa∣red to him that sinneth, and will neuer yeeld some reason for the cause of his trans∣gression, at least some outward seeming shewe of reason. VVho-so-euer will be beloued, ought himselfe to loue; who seekes to haue trust reposed in him, ought yeeeld like confi∣dence to another; who would receiue good, ought to doe good: for we must expect the same measure from others, which we our selues haue extended to them. Notwithstanding, when I say a man
should be saythfully resolued of his wife, my meaning is, she giues him no bad occa∣sion, to deeme otherwise then wel of her, be couse such respects doe euermore deliuer best conceites of her: for we repute a man to be wise, when his behauiour is ther∣to according speaking discreetesy, caryng himselse wisely, and farre from the touch of any scandale. We likewise iudge a man to be lewd when we perceiue his manners to be dissolute, imsprising all ouncel to ci∣uill demeanour, & bearing himselfe in such sorte, that he is hated and shund of all ho∣nest people. huen so a woman shall be ver∣tuously censured of, if her habit bee like theirs that is vertuous and honest, if she frequent the companie of women well re∣puted of, and vse no language but what is honorable: where contrariwise, if she fol∣low reprochfull companie, persons that are defamed, go dissolutely in her attire, speake lightly, without regard of shame and mo∣destie, she shal be thought a stragler, proud, a pratler, bolde and impudent.
Now to know for certaintie, whether she is not to be taxed with the crime of dishonistie or no, little can be sayd therein, by reason the act is so secret: but such as haue bad reporte, and haue gruen occasion to speake sinisterly of them (albeit they may be verily innocent,) they ought to chastise their courses and behauiour by good examples, that they may shunne all hard speeches, both of themselues and their husbandes, ruminating continually be∣tweene themselues, this sentence left by the wise man in writing: That good re∣nowue is more worth, then a rich girdle of golde. Honour is nothing els but populare re∣putation, it is no parte of the conscience: but he that feares not what men may saye of him, (as Caccro sayeth) is wicked and de∣stestable. On the other side, Sainte Au∣gustine telles vs, VVhosoeuer giues a pardon to his owne conscience, and neglects his good fame, is cruell to himselfe and full of impietie, and this is it which we tearme to be scandalous. It
is not enough then to haue innocencie in the hart, we must as well escape the giuing of occasion, to men of euill reporte: of which occasion I can speak no otherwise, but euen as honor depends on the people, & them that are wise: so if a man will haue honor, he must gouern him self, as the wi∣sest & best reputed among the people do, and not deserue any other sinister oppini∣on. If then a woman doe demeane her selfe, in such sorte as hath beene declared, and yet her husband (neuer-the-lesse0 will be sicke in the brayne, and foolish of his con∣ceite: it remaynes to his owne perill, for she is no iote dishonoured thereby, but himselfe, that without any cause became distrustfull of her. Now let vs see whether Iealosie be most dangerous in a man, or woman. Some holde, that the woman beeing weaker then the man, and lesse able to sup∣porte the assaultes, which iealosie continu∣ally afflictes the minde withall, she there∣fore is the more subiect to passion: and in
this case might a number of women be named, who beeing depriued of sence and vnderstanding, haue frantiquely and furi∣ously run about the streetes. I can alledges no other reason in this behalfe, why in her it should growe to such an extremitie: but that a man feeles not like defect of plea∣sure, when his wife dooth stray in secrete, as a woman findes in her selfe, beeing de∣frauded of her due, as when her husband partes with that to another, which pro∣perly and by right is none but hers. As for the woman, questionlesse she challengeth a mightie interest not so much in regarde of the pleasure, as the breach of interchan∣ged loue, seeing her selfe frustrated of the faith and kindenesse, which she was wunt to find effectually manifested, and beside, perceiuing her selfe halfe parted and sepe∣rated from her moitie. Notwithstanding all this, I finde that iealosie is much more hurtfull in a man, then woman, because o∣uer & abous his perfect discouering, that the faith of mariage is violated (the selfe same consideration being on the wifes behalfe) he
feeles withall a shame and infamie, with such ablemish and dishonour, as is no way or at any tyme, repay reable agayne. And yet many princesses haue bene no∣ted to loue and reuerence their husbandes exceedingly, albeit they haue had bastardes by others, rather renewing then any way hindering their loue: but when honour once is wounded, it is a matter almost im∣possible, for a man afterward to giue his wife good lookes, and not proue her as a bad creature, when once she hath forfeited her fayth giuen to him. Many examples of vertuous dames are registred in writings, that paciently haue endured this iniurie of their hufbands, nay more to see their concubines kept, euen in the very same house with them: the olde Testament, as also the histeries Greek and Romaine, want no store of them, who haue enfranchised their seruauntes, that haue giuen entertaynment to their hus∣bandes. But among men of generous na∣ture, ye shall neuer finde any one, that
would endure so much as a suspition one∣of their wiues: witnesse Julius Caesar, who did repudiate his wife, and when one de∣maunded him the cause there of, he answe∣red; because he would hauchis wife voyde of suspition, by much more reason then would he haue her free from detection of crime. Suspition is that which brings dishonor both to man and woman, therefore Iea∣losie (of it selfe) is as yrkesome to beare in a man as a woman, and so much the more in a man, because thereby he looseth his ho∣nour. To tell what kinde of payne this iealo∣sie is, exceedeth possibilitie of expressing: for if the losse of goodes, of birth, of freends, or of parentes, be such as torments and makes a man inmeasurably passionate, how greeuous then will be the losse of his wife to him, of whom it is say de: Aman shall leaue sather, mother, and all, and cleaue vn∣to his wife? If that bond and coniunction cannot be deaided or sundred, but by death
only: what shall become of him, who sees him selfe disioynd from amitie, and yet (for all that) stands tyed by his person? much better were if for him to looke vpon death, then continually to haue before his eyes the cause of his affliction, and see his enemie still remaining aliue, reuiuing dayly the remembrance of the heinous wrong doone him. And euen as a man deemes him selfe happy, when he is conioyned in good and durable amitie with a wife, by whom he is entreated honorably, seruing as an ayde & consolation in his affayres: Euen so on the cōtrarie, he reputes himself vnhappie, whē in sted of wife, a deare frend and choyse companion, he findes a deadly emmie, one that hath done him vnrecouerable shame, one that delightes in his death, and with whome hee hath no assurance of his life. Of like quality is this estate in a woman, when she sees her selfe forsaken and despi∣sed. She that hath no honor, but by her
husband, finding her selfe to be contem∣ned & despised, to behold a base strumpet preferred before her, to endure her braua∣does, insteed of being supported by her lord and spouse, to whom she is vowed and de∣dicated, to whom she hath giuen her goods and person, for whomse choyse she iefused very many sufficient offers, of whom she might haue beene much better regarded and honoured: what life (I pray ye) is it to be thought that she poore soule endureth? There is nothing that more offendeth any one, then to see himselfe despised and con∣temned: as also nothing more contenteth the hart, then to feele the loue and affect∣tion of well willers, and iaclosie neuer commeth without conceie of scorne and disdayne A woman seeing her selfe ma∣ryed to a man, and giuing her selfe on∣ly to him, no other are to bee regar∣ded by her: not finding the like in her husbande, and honestly knowes not how to reuendge her wrong: what dooth she then but weepe and lament?
yet with all she considers with her selfe, that the faultes in a man are corrigible, and tif should he see the like blemish in some oher bad bodie, who therefore goes as ha∣ted of all men; it would be a meanes of his amendment. I haue seene diuers, who haue dearely loued their wiues, after they haue sundry tvmes before gon away and forsaken them: but this doth hardly hold in some Linde of men, because infamie remaynes in the woman, not in the man. God is more readie to pardon and forgiue a sin, then man is, he forgets (withall) a sinne so soone as he hath pardoned it, but a man dooth continually remember it, in re∣gard that honour is like to a glasse, which beeing once broken can neuer be made whole agayne. VVe haue spoken of iealosie in man and wife, let vs saye somewhat of the same in amorous persons, and to speake truely, I finde, that loue (not being fastened by by the scale of marriage) is dayly subiect
to the changes of Fortune: for one while it hopes, a nother while despayres, now full of feare, then by and by assured, now doubting, then rioting, now in fauour, then reiected, often ending and beginning againe, according to the oppinion of Plato. It is an estate of no certaintie, and therfore from such as are subiect thereto, iealosie can very hardly be absent: for delight is not tied therto, but if it be, it is with great danger and inconuenience. Therfore it is impossible, but iealosie sometimes must be medling therwith, yet not in such daungerous sort, as in the state of mariage because wher faith is not giuen, if any impeach happen, it is more excusa∣ble, then when faith feeles it selfe neglected and abused. Contrarywise, it seemes that iealosie in looue is commendable, because therby is witnessed, how highly a man esteemes her whom he affecteth, as beeing angry and displeased at vnkinde wordes, or gree∣uing for the absence of his louer accor∣ding
as one compares the case to a mother, that mournes for her infant, whome shee supposed lost: which if shee should not do, her affection might be saide to be ve∣rie small. For which, I would aduise some meane, as in all other things, for it ensues often times to great inconuenien∣ces, by brauadoes and repulses giuen and taken: Therefore it becomes them, to deale wisely and discreetely in these af∣faires, As concerning iealosie betweene two friends, certainly it is to be reprooued, by reason distrust engenders disagreement, declaring the little credence and repute which eche holdes of other: for there is no man, but he will be offended at the in∣iurie receiued by his friend, the rather, be∣cause his hope is frustrated, and he findes not his friend so entire, as he suppoed him to be. But in what amitie or friendship soe∣uer, icalosie ought not to be, without some cause expressed and knowen.
Likewise, it is verie hard to hinder it, when the occasion is great, and too apparant. VVho loueth any thing dearely. feareth the losse thereof, and takes it more grie∣uously when it is lost: The like eason of sorrowing for such losse, agrees with deep passion when it cannot be attained, but farre exceedeth, when it is quite lost in∣deede. For, to apart with a thing peaceably possest, is verie irksome: whereas things ne∣uer enioyed, cause the lesse greeuance: It is not possible for a good mind, that loueth truely, and doth whatsoeuer he can for another: but he must needes be dis∣pleased, when he beholdes his loue not to be requited, but is answered with strange∣nesse and ingratitude, as if all his seed hath beene bestowed vpon a barren soyle, and all his trauaile prooues fruitlesse, retur∣ning him no profite. But they who once are entred into a league of true amitie, ought on both sydes verie care∣fully preserue their allianuce: for if at anye time it chaunce to bee bruised and
broken, if it vnite agayn afterward, it is very wonderfull, except consideration of that which caused the breache, doo prooue the meanes to help it againe: else it had beene much better for eyther part, that such a vnion had neuer beene betweene them.
Of the passions of Loue. The sixt Discoure. LOue is a passion so forcible in our soules, as therein all affections are con∣tayned and comprised. Foure things there are that do torment our mindes, and hat in such sort, as they seeme like the windes that tosse a ship vp and downe: to wit, hatred, loue, feare, and hope. These foure passions are in loue, and in such order are they there, as they can neuer be exclu∣ded thence. The Poets in their writings, haue left vs sufficient testemonie thereof, but muchmore is that which we feele and finde in our owne selues: Therefore, in regard of these foure affections, a man is hindered in iudgement, and so (by good right) is loue figured and set foorth to be blinde.
These foure, one after another in their seuerall degrees, doo occupie and labour the mindes of the amorous, and holdes them (as it were) in a continuall traualye: for when hope lifteth vp, feare and distrust castes downe agayne: looue makes a man imagine it a pleasure, but then some vn∣kinde crosse turnes is to greefe, and then he growes in hate of that which impeached him in his pleasure. But aboue all, that which procureth moste paine, is the pri∣uate looue we beare to our selues. which at the first fight may seeme very straung: be∣cause he that looues not, hateth him selfe, as one affirmeth, and there is nothing more contrarie to looue, then this Philaftia, which is nothing else but looue of our selues. Notwithstanding, because I haue so found it by experience, I say, that he which looueth, and is not againe requited with the lyke, feeles nothing to him more in∣supportable, then to see himselfe mispri∣sed, not listned to nor regarded: for then
he growes to contempte of himselfe, that he is not of any worth, hansome or gra∣cious; but lothsome and vnfightly, when he beholdes an other preferd before him, and he repulsed at the very first onset, then he laies all blame he can deuise on him selfe, alleadging these perswasions, that if he were of any desert, or any matter woorth affecting were in him, his mistresse would haue giuen him better entertaine∣ment, or else (at the least) would haue made some account of him. And so much the more, as nature hath giuen vs a care, to prochase to our selues all aduantages and benefits, to the end, that what she hath brought foorth, might encrease, and be encreased in the first intir∣nesse: euen so is grefe the more hurtfull, when a man cannot reach to the degree of others affabilitie, and attayne those good partes necessarie to make himselfe affec∣ed, so that a man holding nothing dearer, then emiche himselfe with such graces, as are generally beloued and desired, feeles an
exceeding dislike, when he perceiues him∣selfe faultie, and some noted defect, makes him repulsed and not esteemed. And it is very true, that we neuer know our owne imperfections, till we growe to desire and aduancemente of our selues: for when we perceiue our crossing and con∣strayning, then we doo finde more ac∣knowledgment of our selues. When a man keepes a piece of golde in his pursse or chest, he knowes not then the estemation of it, he sees it hath the couller, lookes very fayre, and hath the stampe impressed on it: but when he bringes it abroad, would deliuer it in payment, and sees it brought to poysing, to endure the touche or sounding, and then it proues counterfeict by publique oppinion, why then he findes himselfe nothing enriched by the piece, but a matter which is vtter∣ly vnaduantageable. The tryall of a man, is when he makes offer of him selfe, and standes taxed to abyde good lyking or disgrace.
If then he be refused, first of all he findes fault with his want of desert, because (in∣deede) we naturally holde it as a singular commendation, to be perfect in all partes, and beeing desirous of honour, we couet to be so esteemed by others. It followes then that a man in this case nothing accounted of, greeues because hee cannot compasse his inent, and sees no other helpe, yet well vnderstanding, that as he looues his mistresse for a certayne oc∣casion, to wit, because she is fayre, graci∣ous, gentle and honest: so should he (on his parte) haue somewhat wherby to gaine her loue, for loue groundes his foundati∣on vppon some especiall cause. Then when he sees he hath nothing good in him-selfe, whereby to attract mooue, and procure her affection toward him: then he growes out of all hope of compas∣sing his purpose, then he becomes sad, me∣lancholique, solitarie, shunning the light and societie of men. Neuer-the-lesse, as we can very quickly
make our selues beleeue, that there is some matter of worth remayning in vs, then hope yeeldes some mittigation: but comming then presently agayne to per∣ceiue, that we are not of any reckoning, ey∣ther because the opinion of people is di∣uers, and oftentymes a woman setteth her lyking on a man of least descart: alas, it is impossible to conceiue, how much the poore minde is then tormented, with conti∣nuall cursings & exclaiming on the houre of our birth. But what would such a man man doe, if he had a iudge there present to censure on his cause in loue? Doubtlesse he∣would conceiue some hope, that the good, nesse of his plea should be to his aduan∣tage, and so to compasse that by iustice, which otherwise by fauour is vtterly de∣nyed him. But the estate of a man dependes on the inclynation of his mistresse, she is of this humour heere, then she takes pleasure annon to be there, and will not resolutely determine on any thing, but still is chaun∣able
in her oppinions. VVhat remedie can the poore man ap∣ply to these moodes? he now intreates to proceede by her grace, and not in the iustice of his cause; his mistresse is the iudge, and himselfe standes for his tryall: he beginnes his plea, but she is become so humorous, as the more she is followed, desired and en∣treated, the further of flyes she, closing her eyes, cares and hart altogether, farre dissen∣ting from them of best crudition, who hate to be touchte with any act of vngen∣tlenesse. There are two wayes to winne a woman by, to wit, delectation, which makes her beautie esteemed, and so to be desirous of iouissaunce: of which kinde there be ma∣ny, which seeme colde enough outward∣ly, eyther by course of nature in them∣selues, or deeming that they are fayre enough for them. The other is, when they are desirous of the beautie of the minde for then they make reconing of any good doone them, or of such as
enter∣taynes them with ciuill demeanour. But the mischiefe is, that the most parte are so curious of their bodies, bestowing so much tyme time in decking themselues like pup∣pets: that they neuer thinke at all on the dignitie of the minde, and when they are with such, as would giue them some con∣tentment in their thoughts, eyther because they are not capable of any good thing, or not willing to be therewith acquainted; they turne their heades asyde, contenting themselues with their delicate decking, to shew a good countenaunce, vse many cir∣cumstances, as also to be generally gazed on and pursued by many, that if now and then they vouchsafe so much fauour, as to listen the speeches of an honest gentle minde, they doe it but to be lookt at by others, and to carrie the reporte, that they are be∣loued and soughtafter, not minding at all what els is then sayde to them. But as forthem that are agreeable to their disposition, entertayning them with sportes and recreations: it falles out often∣tymes,
that they are the veriest sottes, and most vnfurnished by nature, but in respect they be braue and gallant, they are the best welcome, and cheefest fa∣uoured. Nor let vs meruayle ouer-much heereat, because like must still agree with like, and the one should not mocke the other: therefore he that yeeldes them any courte∣sie, especially in publique, he must be very braue, for the goodlier man hee is, and costlier apparelled, the more do they ima∣gine them-selues to be honoured, when they are followed and fauoured of any such. Now they that carry another respect, then to be Lackyed by hueries, or helde with friuolou discoursings, or in them∣selus to declare any other behauiour, then may beseeme their modestie and discreti∣on: it is hell to them to be otherwise solici∣ted, for if they desire entertaynemeut by any, they must then be such as themselues are, respectiue of a maidens good fame and
reputatiō: for when any other language is vsed to them, then agrees with their liking and vnderstanding, they quick∣lye finde meanes to leaue such com∣panie. But if we come a little nearer, to consider the behauiour of these nice ones, & what pickt ceremonies they vse in their cour∣tinges, we shall beholde the onely follies in the worlde: one will stand a whole day vpon his protestings: another shewes his ringes, playes with his mistresses glooue, or prayses her apparell, and prooues himselfe a very sotte when all is doone: but if they attayne to more priuate skir∣mishing, that I meddle not withall, let them there doe their deuoire as they may, and let their mistresses then censure of their deseruing. As for their discoursing together, it is to detract one heere, and prayse another there, to commend one maydens perfections, & condemne the demeanour of another: so that were their amorous orations well list∣ned
vnto, we would greatly lament their wonderfull indiscretion. I haue beene in place among wise and reuerend persons where I haue noted good discourse hath bene broken off, by such as entercoursed in this idle manner, mock∣ing and scorning, when better behauiour should be vsed. One beginnes, and takes his mistresse by the hand, to count how many ringes she hath on her fingers, talking of some place where he sawe her in former tyme, reques∣ting renewing of olde acquaintaunce: o∣thers, of other matters, such as best is fitting their humoures: then beginnes the confusion of ciuilitie, the thawe of modes∣tie, and such things conferd on, that might better beseeme silence. Ye shall haue ano∣ther, who fayne would entertayne the tyme with some honourable discourse, such as deserueth to bee heedefully regarded: and he is hindred by anothers vayne dalliaunce, that neuer is satisfied in his fonde beha∣niour, making no spare of place or
companie, but euerie where discouering his follie and simplenesse. Another comes in hast, and he hath some secret to disclose, which makes the women flock about him immediately: & what is this secret? but that is admitted into such a Ladies fauour, and hath receiued such and such instaunces of her kindnesse towarde him. Some of these coy wantons, haue their onely delight in walking abroad with a stately pace, lending their eyes about on e∣uery side, to marke who notes them: and I know no other reason they haue for this behauiour, but that their fine feete might be gazed at, their gay lookes commended, and their braue apparell praysed. If they standat home in their doers & haue any of like disposition to acompany them: they will seeme as if they talked on some very weightie matter: when eyther it is of their pryde, or quipping and girding such as passe by them, and no man or woman can goe along the streete, but they are still prepared for their gecks and tauntings.
Others there be of a different nature, that pretending loue to men, yet coole when they should kindle them: and kindle when they should coole them: one while they giue them so good lookes, as no one can desire better, then (in meere despight) they will stare so straungely, as if they had ne∣uer seene them before, counterfciting their deuises so cunningly, one while so lothe, then agayne so forwarde: as if they were to treate on a peace betweene two nations, as heeretofore our auncient women of the Gaules did, who eemed not so slacke in a case of importaunce, as our women (at this present) in thinges of no value at all. And one storie of their valour I am con∣tnet to alleadge, to stirre vp and encite our dames at this day to immitate them, and contrariewise, to shun and flye all wordly vanities, and heere will I setit downe breef∣ly in writing, as I haue heertofore read it in the Romane histories. Before the Gaules passed the mountaines
of the Alpes continuing in those partes of Italie where they had long remayned, there happened such a great and violent sedition among them: that at length it extended to ciuill warre. But what then did these generous wo∣men of Gaule? euen as the two armies were meeting together, they stept in betweene them, and taking their cause of difference in hand, they censured thereon with so great equitie, and so well to the liking of eyther side: that it procured looue and good will naturally betweene Cittie and Cittie, house and house, as since then, they haue held an especiall authoritie, not onely well thought on by their husbandes, but likewise allowed in the iudgement of straungers. I could easily recite many other examples, concerning the continencie and modestie of the auncient dames of Gaule, and other straungers: were it not I stand in feare, that diuers now liuing would be displea∣sed therewith, because (to their shame)
they went so farre beyond them in all the partes of vertue, as in modestie, shamefast∣nes and chastitie, yea, they haue beene ex∣ceded by very pagan women, who had no knowledge at all of the truth. For I know very well, that the most of our women of these times, couet nothing more then to be flattered: so that to vse speache agreeable with their lyking, it must bein comparing them to Courtiers and their betters, num∣bring their vertues, though they haue iust none at all, or despising others in regard of their singularitie. And if question be made of entrance into their discoursings, why then it is a demaunding of some newes: such a one is to be maryed: such a one hath giuen chaynes and iewelles to his mistresse: She is very gallant: she hath such a new fashioned garment, with other such like peeuish pratling, which yet they account as excellent, and meete to be compared with Appollos Oracles, because therme consters their onely plea∣sure
But when any Lady or Gentlewoman happens to be thus solicited, let me aduise them, as I would doe all other, by the cou∣ragious and vertuous answere of Gorgia daughter to Cleomenes King of Sparta, who when a straunge courtier, tripping before her softly and delicately, came and offered to imbrace her: she rudely thrust him away saying: Back bold sir, knowest thou not the worth of a womans credit? this example is sufficient for vertuous women, to repulse the effemi∣nate follies of men. But men of good mindes despise to con∣ferre so ouer familiarly with any, respecting aswel their quallitie, as their honor and mo∣destie: remembring withall, that bashfull∣nesse forbids answeres to vnseemely que∣stions, & commonly, the inward dispositi∣on is witnessed by our woordes. Yet will I not denye, but there may passe speeches both merrily and modestly, such as a chast care may heare, and answere with∣out offence. VVhich if men on their behalfe would
be more familiare withall: they should finde women not so curious and straunge, when they breake the yee to them of their amorous pur∣poses. FINIS.
