12007 24145872 27249
THE TRYALL OF TRAVELL OR, 1. The Wonders in Trauell, 2. The Worthes of Trauell, 3. The Way to Trauell. In three bookes Epitemizd. By Baptist Goodall Merchant. They that trauaile downe to the sea in shipps, and passe opon the great waters, such see the workes of the Lord, and his wonders in the deepe.Psalme. 107. 24. Ignoti nulla, cupido. LONDON, Printed by IOHN NORTON, and are to bee sould by IAMES VPTON, at his shop in Paules Church yeard at the signe of the Fox, 1630.
TO THE THRICE NOBLE And Illustrious Lady: prime seate of all princely worth, Great honor of trauell, Patterne of Piety and patience ELIZABETH. Queene of Boheme, Countesse Palatz of the Rhine, Duehesse of Bauary Marchionesse of Mo∣rauy. These tripart tryalls of trauell are conse¦created by Baptist Goodall: in Hope of her Honourable acceptance, with Wishes of ioyes Ex¦ternall, Eternall.
To all the sonnes of Noble tra∣uaile whether Merchant, Martiall, or Maryne Negotiators. TO you the liuely Characters of my muses Epitome (as more due) I present her: not for shelter, but suruay, her sonets are in short the trophes of your trauails: Anti∣dots against obliuion, and the Aconite of skillesse cen∣sure. Therein may ye reuise the wonders once viewed, the worths preconceiued, with the wayes of trauaile traced already: so doing scan how short you are of what may be; as well as reuiue time of that hath bin. Action is proper to you speculation to scollers: what they Aenigmatically peruse, you personally visit, now al∣though she can neyther much augment your notions, nor yet for∣tifie your Iudgements by these her primortiues, so sub alternate to your sufficiencies: yet hapily in the garden of her diuersitie▪ some flowers may selected no lesse delectable then profitable, if not serue they as suchions pendant in memory of more Iuditious ob∣seruations: or euer dure they as pledges of an vnlimited loue to all the Noble sonnes of trauaile, Such primly Whose wishes drilled her out from pen to presse I am not ignorant how our crittick can cauill, therefore haue I fortified her with diuine, and Morall Auncient and moderne marginals, as little how our satirist in his Laciuyous textures confront the like Carpere vel noli nostra, vell edetua, nor how the Tertullian wil puffe at her plainesse, A  faut point d'enseigne, alas deformityes in nature, are only ∣dulterate defects obscured deceptio visus fits homespune punies, not blades who pump for their wits midd salt surges and haue ur yed more countryes thou the carier countrytownes, my  (my present wife) is as plaine as yong nor lesse true then vncommon please shee you with her songs I am satisfied our speech by pa death proues silence what suruiues in abscence is writing eyther after vs, or farr of, Quo lic at libris non licet ire mihi. she may speake when I cannot, where I may not. I comit her to your custo∣dy, wishing your happy progresse in trauaile, with peace foreuer. Your fellow trauailer, Baptist Goodall.
The Prologue to the Generall THat our vnwise domesticke many discerne With the Agrestick Trauailes worths to learne And that Both may behold as in a glasse Pleasures of such who foraine parts do passe Vnuailing so the vices of a crue Who guesse all things by them vnseene vntrue I haue in short set downe my thoughts therin Some credit to that choyce estate to winn, First from my owne lies who a small haue seene Yet better may the worths of trauaile deeme Then from the house bird, and the Dormouse dull So from our critick, and th' vnletterd gll Now if as 't may be) th' sonnes of Didimus In Stoicke humor Daine not to beleeue vs Lo th' Sacred writ will vrge a credit to it No Antidote but seeing else will do it Diuine, and Morall, Modern, and the ould All in her worths vasked with vs hould The Patriarcks, Princes, Ptophets stories Churches And worlds of more of all sorts sort with these The Iewes, Greeks, Turks, Moors, Indians: and wee All ages times, and states, there to agree To Christian some, to Mortall trauaile all Trovaile to euery mortall must befall. Ciill alone is now our muses taske Which he (by Zoilas leaue) shall now vnmaske Its wonder, worth, and way and plant from hence. Canons dismount all homebred impudence pell their false auouch, whose trembling pen Like Canaan spies disconsolateth men Read all or none at all, do but as due Thou't say though yong and short, hee's plaine and true. Quem recitas meus est fidentine libellus At male dum recitas, incipit esse tuus, Martialis.
The wonders in trauaile. What time Iehove had all things ready made. Geneseos. 1. Adam primus homo damnauit seenla prima, 3 The Sea, Land, riuers, winds the Sunne and shade The day and night, both foule and Firmament Heauen and earth form'd all to mans content, Him made he then the microcosme of all, Seated in costly Eden, whilst his fall, Qui facit magna & inscrutabillia abs{que} numero Eliph. Makes him accursed of a Lord compleats Insweat of browes adindg'd his bread to eate And pilgrimewise henceforth on earth to wander, Pacing about it as a crookt meander, Thenearth for sin sustaines a whole delusion Oshominisubline dedit omne me∣tam 1. caput. And Nimrods plott produces tongues confusion Sin, still and sorrow relatiues in vs We are to spend our dayes in trauaile thus. Diuinest for sight arm'd the world with store nihil in terra Sine cansa sit Iob. 5 Of adhuments to trauaile long before To this end we are the windes volutions fram'd Which east, west, north, and south, by man are nam'd. To this end were both seas and flouds prepar'd As is in the Creations rule declar'd. And so become the tongues confusion good Deus  totus quodenim togitat hoc Loguitur & qvod loqnitur togitat Iren Lib. 2. c, 48. One aydes the other to be vnderstood. Yea heerevnto was shipping preinuented, Least entercourse twixt nations be preuented Since man to sweate and trauailes destind heere So to consume in life day, month, and yeare.
Tis nothing else to trauaile but to breath Trauailes ordained posterities bequeath. Tis nothing more to trauaile then to liue Qunti instit Li∣ber, : Earth cannot least reposd contentment giue Nor may the wise, or great, or faire, goe free But equaly the trace of trauaile see. Trauaile tripartite prime to all the rest Is mortall trauaile, all thus interest. The Christian and Ciuill stand dependants Both being on our mortall course attendants Ciuill we treat of tis wee vnderstand Mans state of entercourse by sea and Land As they are destind heere to vndergoe, Great Ioue in his degree commands it soe. To tell such wonders they at sea haue seene, His greater fames forgotten to redeeme. Of things vnknowne a Credit to procure, And men to see his greatnesse to allure Of natures rares indifferent of Climes. To tell the worths, strange qualities and times. Vti beneficia omnibus horis—sunt consideran¦sa Chrisostom: Acquaint the earth with miracles vnknowne, which oney are by ciuill trauailes showne. And friendly chang of each lands fruites thus made, Yea many thousands each way fed by trade. Thus trauailes wonders first their maker praise, Then add they store and sollace to our dayes The forme of ciuill trauailes thus prepard Now shall its wonders briefly be declard Not able to conceiue the cause of much In mare: Her miracles in her surueyes are such Microcosme Each mans a wonder of himselfe alone Much wonder may a man suruay at home Much more in many millions disagreeing Informe wits mannors, nations habitts being Th' invisiue deiety hearin disclosd Romans. 1. Omnipotence in natures frame proposd To leaue sayth scripture man without excuse
When faithlesly men cause his powers abuse Psalme. 8. Qui desendunt mare in nauibus facientes opera∣tionem in aquis multis ipsi vide∣runt opera domi∣ni & mirabllia sua in profundis: Wise Dauid first at heauen, then earth admires From whence with wondering downe to sea retires Such as descend to deepe (quoth he) such see The powers of Iehova what they bee His fame is raised by euery dayes successe The rudest region will explaine no lesse When men saith he are tossed in the maine So that their soules consume in sence of paine Sometime are tossed to the cloudy skies, Hence in a hast hell low, her shipping flyes Billowes carreyring tosse too and fro And wash her as a wherry high and low Now pray they and their sorrow seekes an end Past hope or helpe or harbour to defend The stormy winds are stild, the men haue hope When in a calme the ship findes larger scope The men reioyce, blesse God, and well ariue And in the midd of many perilles thriue Twas sure a wonder Iouas vnder went When he in trauaile crossed Ioues intent The monstrous Whale should harbour be to him Who in his soule had harbourd so much sinne Three dayes aliue transported in his Chest Yet all this time with life and safety blest Then layd ashore, out of his mighty power Whose quality is solie to deuoure Aegypts red sea to admiration parts And from an ocean to drie land conuert Billowes, are walles, they passe on dry foot ground Patientia dei 12 annes dura vit cumarca sibat. When Lo! their foes the Aegiptians are drownd No lesse admired was the Arke of Noe Prepard to trauaile in earths ouerthrowe The monstrous Generation, mockt his skill How ere twas formd by God Almighties will All earths indeluge he and his are fownd
Careyring safe in shipp, all others drown'd, Solares est quae omines obsentes presentes facit Turp: de fit viciss Quibus pusum∣nusetiam abce∣tibus alloqui August, And by this rare inuentions hrbinger The world doth alwayes with it selfe conferre Shipping ar embasies, he get relation Through farr remote twixt nation, and nation Posts packing each way with intelligences Garners to store mortals assure defences The wandrous arke anchours Ararats mount Her docke, and now the nations recounte Hauing a patterne how her like to build Then from a future deluge still to sheyld And I, make the waters passable they try Phenicanus bowe the first in history Naue primus as egypto damnus, aduenit pliny Aegypt proceedes the Greeke and many omre Solomon trads to Opior for his ore. Thus did deuine prescience ships inuent Mans Cheifest friend, the temples ornament Reg: 1, Our Lord and his desciples once at sea Great gulfts arise and tempest ouersway The shipp suckes billowes as her onely diett vide: Mark. 4. 38. Makes the desciples fearefull and vnquiet He wakes, they cry helpe master or wee perish. Oft times thus feare by vnbeleefe is cherisht Christ giues the word and bids them all be still And gladly they as soone obey his will So that the faithlesse Iewes are forst to say Oh what is he whom windes and seas obey. Examples moue oft more then reasons good where sence and sight ar wholy vnderstood monumenta aeto∣tum Lest: L: Lo! Last in paull his voyage is a wonder. When sea and windes teare all their ships in sunder Each boardes conuey, and safe the people land Act. 27 20: Rul'd in the Loue of Paul by highest hand See now at sea the wonders trauail knowes Where God himselfe in omnipotence showes Proclames a power exceeding other places Vbitung fuerit dei prouidentia
And sea aboue the land with wonder grace rustrautar vni∣uersa contraria August: Next acts his matchlesse mercy greater part And seeming death to long life doth conuert Daily experience fortisies our faith Should we surmise vnsure what scripture saith? Our eighty eight Gibralter and the rest Would with amazement scale our flinty brest As thus on sea Ioue in high wonder passes So him in sea his creatures wonder graces Creatura miran∣da. Witnesse the worlds of fish of various birth When waters broad doth simpathise the earth Liuiathan Iohes wonder as a rocke But at a ship maiestickly doth knocke His huge and massy beard whole billowes brusshes Iob 41 6. Corpus eius qu∣scuta susillia compactum se squamis se pre¦mentibus He through the ocean as a whirle winde rushes Or as an earthquake makes the seas to shake Deuouring shoules, and supping drie the lake His sinnes plowe way in midest of proudest waues Thus Neptune like he all the sea out braues Puffes out a challenge, what can quele my might Or who like me can on an ocean light Forgetting how the sea man in meere play Winnes him in sport, to throw his bulcke away And drunkard like allyes the Barrell ore Till he appeareth naked one the shore Now gald with darts that cloudes of blood ensue And die the neerer streames another hue The slimy sea horse; and the Cowe contend Better then the terre themselues to send Yet on the ice will wallouw in a rowte And both brought Captiue by the seaman lente Men monsters and the Syrens rares to see Yet on the waues such wonders dayly be Scene in the north and Southerne hottest climes Chifely the former in our latter times The boulting sea hogg spouts against the storme
And will attend though wild sweete musickes charme Whose consorrs Saluson, Codd, and Sturgeon bee Such in our natiue soile hath primacie . Tis said of sages not so ould as true That althings silent shew Gods powers due And that some workes of his mirit admire Rather then reason how and why inquire His prouidence in heauens high influences To the other regions els are sole defences Sunn, Moone, and starres, aire, Earth, and sea direct Order, dispose, rule, alter, get, protect Their dispositions haue effects in all In sea, in skie, or earth, men creatures call Their constant motion diuine influx causes The sea store hath at large a share in these A second earths store, as the shapes of vs So Brutes, horse, doggs; and all sorts wonderouse Yea vegetiue and minerall appeare The sword, fist, pike, cuts, tortise farr and neare All sorts by sholes in order know their like Their formes so strang, men in amazement strike For note as euery Clime doth various stand The obiect Zones ruling the nether land So euery sea as is the Climes degree Differs in Creatures shape and rarity All which howere to home bred men vnknowne Yet are in midd of trauaile wondrous showne The rule of Reason is my argument It brings in men (things neere so strange) Consent For a relation in one body rownd Twixt sea and land was in Creation fownd In Creatures kind though different in forme Yet cannot natures liknesse be out worne This of the wonders on, and in the ocean The frutes there off are only trauailes notion Cumfreta discu∣ditrapidis{que} See now the sea it selfe miraculouse
His height exceeds earths, and is fluctuos tumesrre ventis & am circum∣dare litora terroe metam Lib. 1. Yet giueth God sayth Dauid to him bownd Nor can earth by its ouerheight be drownd A miracle exceeding common since And wherin reasons proofe is impotence As is the cause of tides slux and retreate Howere by luner motions made compleate This watry orbe is various euery where Now red, then blacke, then yellow, greenish cleare Now hot and seethes, there ice mountes her couer vtque duae dex∣caelum to tidem qu si asira, par¦te secant zon, quinta stard en∣orillis &c. Wonders best knowne by such as trauaile ouer Fiue zones earths guards, the Equinoctiall girt Which vnder Climes still as they are Conuert Two frigid, one fire hot two temporate Gouernd by the high Celaestiall fate the differing seas, and seasons vnder each How ere knowne part by speculationes reach Guid metam: 1: Yet sights the sure, and teitruth of a notion Not subiect, to the pennes vnsure deuotion Trauailes adiacents more miraculous Inable man to presse seas reaches thus The compasse by his loadstone wonders chiefe Yeilds in vnknownest pathes a knowne reliefe Teaching the steareman how to runn his way And midest of Rockey billowes take survay Now sunn and starres are hid not to digresse In nauall calculations more or lesse Instrumenta naevallia mirn∣da, In course to Cape, Ile, harbour, stranger nation But find the true rowmb, in winds variation In midd of misty fogges secure to runn Although in darknesse and defect of sunn Knowing and surely too, each Cape and Cliffes where slatts, sands, shoules, safe harbours rockes or riffes That Ephimerian callender a wonder There astrolab, Crosstaff viewd asunder Whose issues and effects psse home Conceits
Wherewith our seamen act admired seates Bernar in Can∣tic: 76 The Compas Card, scale limbes of euery shipp That plannifp heere, and tranfames so be fit In rarest art, sunnes horall height to know And the altitude of euery starre to show Northeasting, aud Northweasting by a line What way is made, which way the length, the time The North starre where aboue tho pole or not Skilles wherein euery home bredd proues a sott My relation Hebrue, he athen Greeke, yet know Tis now my talke sea miracles to showe Sunnes surgere gresse in euery latitude Harden then heera at home ar to conclude Each lands dimension length, and square and site The solar progresse, euery where his height Tides in all countries by the moone to find Their flux and reflux, and the depth they wind Timly meridian, solles true Declinations The North starres power, Globes rule in Nauigations The pillotts art his Chanall sownds, quicke viewe Vesputiones Ano 1499: Collumbus: Anno 1492. Darcus Anno 1579. In learning ad∣uancement. Magell anus 1520: Candish 1587 Lo! from these fruits our voyages accrue Amazing earth in great discoueties made Inriching Europ with a potent trade Thus euery way at sea are wonders showne I will not name discoueries well vnknowne Those new found Gulphes: exacter reuolutions Collumbus, Drakes, or candishes conclusions Vesputius Norts or Dauis nouigatianes For earths pacts latly rowue by many nations The thorow lights by trauell made are cleare Through which our new world doth to the ould appeare Amerricca her sisters three scarce knew While trauell brought them to an enter view And now acquainted both in admiration Honour, and vse as briges Nauigation Thence to the skies high wonders travaile sees
Cosmographies the plott discouers theese The leuen heauens, Circular effects Trauail in all her wondros dessects That Zodiacke, his twelue parts operation Discrepant to the subdependent nation The Equinoctiall change, earths axaltree Embraces differently her orb ye see Heere starres both fixt and motiue alter Case Wonderous in act according to the place The foure winds Rhouts, and thirty two partitions Eclipses solar, lunar; such positions As these are plainely writ, I neede not say The worths in sight its sure, beyond denay I am quod vide∣tur sciri potus quam credi dici∣tur. For so much as the thing is fancies better View passesse reading, its contents are greater The heauens declare Gods glory, Heauens power Is picturd in earths woundrous parts each houre Gregor in Euan∣geli. 32. Earths miracles in trauelling are more Since the Almighty formd heere greater store That so the sonnes of men in admiration Terraemira. Might passe to view from nation to nation Varieties still added to desire Terra vires vr∣bes{que} gerit fru∣gesque faerasque flumina{que} hec superest Caelisul∣gentis. Imago mett: Lib: 1. Filling the greedy stranger with admire The men, townes, frutes, riuers and brutes all Change Turne any way in trauaile things are strange Geography treats most of arts hearin But trauaile only sweet of sence doth winn Earths sipherall orbe both ile and continent According to their sits are different Complexions to the Climes do beare relation So is in men a diuers propagation How full of miracles is nature now Which euery way such difference can allow? Mens statutes, colloures, haire much different In humours, and in manners diuers bent Our Northern cleare, the Southern swarty browne
Thats merry plaine, this cunning bent to frowne Ons frolicke other sad and dull of spirit Thus diuers Climes their diuerse breed inheritt Europe the Queene though least of sisters foure Ad me undum focetatem home naturà ferter sua Aug. De ciuitat Lib. 19. cap. 12. Greatest in fame, in arts in wits in power In wines and mines high Garmany exceedes As Mosco Beauers, and the rich furr breeds The Belgick fish, and linen, a iarring nation Yet much suprasseth most in nauigation The french her wines, and silkes of Itally Spaines fruits, rich ores, and Irons raise her high The Danish tackle skinnes, and whales suplie The Norway plankes, firres furies, and fishery The polish flaxes, Sweadish Brasse, and mast The Turkey stuffes Hungarian coppers Cast The florence silke, Beames Buffe, moluccoes spice The Brittish wooltrin, lead, corn, cole of price Sicillian Coralls sugaries Candie wines Zauts Corrants, and the venice Muskadines The Chinaes gould, pearle, muske, and Iuory The Indian silke, and mines of ores supply Behould the diuerse store each land affordes The wonders in creations due the Lordes Each land in worths to wonder disagreing In nature, colour, quantity and being Hence may wee wondering in a higher straine On trauells stage admiring mount againe Scorning the least of lying wonders tould inhilminus i am Obsequium ami¦cos veritas obuim parit. Terentius. By sicophants to obiect basenesse sould Telling of foothigh pigmeyes, doggeard men Blue blacke and yellow collored, cald by them Out scoggin, skinke, and like to these in credit Fables, ales hate, trauailes eiection merit What need fond men, the vulgar bee deluded Or yet the Lord of nature be abused? His names almighty in true wondrous things
And truth alone sound satisfaction bringes Hees truly great in all, abhorres all glozing Dishonourd much by each false tales composing. Yet wants no fame; the little ants a wonder Much more those many thousands all out number. Edifficia miran∣da. Id circo credere debemus que non vidimus vt vi∣dere me rea∣mur quae credi∣mus. Hug: victor cap: 1. De fid invi: See but some rares in fabrickes admiration Duly attends on some in euery nation. That Chinan wall twelue hundred miles in length Their mighty citties and, vnuoted strength, Those Piramids of Aegypt twelue miles rownd And fiftie cubitts mounted from the grownd The tower and walles of mighty Babilon The Capitall and ruind worths of Roome The venice fabricks, Cayroes circle stronge The spannish bridge admired three leagues long, As these the creatures vegetiue excell And sensitiue their alterations tell, That Indian figtrees an admired thing Whose touch to earth causeth a world of spring Breeding a long atracke of mighty store Ones brood oft Carreyeth a furlong ore, Those siluer sands, and peatlie vaines distilling The spanish with their matchlesse treasures filling The oliue nutmegg, and the cloues are rare And may with Mirch, and lemond well compare, Land Creatures wonders in the Ellephant Creatura mira¦da. He most for massy fortitude doth vaunt Able to tuggship laden in a calme And fel the Dragon with his massie palme Carrie a fort of Cannon, vnderstand Yet willingly obay his guiders hand, Writters admire at fieirce Rhinoce rosse His horne, sayd the mightiest can tosse With glassy scales encounters greater things And to the new beholders terrour bringes Poore muskcats ciuer as a rare receiued
The Bezar, ambir, rubies rares conceaued But the Camell Leopard hatches an admire In all that to the Southern poles retyre. A Composite, two natures mixt we see Bearing to both an equall Simpathy The cruell Dragons' fell deuouring iawe The serpent makes his venamous sting his lawe Both lurking close in rockes of desert springs And an affrighting of the neighbour things, The Crocodile whose teeth in sumder sharke Making decision limit to his marke Numquid volet Rmoceros, tibi sruire? aut mo∣rabur is ad prae sepe tuum. Iob. 39. Hatcht of an Egge oh wonder of admire To all in trauailes in the torrids are Shee men and beasts often by land deuoures More fish in sea and riuers ue his powers Yet oft the musket meete his high attempt And with his ruine doth a hurt preuent Strange Armadillo armed round about Scales hath as Iron with, a swinish snout Teeth cruell bent, yet helpe his bones to Cure Whose rarenesse trauailes view doth oft allure, But should I pen the tenth of all the store The things some see; good writers record more Nor paper, pen, nor skill could sure suffice Let vs hearin with modesty be wise Instancing truths, truth beares the only sway When worlds of extant fictions decay. Our dayes are short suppose no one hath had A viewe of halfe in progresse of his trade Each what it is add truely to the store Of wondrouse brutes now say my muse no more, Omit the Lyon, Beare, wolfe, vnicorne The Elck, and Estrich, and the Hart, forlorne In wildernesses with the Leopard pacing And with the Tiger trauailes wonders gracing Passe by the Eagle, faulcon, para, kite And fly the tortoise, and the Rockfish sight.
And add to these as different conditions Tot species tani tos{que} ortus var∣os{que}uouatus ipsa clies apperit con∣ficit ipsa dies. Ouid: Amorum. The Spanish pride, and insolent ambitions French, and Itallien lust, and light conceits The vnbeleeuing Iewe in close deceits Dane, German, Pool, Norwegian Russe, and Duch, Tainted with cupping clownishnesse as much Brittish how bould, how various, belly bent Turkes cruell, chinenses maleuolent, Germani multos possunt suffèrre labores ó vtinam possiut tam bene ferre sitim. Vt nos dulce me rum sic vos ve∣nus impia tur∣bat; lix ventri imposta est Iulia nalla mere. Vestitus varys. Rude Indians, and Tartarians Idolizers The morish blacke Barbarians bloody mizers, The west, and southerne soyles to lust runn madd The East, and north, in drunkennesse us bad. As natures ilnesse diuersly doth vent Hauing in climes peculier extent, See how the habits men, and women weare, Varie to admiration euery wheare. The Russe his furd long Coat slopt, Collers beares The Dane his pointed buffes, wiues wreathed haires The German Iumphre huicke, Crague hull, and Copp The swedish mustzell, and long flemish slopp The french all puffes, naked Itallian vailes The Spanish bagg fleues, Long sauoyan tailes The Irish rugg, welch freez; and highland trouses The Brittish proteus, Course norwegians Couses Ciuitatum varic tas. Where ere in trauell thou arriue thus see One named for worlds what various habits bee Fabricke of realmes, as fashions alter much One vsed heare of wood; Bricke, with the Duch. The Geanovoijs guilt, leaded marble frame. Venice for fite and glazing beares the name. Mad rid his fiery wall, St. Lawrence grace The Ancient Roman edifice, high race Cayro and Paris greatnesse, Londons plenty The famous neatherlands structures no place empty Antwerp, and Culloyne,, temples goodly site This handfull for the heape in trauailes sighte.
One passing still another in some rare Wherein alone he triumphs past compare, But that the wisest God may seeme more high Heel mixe his honours with diuersitie, And time the Epoch passe their fittest birth And when and where disperst to be one earth One land this graces, and another that Yet the supremist worths not to relate If one way Spaine passes for grapes our ile Societatùsub lata omuis cuita¦est suqlata Ci∣iucunditas. cero: de Ami∣citia. In food, and cloth we more then countervaile If India passe for ores and pearles the Duch Their nauies passe the Indian as much, If china, sends with Turkey silken store Our sheep clad, and our benes feed thousands more If Norway whale, Ruffe furr, and swedish brasse By steetes in trafick to the westerne passe They turne gould, wine, and fruits of contentation So might I instance much in euery nation One succours other, traficke breeds affection The whole is gouernd by the high protection. For windes, seas skie, and trauell all agree To frame one earth a iust conformity That nature hots, and coulds may be suffied And euery parts commodities be prizd And all men muse to view Earths aged forme Solemaenum do videntur demere¦qui amiciam. Siue qui auitam incundam nullo modo habere passvmus Cicer: de Ami∣citia. Triumphs in trauaile more; as lesse out worne Thousands vnseen assisting one another And the Barbarian rude the Christians brother This harmony in nature, and each nation Hatched by trauailes howrely propagation Nor warr, nor iarr, can totally mollest But some way finde they mutuall interest, Ordaind to fit in all parts man entire Begetting trauailes wonder, our admire, Whereof howres much more might instancd bee Yet I conceaue enough in what wee see The wise may by the modell iudge the masse
So speed my muse to trauailes worths a pace In sea, skie, earth, fish flesh; reason and sence Lo! wonders of diuine omnipotence Some scatterd each way; trauaile must discry And industry, and wisdome moue to try Occasionall wonders these attend on time And we for them since none can pre diuine In Christian trauailes, an almighty hand Protects his Church, and Children in each land In mortall trauailes steard by force of fate Men may presume but no way can rebate What strange effects they are allotted too What wonders they are destind heere to doo Life tis a trauile through earths sea of woes And miracles doth Christian state disclose Neyther the matter of my muses songe They to diuines and moralists belong And my discourse of ciuill trauails worth After her wonders let her vtter forth Prostrating so his selfe to trauailes friend So much in short of wonder makes an end. Aut face, Aut tace.
The worthes of trauels. CAuses fortunne effects Logitians say Est enim iustitia Vnicui{que} Suum tribuere: cic: de officijs. Ignorantiae duae Filiae falsitas & Dubietas, illa misereor, ista miserabillior illa peruitiotior ista molestior Austin As subiects euer Leade their adiuncts way, Though trauells worths are in wonders showne Yet by her rare effects shees better knowne, Iustice say sages is to giue each righte Oppon its worth apparent to the sight, Worth must be knowne, ere't can be iustly prizd In ignorance it can but be surmisd. The fruits then seen pluct off the fertill tre, Can best expresse it's worthinesse to thee, Commit it to the tast of any man Thens no more need it's excellency to scann, Pleasures, and profitts Commonly are crosse And the, gaine of one is still the others losse, But if they in one subiect mett agree That neuer faild to prooue a raritie, Behould heers both, and larglie too extended, Whereby earths seede from ruine is defended. Profits abayte t'allure the thrifty mind Though he small pleasure in the obiect find, How trauail sutes in both is admiration Mans witt, and wealth of these a first relation The wise terms witt, a siluer gliding streame The witts of nobler natures tis I meane
For thers the cause the earthly minded lake Nor will nor can of trauailes worth pertake, Such wits I say still flowing from the fountaine And inbred vigour of the holy mountaine Natures remaines more cleare by graces shine, Both by assistance influence diuine, Still throuh the nations current are more pure By sunncrene, made actiue to endute, Mans wit and fence by trauailes daily tried Remaine by issue still vnputrified, Oth harmony in diuerse witts accord Officiisvitae hu∣mana Constat mutuis omnis{que} ratio & insti Cutiovitae qumanae adiu∣menta desiderat cicero off. Lib: 2. Neuer Could Clime all sorts Comactt afford, Lands must bee louing borow much of each The nearer witts perfections to reach, The God of nature calls for mutuall trade Diuersicie this enter course hath made, The Stoic Iewe loues of the Christians learne And wee in them frugallity discerne The Could dull northerne practize westerne witt And they a true plaine hartednesse in it. The rudest Indian manners of our planter His heathen skill became our trades aduancer, The orphean musicke with Itallian dwelles The Spannish linning euery way excelles, The deepe Giunosophist, the Captiue grecian The paracelian phisicks with Venetian, The Expert Pool, and Pertian horst in warre The prying Crees his iudgement of the starre In some all passe that none may be deiected But none in all that all may be respected. As arts inuentors heere and there abide That they might be to all allwayes discried When the decree aginst, Lewd earth was past And God by waters ment the Earth to wast He then instnicted Noah first ship to build Both him and his from waters force to shield The eye of man Could not forsee the worth
This rare art doth posterities bring forth By it earths spacious kindred Comes acquainted And Christian faith midd infidels is planted, But not Enthusiall, but by practize skill Men Nauigations miracles fulfill A rarat mounts taught the Phenicians how A second arke by Industry to bowe, Hence Egipp, next it to the Greeks extends Who add the Deckes, ones art the rest befriendes The Creet, then Carthage hence the Roman next But prouidence assigens it to them next. And winds transport a shippe of Tyre to them So are the Romans made sea fairing men, Cretnsis nscrit peligus. Become sea masters, whence our Brittaine learnes Belgickes french, spsnish all the art discernes Behold the fabricke out of diuerse nations As this so other arts haue propagations Ciprus the large, Illyrians the Barke Rhodes formes our frigats; nay the tackles marke Beotia ores, Dedalus mast and saile Which bred first poets fond I Carian tale.  nibus grande leuatur onus. The Tuscans ruder, heime and sterne invent And stearing from skild Typhis first descent. Lo! now the lott is euery way disposd Wee see some heere some there of artes disclosd Icarcus Icarijs, nomina dedit equis. The wise may by his matter iudge the masse And see Gods goodnesse cleare as in a glasse. The issues they shall force thee to beleeue it Worthy to tell, and trie true trauailes credit As Noah and his suruiue by this innention And Solomon at Ophirs Long desceusion. Whence he the temple ornaments did bring Gold, pearles, and Iewels, worthy such a King So since the new world and the ould shake hands And freinds are found in many, forraine Landes wilt man be witty, then thy daies deuote or some of those some traueld worths to note.
For trauailes fruit is reapt by obsuruation eorum filij nos dicimur quorux actiones imita¦mur Grigeni ezeck homi. 4. And thers a seuerall Cropp in euery nation. For all mens genius some way Chiefly bends It to accomplish some way he intendes. It may he thine cannot at home be sitted Some artists proue elsewhere, farr sharper witted. The handmaid trauaile brings you both as friends So now ye purchace your desired ends. Thou shalt suruay behauioures of a world All in exact diuersities in rowld Hec ediseas & vigilare Labo∣rare Solon. Cull out the Choice of flowers in the feilds So decke thy witts with that each climate yeilds Sweet plesant sauours of their vertues loue And noysome sent of vices disaproue. So bring home haruest with the ant with thee Equidem exem∣pla multa docere Possut. Which in thy gray haires may a sollace bee. Come to the proffits next each state enioyes By iust Comerce, and trauailes Counterpoise How as in man each member aideth other So ouer earth each Climes suports the tother Earth neuer knew it selfe while trauell rose Ouid: am: Which did it selfe vnto it selfe, disclose Mans mcrocosme can scarsely be accquainted But Brutall be from rationall disionted. Loose in himselfe himselfe his hart vnknowne Though in his midest but to his god alone Much more the Globe, howere the Globe is round Thousands of Angls meere vnknowne a bound. One cannot ayd another while vnseene Trauaile the prospect medium betweene A tripart lamelesse Long possest its forme Whilst by the force of enter view outworue, In reasons order twas adiudged rownd But which wayt only twas by trauaile found, Long time past Assia vaunting all alone She onely she in scriptures trauaile knowne While affrica ascends on Churches stage
And doth it selfe for Eropes search engage. Downe to the Romans yea to Spaine it comes And so to Brittaine hither to her homes, Thus in a glory trauailes the most high Oe earth with that his Arke triumphantly Brittaine and thule vngill accounted last Christoprero columbo, deind Amerioue ves∣putio vnde & Americiae omen fortitur. When we abroad the earth as scumm were cast While latlie Lo! as Lighting trauils flyes And then a fourth America descris With worldes of wealth and mines of ore repleate And all but man, wild man there vncompleate, Sweet trees, raie gummes, rich ores and liluer sands In length and breadth surmounting other Landes. Dubartus. Collumbus and Magellian Prowdly venetrd Then Drake, vespuritis and our forbish enterd, Peruana and the Mexican are cleard But the south regiones what they are vnheard Terra Australis Incogn. ta est. The worlds of wealth thence to our Lands accue And the many fertile Coloines insue. In many large discoueries is declared An therefore shall in my discourse be spared. I onely aime the wealth trade bringes to tell All as one household ruld by fate to dwell. Europ the chiefest right by trauell tries Fixe one those Indies your indicious eyes. Virginia, and Bermudaes, Brittaine plantes And Spaine in her west Indian highnesse vauntes. The Northerne riches; whales and fures brings home Vt enim Solitu∣do in odioest, ita in dulcedine & appetitio soda∣litalis Snn ep. 9 Things to our fathers, and to theirs vnknowne And we the flemish French and all crept in A part in Spaines rich Indian soyle to winn As lands so Citties yea and men are made Potent by trauile, and recourse of trade Whence comes it princes scorne not merchants stile By it their Cosers they with substance pile For as of warr are siluer strings the tyes So it by trade and trauaile must arise.
That prowdest monarck who the whole Earth claimes And would haue Earth cald Gods stild onely Spaines May make a Saint of trauaile for his ore Ere those aduentures, neuer prince more poore. Twas Tyre, and Memphis priueledge so great That holy writts their merchandize repeate The Hauen Low become now highlands better The Ile though but a blott a whole lands greater The merchants warchouse as a princes store Some states in rule are rich in venture more. Some vse them as supports in a relation On to the other mutuall propagation. Quantum quis{que} sua nu∣morum seruatin arca tantum ha∣bet & fidei. Defensiue potence makes trade better thriue As trade preserues a potency aliue, No in stance but the Netherlands, and hantz A mutuall knot, their welfares to aduance. Trafickes true nerues armistically mixt And twixt marine, and land ende avoures fixt No way mechannieke for a boore to know Impiger merca∣tor Horrace. Nor mind I merchants misteries to showe Yet who Denies those mistery of exchange (If able to be sounded) shew how strange The proper subiects are themselues should know Nor any else how goes it high or low. How rich to states ye nether Nobles say, Omnia adiues habet nam prae∣strantomnia nu∣min. 1. Marcell. Who her with can Spaines magnitude or sway; And Countercharme his indies by your trale And the victorious fleets by flemings mae Nor dare I banke our eighty eights defence Though primely due to high omnipotence, The Noblemeane weare ships of victory Martius aduerso dux strennus ob∣vat hosti quan∣dr sub hac veluti palladi bella gerit. Matheus leiuer∣uill vbi: Mixt with aduentures ost tryed vliancie. What agents he who trauaile neuer knew Wanting such parts as tradings worths a true? But by a broker in a forraine soile Become meere slaue to forrainers beguile. See citties clad with shipping as a robe
Whose natiues send to search about the globe How fraught with riches, both of soule and minde He that perceius not this is wilfull blind Sugars and wines we from caunaries haue From Florence silkes, from Naples satens braue. From Candy Currants Oyle and muskadine, From Indies East store of all spices fine Arabian odoures, swete, and ubaes ore From the Could russe fine furres and fishes store. From Newfoundland, the norway firr and flax The swedish Coppers, Cordage ambers wax, The flemish hope his linen flanders say. Volupias non∣nisi varietate confistit. Our brittish stores wee know no more suruay The sea winde weather shippings stores and saile All iump the worthes of trauaile to availe. So that in short it serues the sones of men No more of trauails profits needfull then Now forits pleasures, pleasure tis to tell. Those multitude that do in trauaile dwell. Both soule, and senses mutually fild A secret solace in them both distild Christs crosse a modellis of what we say Tis a meere trauaile passing all denay, Wherein (as Paule) the christian is assaild With many woes, to vertues lot intayld Yet Lo! as he in all becomes victorious And ioyes in sorrow, by abasment glorious Tramples on sin and sorrow by an ayd Which makes the fell infernall curres affrayd Of this to come, as man all for content Poore man his curses bitter would preuent By various obiects relishing his toyle Whereof he findes out some in euery soyle His sences seruants to his will desire Nothing so much as noueltie require, Wise Solomon saw this when once he sayd My eyes with seeing is not satisfied
Nor tongue by taste, nor eares with hearing fild Et deprendi ui∣hill esse melius quam Laetari in opere sua & hane esse partem illius Eclesiafies. Delectant alter¦na magis veti∣tis{que} potiridulcius & sordent qua possunt semper haberi: pallin. Nor nose by sents, nor hands by touching stild Yet is mens solace heere below quoth hee To proue what pleasure may procured bee, And as a creature consolate the mind While he in heauen comforts period find To this end weare those rares of nature framd Where by creation god great power proclamd, Diuersities each clime, and country spreading Diuersities, of creatures diuerse breeding. That as the temple made by Solomon Was framd of forraine rares as well as stone From Sheba some, from Ophr others sent The Fabricke fmisht bredd a stueshment. So we the temples, reasonable soule The temple it earths wonders to enrowle And view the totall, or iudge by a part Each Creatures rarenesse, the Creators art. Our passiue humors proue not halfe so well The actiue chiefly to delight excell The sight, the taste, and touch, and actions like. . Amor, Those at the ground of noble solace strike When hearing reading and dull absence go Void of delight, or certainely to know. On others pennes or lipps tis to relie Onth only organs of vncertainty When thou dost see and seeing vnderstand The various obiects in a foraine land The men in habit, and condition strange Their Citties sites and forme, of stru & ures change, Religion differre men of sauage breed The rarity in cloth and what they feed, There speech and paradox themselues and all Nothing but what thou different maist call Much inward Cheere the sences will surprise Tast, touching smelling seeing eares and eyes
Tis not for vnexperience to expresse Dci beneficia om¦nibus horis Con∣sideranda. August. Such as haue tasted will auouch nolesse. Thout blesse thy God for thy Religion pure And all will in thee thankfulnesse procure And much contentment in thie course of trade How ere it with a forrainer be made, When thou shalt tast from tree the forraine rare Vine iuyce the mirch and such spics are Viewing the Cloue and cinamonds delight And worldes of such a stonishing the sight Supose the pleasure, and the contentation Attend the florehouses of euery nation. When thou shalt saile the Course in surges high Noting thy ship mount proudly to the skie Psalme. 10. Then delue the deepe then tosse thee vp againe And curtey sporting with thee through the maine. By ayd of card and compasse strangly guided And by her way those Labyrinths diuided. The dolphin and huge whale swim tumbling by The mariners their trickes to gore them trie These wonders shall surpasse thy admiration Stulta placent Slultis obsonia quisque palato querit Dignasuo non emnibus vita voluptas mare: Paline. Yet cleare thee with a world of contentation We speake as men (conceiue vs as we say) The soule we know suffied another way In midd of these shees actiue by a hope Surmounts wide oceans in their largest scope And by a ioy in praise of God Creatour Extolling thanfully his wondrs power Lo landed now thou canst not turne thy head But cause is giuen to bee astonished To view in East the Beare and Lyon strong The Vnicorne or Elaphant, high and long, The heards of wilds Ele, beeuer ernim Fox Such stores of treasures deluued out the rockes, Psalme. 19. Those many models of ancient ruind things The rare Erections of our moderne Kings, Thy eye will fixe thy heart one pleasures midd Nor wouldest thou for a world haue any hid.
But be spectatour: twas thewisests wish Who spent much time although a prince in this And from the Cedar to the Shrub did goe The rares in stature amplier to know Yet thousands haue more pleasures vnderstood Who haue in larger trauailes bin improud Twas that thy spirit shebaes queene thee blest When thou by hearing hadst bin now possest, And seeing of his worthy gouernement Raised her strangely to astonishment, To cry thy witt o King exceeds report Blessed was I to Iury to resort A like the sonnes of forraine trauailes cry When they the wonders where they passe suruay Nam vt quise arnant adhibent speculum, ita gesturus nego∣tium Proponat sibi illustrum virorumexempla Plutarke. Twas of a truth O King of Kings we said Thy wonders, each way sure weare vndenayd, But now behold aboue conceit we finde Fair more then could while now possesse our minde O! all thy workes great god thee each way praise Both sea and thy fame to heauen raise. Our factour who in youth full dayes is sene The Merchants goods by enter cource to vent When seated in the clime, and mannor both Now to returne to natiue soile is loth, The change of cuntries and of pleasures moue This man then there as natiue to approue Full oft is seene in fortunes great preferd Viri excellentis antipites va∣rijsque casus ha∣bent admirati∣onem, Laetitium, molestiam siuero exitu notabili conclud untur expletur mens gaudio sumo cicer: Lucullo Episto. 12. And die he there is famously enterrd Thence if returne parts language and behauour Mount him to worth respectednesse and honour He longs and's thirsty through the midd of danger To trauaile out, remaine at home a stranger Such pleasures, and comodities accrue. To men who trauaile honestly pursue. We seeastatist scarse fixe statsman bee Vnlesse he forraine parts, and passage see
And get more language then his mothers say. Whereby he coop well for his Country may, By writ, embassage, treaty or protest As by his state he then is interest. He sportes in all their rates so entertaind His princes welcome is in him proclamd,  venustas in mari Span quid babies laus est omnes{que} vie partes bonaesunt Merodorus Their wines, rare presents, pleasures all are his And he though great holds his most worth in this. Returnd prince, people and religion loue him. And the forraine prince (if worthy) all approue him, Thus soule and sences, both haue pleasures cropp And's brought by trauaile to his wishes topp The valiant souldier, Captaine, Colonell, Will not be confind to his mothers Cell: But trie the fortunes forraine quarells yeild And learne what proiects there besit a feild. Tryall the Guards french spannish, and Itallien, The foot from flanders, horse from Poole and Persian, Triumph in sportes of leaguers fortified And haue seige, afterseige his valloures tried The persons here in famous ile nor name Since shortly we shall come to persons fame, Their pleasures now Ingenerall I note qualis quque aerbor tales solet dere fructus. Who do them thus to traueling deuote. But know the aime of noblest youthfull men Is still in forraines to accomplish them Sea captaines in the ioyes of Nauigation, Land captiues where warr is extant in a nation. Nobles at courses of greatest sport, and fame, Merchants to port townes of the richest name, Discouers to the farr remotest regiones The vnsetled Crac-kbrane 't Ansterdams religiones, The nouelest, to'th shadow of a sieidge Rome, Compostella, or Castillian Bridge, Laurettoes relicks, or ould Iuryes Celles, The wild and sauage wonders lapland telles,
So each his humour couets to attend For trauaile euery humour can befreind, Some to the East, some west, or Northerue runne, Others discoueries to the South vnknowne All sorts of solace trauelers attending And them with their desired ioyes befending, Quallitates de∣s;iderande Good propertyes in trauailes learnd are many Qualities not inferiour to any, Of other subiects men on earrh enioy Or this our tedious pilgrimage imploy, That betters man within, without and both, Expelling sickenesse, lazinesse, and sloth, Subiects man both to health and happinesse, Must needs be iudgd an earthly worthinesse True trauailes this it excercises men That these home oppilations choake not them Clearing the stomacke by the seas purgation The mind of dumps by motiue recreation, The braine of melancholly blockishnesse The boy of laciuious filthinesse, If well pursued, thus worthy I conclude Chearing the soule and checking sonces rude, That breeds eternall quietnesse to men, Begetting vertuous faculties in them Virtutem veram qui possidet ille beatus ille satis felix permitat cetera diuis marcell. Must needs be worthy in their natiue kind Worth the embraces of each noble minde, Lo! trauailes this humility it causes Conducting man thence to deserud applauses, Ciuility breeds by experience made Dilligence by true practise in each trade, Pollicy by suruay of thousands acted Patience by endure of griefes effected, Siqua amisis vitae gaudia ne∣gotiatio est par∣ua amitere vt maiora lucrerir: Pitty by religious obseruations Curtesie from the vse of best seene nations, Complement from the order of the Court Manners and trade where factories resort,
Agillity and actiuenesse by motion Wisedome collecting euery way good notion, Sea arts from view of practizd nauiga ion Chrisost: Rom. 7 ad pop: antis: Partes from the trauaile of each dayes delatian, Language by trade and forayners comerce And what in briefe of worth man may rehearse, And though most misse this, tis not it but them Wisdome is hid from greatest part of men. And man must practize long with patience And thanke his god for what he gathers thence. Therefore I say neerlesse, these qualities Will vrge the wise her worthynesse to prize, O Could we but consider at the sea How in a storme the trauailer doth plea Mercator factu∣rus iter terretur & alt: pectore d gemitus, metu ens scopu∣losreta ventos. With god for mercy, ayd and preseruation Expecting still a fatall invndation, His faith now conflicts with his feare therein Vowing to god preserud neere more to sin But liue renewd and thankfull euermore The Lord ore come with penitence deplore, Soone sends a calme as wisht to cure his heart And windes and weather to desire conuert, He passes now with praises to his maker And vowes himselfe to vice and sin forsaker Next course he meetes with pirates opposition And must indure a souldiers condition, The smoake and bullets smoake it many die A time to importune the god on high. If Ionas house th' whales belly made him pray Or the Desciples when the storme oresway, Or Paules associates at approching night Then needs the christian in his nauall fight. His faith and valour grow by vse more strong Praises to god in conquest are his song So that the foe surpressed with the sight By prostrate yeildance forced is to flight
The medicinall rares on earth dispersed With exceilencies not to be rehearsed Besides those waters bath and Spaw excelling Sicredire dig∣num est, Ouid. Both many noysome foule defects expelling The Poets fictions of acadian welles Wherein the perurd onely dy hee telles Azaniam causing hate of wines and drinke, Matters for puny shallow pates to thinke Such and a crue of frothy fictions vaine As sotts surmise, meere simples entertaine I hate to name, the mentions a disgrace Colligitac ponit temere & mula∣tur in horrace imberhis iunen is tandem custode remote gaudet equis canibus∣que & aprici gramine campi∣vtilium tardax prouisor Plaine truth that claimes iustly trauailes place Her worths are in true properties relation Not needing any fained innouation Note but the rusticke hatcht with pap at home In mothers mannors; plow-trickes only knowne Eyther in Citty or with gentry plast At first how motley raw, dispisd disgract. While by the nurtures of a better breed Hees with behauiours better farr agreed Iust thus tis with a new hatcht trauailer Noratrus in Ar∣te petic. In forraine way on each file bent to erre Though iudgd, at home sufficient any way Come heere hees wanting what to do or say Tis with him thus I say and nothing lesse Vntill he parts, and language too possesse His home bredd posture cannot act his part Thats folly heere, theers estimate an art Experience it wiil worke an Vniform And obseruations strangers hedge from scorne Tis somes ambition they were gentile bred Too little mannors taught and too much fed When such (as oft it fales) are disapointed And from their former golden hopes disioynted Strange tis to see the shiftes they vndergoe Who neere in youth desire of worth to know
The trauailer (the wise it is I meane) Though of all fortunes disposessed cleane Wisely with sage, ould Bias still can say Omnia me a me∣cum porto cic: Som: sc: Yet all my wealth I beare with me away In spite of Pirate soe of iosse or crosse Which would a foole to desperation tosse My witts my arts and learnings and good life Hipocrates. Are to me riches, houses, children, wife, A trauailers experience as Phisition Is such as none, s' at home of like condition, Each for raine soile still stored with some rare Hauing it may be else where no compare Nepenthes clearing of the broken hart Euphones purging of the envenomd part, The Corrall, Cipres, Rhewbarb, mandrakes vse The Melt take it for all yeilds sugred iuyce Makes weapons, phisicks needles, thridd, and line, Balme, suckets parchments, sweet pursumes, and wine, Cures serpents sting, both french, and stone disease, One Indian tree to wonder doth all these. As places proue in nature all deliciouse So are they still in some case all propicious We see somes health at sea got by purgation Some in the Easterne, some the Westerne nation, Pectoribus mores tot sunt quot in orbe Figurae: Qui sapit innu¦meris moribus aptus crit Some in the freezing North can thriue a pace Some though in scorching Southerne come to grace. Sorting with noble Dauid in opinion That Gods sole soueraine King in each dominion Promotion comming not from East nor West Ouid 1: Amor. Nor man alone in North, or South are blest, But euery where cares cround with good effects As euery where the Lord the iust respectes And euery soile the wisest hath a thing Which will him custome, trade, and traficke bring, Good propertios are alwaies worth respect, As bad deserue reiection, and neclect.
In mentall matters faculties of minde Some better one way, some elsewhere we find. Flumina pauc vides magnis de fontibusor ta plu¦rima collectis multip licantur aquis ibid. The workes of sages: and of churches too Transported euery way as still they doe So harmonize each documents perfection That trauails this way worthy als protection. Their sayings, ours, ours theirs, both so suruiue By mutuall fauour cherished aliues Next huma, arts we see haue propagation By reference twixt nation and nation. Barbaro & In∣dianor peritia, How acurate some wa mechanicks are Whom christians count but brutish in compare That now the gray haires of the world appeare And age her to confused vice doth weare Trauails tricks vp and keepe her still aliue Noy more, shee seemes in wrincles to suruiue Since lately that America so vast Hath her whoel selfe to the three sisters cast And an acquaintance made by traficking Makes our new planters much admire the thing Each for his ends: some passe to blessed ends Whose aime to heathens true conuersion tends Others to liue, to labour, and remaine, Transplants, from Brittaine, Holland, France, & Spaine, The properties of traualle so imense Taken in christian; or in Ciuill sence Profit esteemed worthy als embrace Pleasures and properties excell in grace The one assuring Chiefly youth to trie The other midage, the iudicious eye The third to gaine euen aged do proceed Vntill they run their glasse of time decreed, Lo! as the obiects thus in briefe appeare Next now their subiects in their place come neare Examples oft aboue all precepts sway Men mind more how we doe, then how we say.
Twas the holy order God vsed in creation Non intendunt qua a nobis di∣ntur genilia sed quae aguntur  om. 7. ad pop: autio. Ands worthy euery artists immitation The sky, sea land, fish, flesh, and all else framd Then formd he man, and man he Adam namd So we the instance framd, obiects of worth Next shall in briefe traine trauailes subiects forth To name those clouds of subiects (men I meane) Who haue had part in acting trauailes sceane Is with no art, nor labour to be acted As much as need shall briefly be compacted. And by the goulden rule mete what wee say In mortall, Christian or in ciuill way. So by Commixion of this rule of three Summe trauailes worthies so their worths to see. Nor neede distinction, we of totall treate In trauaile men saith God his bread must eate Iew gentle, all some way must haue a share Eorum fily dici∣mur quorum actus nos immi∣tamur Grigen: ineze And all haue interest in what we declare. When Adam and his house had spent their dayes, In cares and trauaile wandring many wayes, Now by the naked sword from Edon guarded And iustice thus their treasons had rewarded, Genes. 4, We all attainted, all his ofspring cast: Yet after him in arebellion hast Snce the fall, we trauaile all. So that our maker missing his intent Fales now of mans creation to repent, For Lo! the Sonnes of God mens daughters wedd Ca. 5. Whereby a monstrous generations bred The highest angry, powrs his furie downe And (but a remnant left) all earth doth drowne. Noah and his house now trauaile in this flood And by his arke the waters are withstood A hundred dayes and fifty straying so Now all the earth beside lay drownd below. Genes. 7.
From Vr to Canan, Abram, trauails next Caput. 11. 12. 14. With Heathen ills his righteous soule now vext Forsakes by Iouahs call his fathers land By saith obeing this diuine command, Through Haran, Bethell, Egypt Terah dies At first: from Hay he then for famine hies To Egypt: yet at Egypt cannot stay His wife abusd heere makes him furrher stray, From Bethell now by his brothers quarell chast Then captiued by the foure Kings, and displast Thence rescued by his brothers valient hand Thus wanders Abram out his fathers land. While aged in yeares, and Iorneyes he departes To Machpelah his graue: sole end of smartes. Nor differs Isaack from his fathers dayes Genes. 25. 26. But as a pilgrime downe to Gerar strayes As his sonne Isaack, Iacob Isaacks child Wanders by Esaw (brothers ire) exild. Goes pilgrime wise to Padan with a staffe Trauailing from his natiue brothers wrath, To Shechem next, whence, he to Beathell goes Where in a caue he takes his last repose A hundred and eighty yeares the one And fiue yeares lesse ould Abram? Iacobs mone God heard in famine and a Iosepth sends Who father land and brethren all befriends Ould Iacob trauailes) few and ills my dayes (Quoth he to Pharaoh) troblesome many wayes. Hic enimnos diuersorium comorandi, non habitandi habe∣bus. cic sence He buried now! note Iosephs traualle blest Who in his dayes exceeded all the rest. Though in a pit him first his brothers cast There iudgd to die; yet saud, then brought at last Gennes. 37 Carried to Egypt set to sale yea sould To Potiphar 'o wonders to be tould
By lot made ruler of his Lords estate But as best meritts meet on earth most hate, His Ladyes Lawlesse lust procures him ire Vt hoc agm¦n in deum offendere? Since his chast humour crost her lewd desire. Hees cast in prison yets, exalted there When by his diuination dreames were cleare. Hee, next made Egypts Lord, weares Pharaohs ring And by his trauailes blest of bondman, King His witts the seauen yeares of Famine feeds enres. 50 Supplying fathers lands and brothers needs, Heere ruling fourscore yeares, much blest; then dyed When thus in trauaile strangely dignified. As thus the father so the Church did stray Ands meerly militant, as scriptures say. Hic Eclesiamillitans Illie triumphans. Not Chaird in roome or any where in rest. But's millitary and in trauailes blest More then in ease, still pooles they gather mudd, And drousie sweets souest corrupt good blood. Both Church, and soule, and vertues mount more high As they in trauailes through temptations flie. Exodus. 15. Yea man is modell of the whole we say Best are the best men, most when motiones sway. Exo. 1, 2, 7, 8, 9. Earths in fancy in trauailes nursed euer The Churches in the partriarks thus peseuer, Come now to any growth is Egyps hate Ioseph now gone the blood hound of her fate The bondage noted and theit cryes come vp Moises is raised to beget a hope Lo! hee at first saued among the reedes And mid wiues knife) him there his mother feeds By pharaohs daughter fownd) pitty preserud Nurst him and so's in Pharaohs Court preserd, Where he in state did forty yeares abide Whence in greate feare he downe to Midan hied Kept sheepe a while there married alterd thus The Lord accommpanies him in a Bush.
Sends him to court thence to redeme his land Vide t Israeli∣tarum vita de∣seribitur quin∣que libris moyst Iosue iudicur, & regum. Where hee with wonders doth before Pharaoh stand Turnes waters blood, brings frogs, and flies and lice Murren sores thunders grashopers and nightes Instead of dayes next are there males destroyd In trauails thus is Moises now imployd. Is pharoahs god: the socerers Admiration: Egyps scourge, but deliuerer of his nation Bring Israel safe through the sea, when foes are drownd Caput, 14. Six hundred thousand strong the church is found And is to Canaan promisd traueling Hauing bene foure hundred yeares flaues to that king Deutronom. 13 forty yeares trauaile hath now ere they rest Being in their trauailes wonderfully blest Apparell weares not nor dare foe withstand Exod. 13, &c. Pillar of fire their day stare, cloud on land Forty and two great iorneyes in the wild The Rocks yeild waters, are with manna fild Iosuah: 1. And with all dainties still their iorneys flowe Their foes the heathen haue the ouerthrowe, In view of Canaan come, now Moises dies Caput. 24. And with the rule God Iosua dignfies, Who Ierico, then Ay quite ouerthrowes And flayes both prince, and people of their foes Iob: 1, 2, 3. &c Thirty and one lands they in trauaile got So now the Church parts Canaan by lot, Triumphs in Rule of iudges would ye know The case more cleare? behold the scriptures show Caput. 42. 10. Nor can we christians sure be ignorant Of what the Iewes of trauaile vse to vaunt This onely this, may serue to shadow foorth The Patriarckes, Churches both their trauails worth. About this time was holy Iob in east In mortall trauaile oh so much opprest Bereft of Children goods and freinds turne foes Be guirt by sathan round and round in woes
Yet Lo! when patience had her perfect aime Ruth. 4 13 Hees easd of trauaile and releast of paine. Come on to ruth a woman trauailer Youl finde it will that weaker sex prefer From Israelles famine shee to Moab goes Hestre, 2. 16. Where for a wife her wealthy Boaz Chose Renowned Hester of a Captine Queene Though poore remaning as a iemm vnseene Empresse of thirty two great prouinces Vide litincra Daiud a regum 13. priads. cun∣terlij. Prouing the Churches fauster dame in these Hamans confusion, Mordecayes sole raise One woman all the Churches foes ore swaies. All telling plaine gods blessings where meanes want Whose loues in trauailes are the iust to plant I need not name great Dauids trauelling Ionah. 2. Before nor after he was anointed King, Though as a flea by saule in trauaile chast Sauls flaine and Dauid Lord of Israell graet But to that antitipe of our redemption Ionah from plague for sin had no exemption, Cast into sea the waues deny receite The whale may swallow but he may not eate, But from his vaste chest cast him one the sand. And after three dayes postage comes to land. So now lets hence to the churches head away Behold how he in trauailes heere doth stray While he on earth our shape did vnder goe For of his life himselfe confesseth so, The foules they haue their hooles, a nest each bird But I poore I no hole to hide my head His mates to trauaile chose he trauellers Math. 3, 15. Esay 61. 11. Iohn 46 Ma . 21. Ship men and fishers these our Lord preferes At Beathlem born hies to Ierusalem, Taking a iorney downe to Egypt then, In feare of Herods cruell bloody aime, But Herod dead, retireth backe againe,
To Gallile: and Nazaret, to teach And thence to Capernauum there to preach. Much cares and crosses euery way enduring Yet euer teaching, doing good, and curing. And Lo! at last our Lord is first betrayd Next by another of his owne denayd, Araind, whipt, scorned, spitted, and despisd Omnis Christi actio, nostra est instructio august And at Golgotha after crucified. Our Lord and King thus trauailed below Waies of earths trauailes to vs all to shew Now out of sea in middest of many stormes Math. 27. Math. 16, 19. And then on land in middest of many harmes In hunger thirst, wants, woes and trauails tryed Math, 3, ▪ And now with heauens high honoures dignified. To tell vs all and giue vs this to know Hebrewes. 11. Our rest is vp aboue and not below. Which apprehension moues by faith our minde Caput. 14. 12. 10: Baptistae vita. Luc. 1. To spend our trauailes heere, that rest to find. That graue forrunner of our Sauiour, Iohn In wandring through the wildernesses knowne Hard bred with locusts, and wild hony there Rough skinn, and Camels haire his softest weare Actor, 14. 16. 2. Cor. 5. 22. 1 Tim. 4. 16. After all trauailes by a virgins hand Is sent to heauen, the forexpected land, Now Paul and Peter trauaile Christ to preach And middst the gentils Christ ascended teach In Selench, Cipres, Lystra Pergamus Antioch, Paphos Derb, and Ephesus, Troas, Cilicia, Creet, Neapolis. Athens, Cesarea, Spain, Amphipolis, Macedon, Tyre, Samos, and Milletum, Phenicia, Ptolomais, Trogillium, These for a mapp of cuntries Paul did see And lastly suffered Roman tyranny. Apocahp. 1▪ 1, Weel Close with Iohn to Pathmos banished So rownd about it by the spirit ledd.
Much wonders to him in his trauailes tould Prophesies ages since each day vn fould, And hauing much foretould of Church and nations With heauens description ends his relations I my relation too of persons worth Who haue the way of christians life chalkt forth Closing as paul these clouds of witnesses Our passag cleard by worthies worlds of these Let's arme our feble ioynts with faith passe one In trauaile to that high Imperiall throne, Now that the matter each way plaine appeare Let Ciuill cases see themselues as cleare. Tell of Ailles valloures victories Aeneas great sea trauails noble prize The worthy Curios winning worlds of grownd And by partition sighing each his bownd, Those three rare Decij vowd to countries good In trauaile and feirce battaile venturd blood Hectoreroy hope, renowned Sceuola Vide policron Graston. High Pompey braue victorious sway) these may With Fablos and Marcellios (Roomes support) And lofty Scipios valours well report, Much to haue done in trauaile to regaine, Fortitudo paren¦tum filliorum segnitia narrat. Their countries freedome; friends, and houses name. Now should I downe to moderne times retire? To tell the tith would Illiads require, That Cordeliew his trauailes in the East And Edwards too thence Saladine supprest Wann much of that ould holy land againe Wherein both trauaild vndergoing paine Our blacke prince battailes in the spanish warr And conquests poicters tell his fathers share, Henry of Monmouth rare victorious actes Our Glousters, Warwicks Huntingtons high facts In trauaile ech for countrie to proceed Eliza was victorious indeed.
Much of her father, Henries fame france sayes Erat fide nobilis quae omnibus ornatibus orna¦monto sine qua¦uil tam ornatam quod ornare queatnin. Salui. ep. 1. Both sure a spurr to our declining daies Forhish, braue Drake, and Candish, hand in hand With Willowbeys high ventures grast our land. But now by trippletye our peace combind Elizaes second acts her part behind Through Paltz, then Beame (oh! fate) she makes retire In spire of foe with patience past admire Long liue the friends of this thrise noble Queene Netantiuiri laudes minere oratione ma potus quam exornarem, cul∣petur sane in genium non vo∣luntas Chris: de sacr Liber: 1. And for her branches dure they euer greene While pacient trauaile period hath, and then Both shall be scene victorious to men, Gracing his greatnesse whose almighty power Keeps time that Romish Dragon to deuoure. Behold next peace, and prince arrelatiues Yet trauaile in her acme still suruiues, Our Soueraigne sent his sonne its worth to learne What he before by tryall did discerne Lo? how so high a prince passes vnknowne That trauailes fame might freelier be showne His happy crop, great cause of comfort giues In peace, and true religion Brittaine liues Als ioy, our hope true Christians defence Rests primely in his sacred excellence And long may hee great God our ile defend With whom (as period Trauailes worthys end. Praise we the highest, cause of each good thing Vniting loue, and duty to our King. Hy hence in hast halfe mazd Caliopea Refresh thy selfe with consorts of the sea Both Trauailes wonders, and her worths appeare Returne and make thou trauailes way as cleare Thy choore's not comon) Momus if thou lowre Know them the Issues of a vacant howre,
The sacred sonets since compild in verses No shame to him lesse worths a like rehearses.  parent animos, comprae¦ndunt plurima paucis: aures delectant, pri¦stina comemo¦rant Good matter graced by so sweet a forme, Shall not by, time, nor enuie be outworne,
The way to trauaile. LYeurgus lacedemons Lord of ould When he youths rudenesse did at home behold, Iohn sab comen¦tar in Arist: & hoc. their wits through ease as standing pooles corupt Their vertues growth, by sloth of vice ore topt, Adds to his volumes of good lawes this one That heel, admitt of none to stay at home, All youth must out) some traynd in forrayne parts Others in tents in th' feilds must practize arttes, For there sayth he they'r clearest of temptation And may in trauaile learne from euery nation. What we haue said of wonders and of worths, And of aduantage brought by trauaile forth, Is modeld in this wise mans obseruation A rule well merits each mans imitation For the effects braue Lacedemon grast And him among the wise of princes plact. But as a wiser Solomon once sayd Thats truely worth to get it vse all ayd The foole sees, and neglects a thing of prize Where as its seene and sought of such are wise. That wisest Merchant saw a pearle quoth Iesus And bought with whole estate whats prised thus Tis not the bare hearing of its worths suffice But th' way to winn them layd before our eyes. Quaese scopulo¦sis ardua clmis, in longum pro∣rum pit iter riget. aspera prim ingressus. Of the mannor now or forme wee are to treate The goods good issue, and the bads deceyte
Formes of performance, bad as good we know Hesed Liber. 1. The taske is then the better Part to knew. Way as an adiunct locall may be held So how attendant fitting to be teld Way as the mannor, how to trauaile taken Whats worthy choice, whats fit to be forsaken The latter part the former comprehends And first my muse the formall part intendes. Tis asked how a man may best attaine When, where, and fittest way, to crosse the maine? In course of traficke ciuill now we treate The Cleargy oft the other way repeate And Christian life is plentifully spread But oft where most is known worst waies are led. Yet all accord by right of reason too He that neere knowes the way can neuer doo, In ciuill course then know againfull way Is from the paths prescribed not to stray Quod bene fit his fit. For note we this the bests are worst abused. Trauailes the bad of all bads, badly vsed Twill in a moment ruing man and state And proue of all pathes most vnfortunate. Turne in a trice the ablest youth to Death And as a viper sucke away his breath What mischiefes are but it illframd procures And man confounded then constraind endures, ustitia in se¦virtutes continet omnes. Pythag¦orus. Wherefore some iust proportions to be had At first twixt man and therein hees to trade Tis as the ruler stearing trauailes shipp Els must the passenger suffer wracke in it Some corespondence, possible relation The mouing cause of tradings propagation. Tis not each Boor can trauaile to auaile Nor call we each slugg-ship, can hoise a sayle, Nor euery place can euery man befit, Nor euery one each way imploy his wit
Reciprocall affection must be had And mutuall betwixt'th, person and his trade. The subiects birth must sute his way he aimes Naturam expelo¦lac furcalicet vs{que} recurret Haman vid Woolsey. &c. Birth greater aptnesse then ye thinke containes And mi-imployd beyond its reach destroyes The man imployed, and what he imployes If one vnskilld rawbred, high matters passe Hee spoiles both matter: and is proud an asse For ignorance gets scorne to him of all Besides the thing must wanting mannage ale The reasons plaine for natures inbred hue Vnpotene made aboue her reach to serue Struggles gainst fate; and streames of higher straine So needs is forced maymed, backe againe, Exemp, Phaetto∣nis Proprietatum equabilitas re∣quiritur. As Isops frogg effuse her entrailes out Coueting proudly lion like to strout. Ambition cause of this aspiring sence Euer in finall fales to impotence. We see our bould Mechanicke vncontent In discret way, his manualles to vent Will now be merchant yea pry hither too Whenskill else pride procureth his vndoe Our moderne merchant tosse a statists weild Nor will in fashion scarce to courtier yeild. Deemes hees imployment it o' silly iest Preda suis ta∣nibus non minus ille fuit metam: lib. 1. By the supply of forriners supprest Much like that asse clad in the lions hide Vncast was scornd and woried for his pride. As such vnmeete ascents proue ruinous So the most base descents befoole it thus When high borne minds debase their breed for gaine Any slauish trauaile entertaine Or vse in trauale an vnequall hand Matters to low for such to vnderstand. Distinction in maters vulgar vse, Twixt personall, and Casuall abuse,
Say sages truly merits to be made When as a vertue out extreames is had. The frowne of fate may force a iust debase In men of worth and once in mighty place Our stories tell, proportion is our meate Necessities are banished our treate. Complect ons corespondence to our way What natiue vigoures more, or lesser sway. Must be obserud) according to the time And place imployd, and qualitie of clime. This in these paths is needfully requird Else if not death, disgrace quells all desird Natures and nations lump in true relation Numquid amore Though scatterd ore the earth, haue propagation. Imploy thy trauailes where these likes accord And as they inbred powers to do afford Hott noble spirits actiuest are found As could with flemy sottishnesse a bound, Accord thy place and person, first vnyted To tread a nation like, both be incited The Russe, and Norway, or could Groynland trade As in Russy a Groynland &c. Best by the could hard Phlegmaticke is made. The coulds extreames such safely entertaine And may a brother hood in dull coulds attaine Is potent made to labour, tugg and toyle The best rchiements in a frozen soyle. For heere his coulder humours meete their like When coulds to death the cholericke shall strike Or nose, toes cheeke, and hands, we see they loose See then proportion heerein is too be chose, Let nobler natures places nobler trace For thers accord twixt natures place and place Hott natures actiue bent and passiue too Able t' inuent, and iudgements scann to doo. The could are meerly patients practizing Alike it is in place in time in thing
The rarest fruites I know take putrifaction The ablest parts, worst chiefely in ill action And as twas iudgd Themistocles would proue Worst if ill nurtured best by good improue, So may we censure of complexions power In trauaile bent to much gaine or deuoure Climes their complexions haue in each degree To which in trauaile men haue simpathy The tozzid zones one sort of rule command A differents cald for in the frigidd land The obseruation trauailers daily vse Makes mee no further now hearein peruse As persons thus must be the places meete So some proportion due in parts discreete Twixt him now trauailes, and his way of trade For triall heereof must at home be made Wherein respectiuely difference is requird According to the state of that desird Some generall parts, as strength and languages Qualitatum proportio. According to the clime, all must haue these. Particular notions as now interest In vitium ducit culpae fuga sica¦ret arte. Hora∣tiua. If as in publike or his owne invest, I cannot stand to point at each mans way The wie may see the whole by what I say. And application proper to the thing Can on ly sollid satisiaction bring. He must haue tongues each way bownd out to treate Else shall he be a pray to mens deceit. Recte collata retina expectant predam- Each aiming at his properends availe And ioyes to see the sortish stranger faile. When ignorant to make his sales or buy Or if abused vnderstands not why. If souldiour, merchant, greater strangers raise For what they point to he constrained paies If a mechanicke hoodwinkt walkes all mumm A meete allusion for all cheates to come.
If on his way, ambitious to see rares In high way errours ignorantly shares. And what hee sees, or where, not say where now? Ignorantia con∣fusionis mater non. But whats a guide to strangers, strangers know. Chancing on sales, turnes now, knaue brokers ape For as the Dauus wills 't must rise, or bate Potos, Sotos, de∣uotes. Yea if more noble in a treaty sent, If ere state sent out such an imnecent. The tearmes appeare in writing, as if there Hisp: pro. A scipher sent, and no Embassage weare In short send any meere vnletterd out And hees a nose of wax made out of doubt. Tis true times short and many cannot haue Paris for each place, where tranaile passage craue But let vs note language collatrall mixt Non satest bene ali quul sacere visietiam fiat∣venuste. Vnder both Poles by prouidence is fixt And generall tongues for generalls lead way Which generals each way specials ouer sway. Ould Roman Latin in the westerne lands Italian, Spanish, French, and vs commands, Ould Greeke the spacious Adriaticke climes Hebrue the East, honourd in first of times. High Dutch the danish pole, and Northerne tracke So hauing one we cannot wholly Lacke And by the generall language that way vsd I anuo lingnarunt gramatica. Perticulars will more easily be infusd Since a propensitions causd in tongues confusion Many as members haue to one head allusion Then fit thy selfe such specialles to collect And lazinesse worths canker worme reiect. The many parts each state of way requires, Causing succesfull progresse in desires Are in such speciall mannor suting it So as no parts but such in that place fit. In all a search is easily made: Let those Who passe themselues it to themselues disclose.
The fourth and last attending the persons grace Equabilitas in¦fortune bonis. I hould propertion n Estate to place, Assighning period to the three before The rudder steareth steadily to shore Mones Great Traian tearmes trades nerues to be This we in daily course of traficke see. When language, natures worth, mens bredings faile Now meanes in trauaile seeme to strike their saile. Yea in the merchanicke how beit their hands Seeme to supply this want in trackt of landes A small tis true accomodates his place Qvantum quis{que} sua, &c, When higher steps ascend a higher race Which as it must of force in vse be had So like wise corespond the place to trade. I say no more let specials be applyed The merchants this way chiefly dignified Where many lands, and rarityes are eyed. As a meere oreplus; to the gaine of trade; Which to aduantage is in forraines made. Plessures attending profits euery way, Others conditions costlier are to stray. For trades encrease, and minds contents concure Accomodating each by trading fuir. Quam fausta habet regma pe∣cunia sortes vt{que} sit hec seltx quamque beata vide ibid. Aruillarj vbij The fashionists expences buy his humour, The nouellists paies dearely for a rumour. The Noble gallant spends, no substance gaines The aiery Camelion only feeds his braines, Meanes is the matter, formd by all the rest, But their effects it wanting all supprest. Yet as the little puffe makes small barkes fly When greater Caricks, wind bound grouling lye: So smailer meanes a maner way well serues, When wanting sustenance a greater sterues Or Comes confounded in his crossed wits, This of the foure the persons selfe befits. Subiects that haue good adiuncts their attendants, Well grace their owne worths, mutuall defendants.
Two sorts of wayes one method hath proposd What way man goes in as his cause disclosd Whereto or which way and the clime, thats next Via in qu. The time, and these kept trauaile's vnperplext. The way or state man passes in is tryed, And by this touchstone needfully discried. If consonant, not crosse to pious life, Non nobis solum natisumus sed liberis, sed a mi∣cis & patriae. Nor cause of countries, or religions strife. And honest iust, and voyd of fraud and guile, Causing thy owne weale too, this good way stile. Which foure, though foure, are linkt in vnity. And handmaids to our christan trauailes bee. Cicero: de offi. For christian trauaile it all trauailes blesses, If not besure thy harboures in distresses. For us not for vs christianst' vnderstand, As heathens do als good to take in hand, After we once from natiue Climate goe, As if the great God did not all lands know Hee sees in secret as wise Dauid sayes As seend I to the Heauens, Heauen he suruayes Decend I downe to Hell he noteth me, And in the midd of darknesse he can see. Yea should I say Ile hence to sea als one. Or to the outmost Ile, he there's well knowne Tis therefore meee we Christians stand in awe Forming our trauailes to Iehouahs law Well may we then expect great happinesse And in most aduers times desire successe t quis non cau∣sas mille doloris babet. Alas whats Earth as sea vs mortall tofses Sometimes in sunny calmes and then in crosses Our destinies our ships transports vs ore Times trimmer of the sailes and hies to shore Ouid amor. What men? all men are passengers therin Some trauaile in gods siruice, some in sinne Gods hand it steares, yet none the hand can see, Nor yet fates fleets, wherein we sayling bee
Some sport, some sleepe, some worke, the voyage hies Vns hore zey Youth midage, dotage, posting through he flies. Our harbour Earth, graues houses, welcome death, Roytan skepke royt: all zijgh diewills ver i moyt in hettzee van tribulation icke zal vster ckene met in i gration. By sortowes, sicknesses, when losse of breath. Thus ore earths ocean glides our fatall shipp Iehouah steares, time rowes, man ends by it; This mortall trauaile; Christian consumates And though in both we are guided by the fates Yet may we guesse successe by our attempts, And by the forme of trauaile iudge euents. Nor need we part, but in the whole we say. Come by both Christian and Ciuill way. With piety our trauailes must agree, Nor must our gaine religions ruin be. That proteus like, we as a feather change Nor through religions as through realmes we range. Heylichey nit in de scii. Loue Caluin heere, there Luther: Bellermine And to aduantage make a stall of sinne See masse, hugg relicks, trade in Images, Bulles, paxes, pardons, or like trash as these. Nor as the preist, and giddy braine steale ore, To serue before their state, that Romish whore. And when returnd plot mischiefe day and night. To make some simple puny profelite Entise alasse in shape of boy disguizd. Ore to a Cloyster to bee Idolizd Where oft her guts giue way to ore deuotion, And in rebellions rumour make comotion, Our cracksculd Brownist steale to Amsterdam, Ore to tribe of Gad, their chambered cham. There cucko like our Church their Dam bewray Professing als prophetical they say Runn strange diuision on their iarring muse. When still the close is natiue soyles abuse. In ciuill case the mono Politan Aiming as Atlas, trades, whole orb to spann
Feeding open the generall defect Our  transporters. Ex malo dogn∣te prausque mo∣ribus digoscun∣tur lupi. Melancton. These wayes and more past namm meritt reiect The comon good we Crossing cannot thriue, But our disgraces in our deedes suruiue Nor can in iustice fraud, or false deceites Proue ought but grauell in our tasted meates Conueiances exceeding law neere thriue When men their common weale of weale depriue Turne machiuillians by coueyance ore, Of whats in proper of their natiue store. For forreynors tis base; a worser thing. In such as owe alleagence to their King, L'o next our trauaile must our owne good breed Youl say this caueat sure is more then need Tis true the other three the fourth Create None benefits himselfe vndoes his state Nor can it be thy gaine thy god offendes, Nor when thy trauailes in vniustice endes, Yet bodily some faculties weare meete Mentiond before (doubt ye looke backe and seet) And howsoeuer matters passe relation, Which out the womb of time haue propagation, Yet each may view many vndone alas By rash attempts of trauaile brought to passe. Somes progresse to Vtopia for a toy Making their mendicant pilgrimage a ioy Currey from Saints to relicks, vp and downe. Others by plotting mischiefe seeke renowne As Herostrats, or Dionise seeke grace, Their owne lands welfare, by their force to face Riot and reuell in a lawlesse wise, As if their trickes were soly worthy prise. Neclect their natiue family, and roue After some forraine whotish lawlesse loue
At least wise wander in a thriftlesse kinde Deprauing both the body and the minde Spendbrists Such holy writ stiles worse then infidels, Whoes carelesse of his houshould where he dwels And Solomon tearmes a destroyers matc, The man (more soole) that lauishes his state But since our treaty yet some pilot wants Come we to trauailes true concomitants Vertues adorne the progresse of the action Keeping, its body cleare from putrefaction Of vices poysons fogg, obscuring earth, Sollace. Our crack braines come bome by weeping crosse Qui populari inititur aur a do∣mini in luto ex∣truitur. Mach. 1. princip. And none as these our late dayes equall birth. In danger desperate, and disconsolate, Many such symtomes could I now relate. But see at sea their frothinesse is scourgd, And by a timely pyll there braines are purgd, Turne taile to trauaile now retird to shore, Loue England now so well theyl out no more. Others in rashnesse (placed) dominere, As if they Lords, or Denizons weare there Esteeme their pride extold in als abuse, Forgetting fooles they'r heere with out excuse, Are bandied well, informd their not at home. And th' other sweet tooth glad to picke a bone. Oh sy! that trauaile ere allowd such brats, Fitter to hedge the fier with doggs, and catts. For there they still may play with mothers dugg, And pamperd, counsell with an Irish rugg. Prouident trauaile neuer hatch these braines, Tis true she still of their abuse complaines, Fond Chimy Cricket know that trauailes way, Orst: west: Thys: best. Is danger, and aduenture: and no play. The bests are hardest euer to be gaind And with endurance must be entertaind
In dye, rest, speech, welcome, people all, Make no exceptions take what lots besale. Expect no sleepy sollace as at home, Nature it differs in each clime is showne, Expect no other but a share in crosles, As thou through trauailes desert each way passes With good Lo! bad must equaly be shard, Prouide then, be thou for them both prepard, See as a second dilligence attends, The man that trauaile honestly intends. Sagacity by sages termd of ould, When wits are actiue and heereby more bould Timely aduantage in our way attempt And what a foe may plot that to preuent On raging seas yeald hast a storme to still, Dilligentia-Sagacitas. Nil tam dffi∣cile quod non solertia vincat. Temperantia, Modum vocoid non dolorem afferens Pytha∣goras. And valiently oppose a pyrates skill. If crost by strangers curtesies timely vse, Whereby a foes engaged not to abuse. If trafickes commodities to cull, Yeilding in sale a haruest plentifull. Hower employd, for tis not to repeate, Our ends to purchase and preuent deceipt Neclects assaylants, do molest this care, And sottish dulnesse, in a slow prepare Time crownes with lawrell gaines a quicke embrace, And dilligence will many lets displace. By temperances rule and bodyes kept, From routes of illes, in latter ages crept. Comands the sences, rules by moderation, In drinke, and meate, according to the nation, And pleasures, too, for know no vice more raighnes Then this intemperance in youthfull veines. Incontinency issues as effect, And due reward of temperance neclect.
Much like the passages of drunkennesse, Worthily said our Brittons to possesse. As heare at home: in forraine soile men tell Some place their packhouse in a frothey Cell moderation praised. Quis secum preit? ebritas, sopor, otia, Lux us qui comites? rixa, bella, odiae opprobium. Puft vpse Dutch, nor failes Lasciuious end, Immoderate drinkings duly to attend. Whereon the Epicurean vaine serues constantly, Let trauailes worthies worthlesse vices fly. So shun such sinnes so many still destroy. Vnhappy he intemperance shall imploy. Some haue I noted who haue dyet kept In eating, drinking: and pleasures sweetly slept, Marulus Lecheritanians. When others on a surgions box append, Or on a doctours bill as bad attend Some haue I heard of wisely note the Clime, Great dangers to preuent by keeping time. In rising after foggs by sunn are cleare, A death to othets who neclect it there The freezing could in russe, know how to quaile, And in the Torrid cuntreyes heets assaile Swellings and suddaine pasies ginny boyles. For diuerse illes encounter diuers soyles. Men must, as Masinissa keepe good dyet, Else must the body languish out of quiet. Luxurious sardinapals imitation, And Bachus Trophyes are in euery nation. Couers thou now to shun these lyon clawen Be temperate, and timely shun the cause. For venery is occasiond oft by Drinke. Then men once in, turnd prodigals, soone sinke. Wherfore an opposition must be framed, Whereby the lets of trauaile may be tamed, Prudence of morall virtues for her grace Merits her ranke in trauailes primest place,
The straites of vertue so by vice beset, As we may well perceiue a world of let. Where for an opposition must be framed, Prud niia est habitus agendi orta human  bna vra cum . Vt corpus absque ceulis, ita & virr ngotio im-prouidens Byn Whereby the letts of trauaile may be tamed, Prudence of morall virtues for her grace Merrits her ranke in trauailes primest place By prouidence the armies sentinell. Discry the things that let to trauaile well. Forsee the Westerne lust with chast intents, And th' drunknesse in the East alike preuents. The vices that attend in court and citty, Becomming by the better view more witty. It being no lesse wit ills to escue, Then that is good by science to pursue, A quality, next seruing to her worth. Wherby a forme of mannage issues forth: Gracing the subiect with admird affection, An industry well merits alls amplexion Pericles science praised is heerein, As did Vlisses in his Homer winn. Pirgoteles heare by the picture drew. To Allexanders wish when none else knew Good Iosephs foresight in his trauailes feed, Pharaohs, al, Egypts, fathers, Brothers need And moises science, and great weekenesse raisd, Him though a man of Great loue to be praisd. The Churches trauaile, wants, and wichednesse, By his contriuing, purchased release. Yea so hath arts by search bin brought to light, When sciences peruse proues mans delight. Tiresias, and Archilochus for lines, And Aristotle phisickes best of those times. As Bazaleel, and Aholiabs skill. God those thus with his spirit did fulfill. All Curious arts of sciences to know,
And one the temples fabricke all to show Thus prouidence is sent forth to proiect, How to supplant in trauaile each defect. Opitime crede iuat rerum pru dentia cunctos, ledtiur aduer∣soqui necligit vndi{que} fate-Hesiod. Note. This seconded by science to an action, Both to the subiects trauailes satisfaction. The Contraryes encountring in this season, Are rashnes, and a shallow vse of reason. Raigning in many a giddy straying pate, Who all thinges done doth to the fancy shape, Lantloping crocheits, any way is best. Landloper. When once the giddy humoures preposest. Little for seeing Scyllaes straights ar nigh, As they in trauailes from Charibdis flie For know howere our whole discourse is forth, Of trauails wonder, praised way, and worth: Tis not to be assumd as due to all, But only such whom God to it doth call, In honest wise, tis the Appostles case, Wherere mans cald, abide he in that place, Conditions praisd are propper to the men, Who are and rightly too instald in them. And euery man his limits due assighnd, Giddy pate-Nunquam tefall aut animi sub vulpe latentes impia sub dulci melle venena latent Augustin. We must dehort, not raise a stragling mind, Least by refusall they with Icarus, Or Phaeton descend to ruine thus. Such haue I scene in giddinesse depart, From a good settled Course t' some forraine part, Squander their meanes in fruitlesse lawlesse life, Vncald forsaking families and wife, Yet shrouded euer in some poore pretence. Of need, friends, bettering faith or conscience. Some small time spending vainely, guld retire, With pouerty the fruite of rash desire. What mans to build saith Iesus will not first Able, or not to end bee prepossest.
Or who is to encounter any foe, But first his owne sufficiency will know? And if too weake in time from both surcease, Of thoughts to builde, and sue to haue a peace. For know this rashnesse founded one the send Of impotencie withers out of hand Such haue I seene in diet disapointed, In raging humour on the waues distoynted. Cursing the climate next, the hochpoch there Iustitia in se virtes n∣tinel omnes. Longing for English powder beefe, and beare One cryes his bones Crach on the Cabin ropes A second as forlorne now nightcome gropes A third nice youth his clothes are spoyled cryed Would to god when I came downe I had dyed. Of iustice worth I somewhat sayd before And only speake a distribution more Comutatiues in dealing iust proportion Distributiue in Charities deuotion Giue each his owne in way of honouring De iustitia vni∣uique quod suum distribure cic, do: offe: Feare God aboue fitst honour then the King Preserue thy credit, and thy fellowes state Whose chance in trauaile is to bee thy mate Do as thou woulst be done by, Christ commands And deale with iustice, almes in other lands A generous and noble minde is meete That men may praise thy country when they set' For such as thou thy land stands estimate And by the subiects men adiudge the state Contraryes are that miser arous Who count a stranger as a dogg to v Where as the Church of Israells cld to cherish The strangers heart, and none by need to perish The Prodigall one lusts will rather spend Then striue the poore and needy to befriend,
Let none here neyther enter a mistake Frugality next trauails worth I make. A sauing habit of both time; and state, Frugalitas cla∣is conse ruandi quod est maphae: Note. Magnanimitas▪ Making a man thrifty and considerate. A worth if ere in any course required In this its ten times more to bee desired. Preuents a famine oft of store at sea, Yers mercifull when others wantings plea. Attends at pinch, and in extreames befriends. When lauish prodigallity still spendes. Si fortuna. Sonat caveto o'li, cum fortu∣na tona tonat: cae to mergi Cato, So haue Post seene souldiers vainesse payd When with the pot and pipe purse is decayd Trugg towid the Lumber (foole) for more supply, And now beginnes on lauishnesse to crye Where had he iueld meanes and score at first Good licour might serued, stead of thirst So much in short, one instance stands for all, And hence I downe to next of vertues fall: Being a mind magnauimously bent, With courage eresses bitter to preuent: Armd in a faith and hope in a tempration Anchord firme in gods mercy past narration, To this the scriptures plentifully moue, And dayly tryals wonder or sly improue. A barr against whole billowes of temptations Calling man to dispaire, in crosse of nations Crosses are the godlyes lot, true churches sate The earthes surayours; euery mortals state Whence comes it trauailes termd the Godlies lott No perfect sollace can below be got The ciuill trauailer first (if christion) suffers Then as a mortall, many, crosses shares. Next in his place (for no place so defended But sometimes is and shall thus bee attended) Sometime by ship wracke, then by pirates theft And then by trust of any estate bereft,
Now in profession, then in body beates, Then in his trauailes multitudes of cares. But Lo! his courage, christian faith begets? When any danger sea or land besets: As Paul hees bould, and fortifies the rest, Being with a heart magnanimous possest. For all things worke he knowes to him for good Nor can he be by Hell or Hagg withstood. Crosse to this worth is fearefull pale distrust, Not rating God as mercifull as iust. Twas the disciples weakenesse; Thomas sault, Gratia bene ordinas quae de∣dit creatio Ber∣nardus in tract: Degr: Lib: 6: And too to common still when stormes assault. Or hight of a presumption in our selues That th' apprehension faith begetteth quelles. Thus Peeter stood, vpon his resolution, Which made him fall to fearefull in conclusion. Though all for sake thee Lord yet will not I Yet lead he first the other to denye Note! Now to a habite effable we come Not to be Churlish bent, or Cinicksom, Effabilit as quid. Vneffable behauioures purchace hate Haman. And scorne of strangers in a foraine state, Yet see wee some, too many too aspird Ixion! Into some state of trauaile as desird: Stand puff, and huff, to natiues coming ore Phaeton! The priest forgets he was a clearke before Icarus! Lookes squint at strangers turnes imperious A small imployment, hoists a Haman thus Primus mali mtor cachedra pestilent a su∣perhia, Augustin And higher to! Tis one of those great illes Solomon sayth Earth with impatience filles A seruant when he raignes, a foole in hanst: wise men on foot, and sotts on horse aduanst Denyes to know, condition, or kinn, Or as a iockey, euer to haue binn Armes fixt agambo, and his beauer cocke Is learnd in better manners by a knocks
Sequestred pride, attends a speedy fall, whereas the meeke are effable to all. Procures of forraynes by the fact a loue, Yea with the very infidels approue. Those churlish Nabals, Doeg minded men Neuer succesfull scarcely one of tenn. Come thus farr through the paths of traualling, Ambitis secre∣tum virus. pe¦tis occulta doli∣artifex mater hipocrests liuori parens vitior un origo tinea san∣ctitatis cordium excatrix. &c: Bernard: in ser qadragess- Lets in our course obserue another thing. Verity to be vsed in word and deede Through all the paths of trauaile we proceed. Adding a credit mid the strangers towne. And purchasing a truth of much renowne. For witnesse, hand, and oth, thus bare word passes And much a christian Cariage each way graces. When lying stops a strangers loue intended, And trechery when matters passe pretended. Twas Abners bane, yea Ioabs, Iudas kisse, Recorded for a trechery in this. Great Allexanders fame allurd to trechery. By base Parmeno, that I should gain say. Was I Parmeno, but I am my selfe, And prize sayre victory aboue all wealth. Worthy Fabritlus tould pirrhus though a foe, How he was moued to his ouerthrow. Not Ianus Bifrons with a Harpey smile, Bent both wayes equall falsely to beguile: But Ionathan like patterne true affection, Merits true trauailes grace: a false reiection. Seest thou a smooth salute, proffer too great Beyond relation? Consure a deceipt The whistle sweetly playes the fond birds hye Note! Beware of machi uillian fawning, & simplician slaues. Thus are surprizd by th'fowers fallacie. Comes one to ayde thee slauishly officious. Such hasty helps haue births are to pernitious The wolfe will worke the sleepe from out the bryer Poore sheepe thy ruine is his next desire.
Thy language, and thy owen endeauours trust; Vnused armours subiect are to rust: And mens deceipt is silly ones to cheare They know experience will not brooke decite Nte; Findst thou a country man of base report, With him of all men neuer once resort, No Iew or Turke can proue more rauinous: Then will a christian once appostulate thus. Auoyd as death a reconsciled foe, Nor euer with him confidently goe. West  ende . The sore smothd vp not cured out will fie, And soonst infect a carelesse stander by. Man of a crosse religion do not trust, He hath causion be with thee vniust. Power allowes the lawesse to offend. So doth the Lyon on his pray descend. Voorzich ich in al. keert meni gen val Deale not in points beyond thee with a foe, Better then wit abusd, is not to know. And in their I and thus falst thou in a snare, Of entermedling in beliefes beware. A Temporizer shunn though allied, Vibanitas quid. May a viper's in the bosome breed, And feare thy mates accompanying thee, Non volo tescu ram, sed fi pots este facetus ▪ all¦ing. The fox Clad in the sheepeskin warning be Whose vnspectednesse likenesse did deceaue And th' silly lamb downe to his den bequeath, These caueats so in short the wise may end, The world is now too basely ould to amend. Last louely posture sages noble deeme, Vrbanityes defind its an esteeme. Of euery passage as its worth requires, And ioy in person as his loue desires Not stoickes, surley melencholy all. Much merry parts in traueling befall. Wherein mens action present is at gage, And ablenesse of discourses set one stage.
Now stands the case and touch stone of a man. When strangers shall his worth of breeding scan Behauior Crownes the outer mans desire, merus stoicus merus A sinus. And makes him great mens presence to aspire. When Lo. the sottish ciicke selfe deuoted. Sits in his tubb, how wise so erenoted. Opon the way a scipher to the view, And passes Liuing, as one dead in shewe. Nones sollace, not his owne, sad humours seate, Be ware thou neuer with a stoicke treate, In melancholy fancies onely ioyed, Whereby loues true Vrbanity is destroyd. And trauailes paths disconsolaterate made. Man a meere deadman mid a Liuing trade. Comes secund in via pro vebi culoest. Good mirth and gladnesse grace true curtesie As do good properties good men discry. A merry consorts chariot in the way, And makes a long way short as sages say. Artes acting parts, then history attending, Then the merry muses with their hores descending. The wood and water nimphe bring in there shares, And time of ould it selfe a new declares, A scholer's halfe a trauailer at home. Attended in his studdy though alone. Yet better fitted trauailes rites to vse, Then mid bookes dull acquaintance sit and muse. Learnings most proper to the fortaine breed, Whereby both they and these at home are fed. His protects, plots, and parts of trauelling Assist the state, himselfe, his church, his King. Come to the climes of sweete discourse hee's rare, Heere say and ignorance still attendants are. Yets heare a moderation much expected, Iests become scurrill once the meane neclected, Scullity exposing man to hate, Chiefly much vsed in a forraine state,
The Clownish rusticke short another way Chuff as idoll wanting what to say Blurts forth in a presumption homebred shame Two sorts vnworthy vse of trauailes name Horat: in Su: lib: 1: When Lo! in true vrbanit yes no wast, Offence, ill mirth, presumption or distast. Apelles like I leaue vnfinisht quite The shape of trauailes sits for should I write? The decades decour more: all worth Narration So might men Iudge it too prolix relation. Hl is zo ment acht With Socrates lets giue a iudgement now, Aske if he would Heraclis writs avow? What I haue viewd and vnderstand is good: So sure (quoth he) that is not vnderstood These Comly habits for the rest may stand As generals may the specials command. As for the christian progresse, its dayly taught, Viuat, Valeat Vincat Carolus And blesse we him his plenty heere hath brought. A like much care for mortall trauailes taken, Whats best to be embraced? what forsaken? Trauaile to forraine parts, I only tend, Wherein the rest I briefly comprehend. Circumstance sayth our lawyer alters Case, Our circvmstances shall be time, and place, Part for the whole, though more might be proposd The whole may in his parts be full disclosd: First for the time to trauaile in most free, Is as the persons interessed be: Met ghemat men gaet verr. Person with place and time colatertali made Respectiue to the calling, cause, of trade. The Sunny beames of peace most cheare the most How ere the souldier may of quarrels boast. For warrs a viper that deuoureth euer It canker like consumes, but comforts neuer, Beati pacifici. math: 5. Yet thens the time, the warriour trauailes forth. And now's the season best to shew his worth.
Times they are as mens purposes require, And hearein euery one must backe retire, And note his owne occasion when best How should I be with each mans way possest? Yet theres a time for all things to be donn, The wisest saith) enuirond with the sunn A seed time, spring, a haruest, and a frost: A time to linger trauailes time to hast, A time to laugh, to morne, to sport to stay. Elt hefi zen tij Omnia tempus habent, & suit spatijs transe vnt vniuersa sub caelo Ecles. 3. 1. A time to fight, to rest, to warr, to pray, A time to fish, and furr, and fir in East A time for oyle, and vintage in west, A time to care, to watch to plodd, yet then A time without time, thats vnknowne to men, Wherfore while time is present passe thy trade By this pursuite are many wise men made When as the foolish late are wanting oyle: Naufragium, occursus pirat arnm. Pall. Others in fruitlesse desperation toyle. Time is when stormes at sea much multiplie And Hymall clowdes Enuelop sunn, and skie, When art, and skill, and tryall, turne to doubt, Ignorant which way now to vse the route. When deckes are clad with cloudy oceann, And dreary gusts incarcerate each man. Now skill of Compasse Card and crostaffe, failest Poore man as in a second deluge sayles, No harbour, hope, or helpe seemes to assist Yet then the ship to wonder doth resist She trauiles vp towards heauen as if there, Conuoy Elyas fiery Chariots weare: And nests in mounts billowes of Neboos hight Quauering as drunke thereon; a scarring sight Not now content she shifts from hill to hill. And in her progresse sore against her will. Psal. 107. Ionas. 3- Acts. 23. They post her downward as an arrow shot, When lo! her next pursuer sees her not,
As if to those deiected Angels fled, Chaced from thence, by the Almightyes dread, When see no sooner ovvsd in valleys deepe But at a start she monnts a gaine as steepe, No more, Wife Dauid Limmes it more at life, Ionas and worlds of try all end the strife, Note only this in all these trafickes scenes Time, ioynes with place, both act as primest meanes The issues serue the cause, cares are arrendants, Since prouidence and wit eare, no defendants. For see the sea men strangely terrified, Nor land, sunne, starres, or light can be discryed▪ Yet pry, and hale, and pump, and all to saue. Ziet opt eynde. Apres lapluye vientle beane temps. And now the merchants bilt the saylours slaue. His life more precious makes him, pump, and pull, Stormes make each filly shipper masterull, Each dye themselues their couch and goods in waues, And in this dreadfull postutes play the slaues. Their prayers, and paines and teares, are multiplied, Est modus in re∣bussunt certi denique fines. Winter stormes terrours not to be descried. The vernall view fell Bore as homeward Chases And Calmes for stormes and light for foggs replaces, Thus oft at last an vnexpected rest Possesseth Marriners and Merchants brest: Crosse time growes ilder, mists are vanished, Billowes made plaine, and Rockes discouered: Men are at ease, the Ship now quieted, And th'hilly Ocean as a sheete is spread But see! the time, times will be wayted on, Tis better therefore, tary  now at home: I meane now Sol to Caprecorne hath hyed, And Eolns suruayes the Seas in pride. When churlish Neptune counter maunds our ends, Herein it is my Muse true time commends: The time againe is as the Climate stands, Since diuerse times attend on diuerse Lands:
For East, and North, by icy hyemes closd, Trauaile these wayes is crosly now oposd: No green-land, nor a Mosco voyage then Presumptions eate the liues of many men: Temporibus mo¦dicina valent data tempore prosunt & data non apto tempore vinanocent. The times of passage vnder zoones obserue, Be sure thy bodyes rule to it reserue Such timely moderation health Commands When much diseases neclects attendant stands A time most suting euery limb of trade, For true auaile by ayd of time is made Ouid: art am: One time another Crossing in her state And whats a gemm now: thens quite out of date. A time when by iuuasion and warr, That country where our course is, is at iarr: Temporiserua, neere stauentis phooilides. And Garisons, and rutters domineere, Tis no good season now to trauaile heere. For Lyon like fell warr deuowres all right, And lawes, are prostrate to a vulgar might, A time for specialles, such ile not discouer, For Propertyes in time surpasse each other. Iarres sute ye see to somes best benefit, When, 'ts good for others peacefully to sit. Peace fits Republick trafick to auaile, And Actuall smiles the marriner assaile, Lo! now a limb of trauailes way is this, Not of true times of trauailing to misse Occasions figure epitomes these things Since time still flyes, and hies with swiftest whings The deed is crownd thus executed well, And now I come of places rites to tell. Times howre glasse runnes, and sword deuoures on [earth, Yet each dayes dissolution is his birth: Fronte capillata postest occasio calua Seruing attendant to the God aboue, Fitnesse of time one such his grace doth loue: Next to the place our trauailes must be fitted, Else must the sequell shew vs shallow witted.
Man must Each Climes condition preconceaue. And different humoures there in vse perceaue. For natures wondrous fabricke sorted standes, Natura gaet voor lecre. In all the parts and paralells of Landes. Earths circled kernell with the Heunes according: Relatiue course to obiect climes affording A locall method causing to admire, Whose fruits scene; feed, the trauailers desire Since discrepant subiect to the clime, In creature, feature, fruit, delight and time. Expect none but colaterall relation, Wat noodich is moet vergaen Petwixt a diuerse people, clime, and nation: View well their wiles, the Sutherne nations vse, Bnt to alure, betray, cheat, and abuse, The Northerne course condition, stupid sence, For arme thy selfe to these by prouidence. The Turke Moore Iewe, and Christian haue their illes, Extremancent virtus medio, Man iudging all place one: tis that killes: Men to their climes still good or worse are fitted, Had not each then in sight be sharper witted? With Tom, his plow, or cow no cheats at home, But millions are intrauailes traces showne, ziet menkan godt niet bedrieghen Tis requisite thou Corespond the place, In all things fit, to decour trauailes grace. For first, once shipt: now 'ts good to meditate▪ Where thou art now reposd, thy dangerouse state This place requires much prayers and preparation Sorted with some suruay of nauigation See to thy body seaficke keepe it warme, Vitall powers opend, th' bodies most in harme. Vse excercise aboue, and little sleepe, This Galene houlds will thee in temper keepe. Know thou a Captaine heere is as a King, And please the mariners in any thing. Tis they defend thee from fell waues deuoure. And hee hath now thy liberty in power.
See th, master haue in seafkilles able share, And in the stearage looke one haue a care. Twas Palinure Aeneas shipp did saue, Neuer make choice then of a skillesse slaue. Chanct in a storme hale tackle, and assist, Two better may then one, assaultes resist: If in a fight scorne cowardise to vse, Better by farr life, or a limb to loose, Then be a slaue to tyranny of soe, Gratiarum enim cessat de cursus vbi recursus non fuerit. Bern: serm: 55. Many by try all haue anoucht it soe, But guesse the worst, tis odds that valience slaues, And thus the place well, vsd your foes are slaues. Landed now's place of thankes for gods defence, So each hast to his owne place free from hence, Twere friuolous for me to scale the orbe, Of locall rites each country doth afford: Take compasses and mete, each man his owne, And in that place keepe compasse as is showne. Earths various formes, in trauailes wonders see, Then paralel and with thy owne agree. And to thy state, occasion and clime, Fit vpon tryall course of place and time. And thus the mapp of trauailes way is spread The Compasse in the midd; each line is lead By point: the Rhomb, thou seekest shall direct, Thee by the causes to censure they effect. Fates Loadstone right to will of highest set, Cannot we say by art of man be let. Yet by our runrace; iudge we the arriue. Since cases common to their causes thriue. So had I done and set my muse at rest Had she not smelt some sauours of disrest, Ascending from the fogg of misty Zoyle, And with a puffe or two thus endes the broyle The Infidell, or home hatcht misty eye, Seeing vs trauailes wonders thus descry. Obiectio: 1.
Puffes out his froth: I neuer saw the things, Defoliuge breue sort nce. And sight alone from me a credit brings. Dull didimus the force of thy saluation Depends not on thy view but application: Blessed are they saith Iesus trust vnseene Whose faiths their goulden medium betweene. Thus then thy soule the better parts affected Why'es Charity thy sences quite reiected? A locall distance causing thy distrust, . Yea all eyes blinde and men but thee vniust. Lo! euery day a confirmation comes, Of wonders wayting at our very homes. Strange births and mereoures, deluges. and fires Issues for sin of the all potents ires; Yea creatures common in our clime no rares, But wondrous to a stranger heere repaires. As is the clime: lands are miraculous, Blind ignorance thee metamorphisd thus. Creations worth, though Gods first worke vnknowne Thy sight, not reason Credits what at home. Elie know how ere in tales are much abuse The eye of wit will passe twixtlyes and truthes. Reason, and learning prospects will discerne And the' truth amidd a world of fallace learne. Well its enough then; now ile read and credit, So can I sit by th' fire and purchace it, Obiectio. 2. The wise mans sluggard vsd indeed to say Yet some more sleepe, as lyons in the way Quisqxt habet mores ita iudicat itaq fatur: M: Palling. Such shallow puffes are fruits of necligence, Still tis enough; is euery sotts pretence This makes thee man so vnbeleeuing bent, Because come short of trauailes true intent: Orlando, Bevis, Palmeryn and such, Are by the fire side credited as much As truer trauailes; if oppofd thoul't say A man may credit, or he may denay
Reeuiew the worth of trauaile and be hold! Shee triumphs midd of wonders manifould. Then recollect the loosing difference, Licet acrioraqua legas, altius ta∣men in animo sedent quae vult us, habitus; & gestus dicentis ad figit. Twixe passiue, and betwixt the actiue sence. Had our heroickes trusted passiue sences, And made their ease and safety home pretences The wayes of trauaile neuer had bin knowne Nor Earth it selfe ere to it selfe bin showne: Nor mutually each others rares imparted, Pliny. Epistola: 4: Lib: 2. Or the rude heathen to the truth conuerted: Or yet the wonders of Almighty spredd But each bin blind fould by relation ledd. Be ruld by me still keepe thy chimney warme, A sluggish spirit breeds but trauails harme. Obiectio. 3. Ile not repeate her many worths to thee, Tary at home, let others goe and see, Omnibus sane factis in est pe∣riculum neque quis nouit quo apulsurus esta: negotii principio Solon Well I agree a third cryes t' trauaile due In wonders: and her worths wotthy pursue But oh! the dangers in the way affright Better then trye: Ile trust what others write. Twas the fond crochey t Israels spies possest, Sent by the Church to view that land of rest The Ankims great Giants guard that land And how can we these enemyes withstand? This cowardise these saithlesse disinherits Caleb and Iosua prosper by faiths merits, Thou readest of Christ his trauailing at sea, when helpe vs Lord, was the disciples plea. He checkt soone stormes as Lord of sea and land Nor can the proudest waue his word withstand Art, thou a Christian? know Gods prouidence, At sea, or land is equall strong defence, Thy lot thats to thee man predestinate Nor canst ouer run or ouer stay thy fate Perishes on mans lineage traueling? Another dies in bed? why heeres the thing.
Ile neuer come swearst thou where these weare lost No nor to be by sea or pirates crost And why forswearest not foole thy bed alike? Where death each day doth greater numbers, strike? And aches, paines, yea crosses too: are more, Then at the sea or of our natiue shore I had for got in trauailes wayes to tell How thou art skild in this distruct so well Tis penury of faith to fortysye. And breed in thee a noble constancy Thou liuest at home an vnbeleeuing course Nor dost with God in priuacy conuerse Prayers a stranger to thy study cases, This makes thee so prophaine in forraine places. A conscience pure is alwayes lion bould, Impures to ill and desperation sould. A good man beares the record in his brest That all to him shall issue for the best. The man holy at home hees fortified And's, both for stormes and opposition tryed: Ibi fides nullum habet meritum, vbi ratio buma nahabet experi∣mentum. Gregor: in euan 6. Comes and is bould gods workes at sea to see Longing to know his wonders what they bee Armd well by prayer, and patience for a storme, And fortified by faith can cach no harme Knowes prouidence his portion hies a way. And safely can in middest of pirrils stray, Oivitae secur a vbi est conscien∣a pura. Romans. 8. Caelum non ani∣mum mutant qui transemare currunt. Counts crosses, deaths and all, like aduantagious? And how can this man chuse but passe couragious? Thy ignorance how blesst it is, opposes. Time euery day true trauailes worth discloses. Se Moises, Ioseph, Hester and the rest, In forraine trauaile wondrously blest For where meanes seemeth vacant god supplies, And in defect gods greatest honour lies, Posse pati facile¦est tibi ni pati¦entia desit. Ouid: amor, Let men saith Dauid tell his wonders then Deliuering best: when worst to eyes of men,
Life is at home an ocean of crosses, Iazillan gebuz Basimah, turk. procua. Amapp of cares, a labyrinth of losses, Tis ut a change at sea, a locall shift, God cannot be preuented of his drift, Thy lot is in thy forehead writ by fate Obiectio. 4. Exemplis flecti¦te quoque posse puto Amorum; It canst thou not alter, amend, abate, Another Mimick and a worser sayes Tush trauailers can liue no other waies Looke backe blinde Doeg to the troupes before Rings, princes, prophets, who haue trauailed more? The wisest, richest, greatest leade the way, And well may then the meaner after stay, Thinkest thou because poore in her way are blest No men but base are in her interrest? Gods no accepter of the persons grace His blessing waytes on euery lawfull place. How able meanes is to the place declard, Looke backe: for now that labour shall be spard. Yet Know if thou hast small at home to spend, Much lesse can costly traualle thee defend. Thou meanst perhaps the lawlesse leagauer crue Whose profits by all nationes bate accure Or the land straying spendthrifts Indian course, Or th' bankrupt cheater bandid of the buise: Or th' giddy pated criticke stird with errour, Or the offendour chast with conscience terrour. The beast and noblest roades some villianes vse Nor can we trauailes noble path excuse. Let lawlesse strayers see in Ionas mapp, And turne a straighter course for what may happ, Oune saurit fai¦red'une buse un¦espre ier. And thy reuile experience checkes vniust And shewes thou hast to trauaile lesser trust. It may be thou and such for mentiond gulles, Acarion crowe neuer good bawke. Haue sluggishly consumd your meanes as fooles A broad at home and each way base neclect, Makes mans weldoing equall in defect.
Sir tis confest a fift sayes many gaine, Obiectio quinta: But many more by losse of it complaine. Tis part amends with Thomas thou beleeue. Trauaile hath in it potence to releiue, Yet he that Credits clowds shall neuer mowe, Nor the obiecting flowbacke seldome sow Tis true great losses many times befall But donot greater gaines the losse recall? Angliano,  de:  de. Letts paralell the trafickers condition And iudge him, (as thou vs) without commission Who more aduentures? passes too, and fro? To Spaine? to Zant, to east and west we know Mixing the gaines and losses in account? Yet do the gaines By much the losse surmount? How comes it earth ore no degree in state Proueth so wealthy, able, fortunate? If (as it sales by land too) comes a Crosse Impigr extremos currit mercator ad indos: per mar pau periem vitans Horat: By stormes or pirats vnexpected losse, His comforts this twas not his owne neclect Nor as a spend-thrift, lost it by defect, Men subiect are their losses to repeate But not of blessings thankfully to treate Hurts are in marble graud: but guifts in sande And thus misprise men the almightyes hand Yea some as Changlings trauaile will bely Faulting it for their owne ill husbandry Lo! Losses wayt one men as much at home, And Crosses charge vs thicker's dayly knowne. Vnkindnesses in strangers grieuie vs lesse Then such who though of land, and blood oppresse: And man can trauaile harder, and content: Then when his home friends eye his poore intent. A thousand honest shifts men there effect, Which end in worth, successe, and good respect,
Which they abasht at home could neuer try Or in a worse sort suffer misery. To you let me appeale who haue it proud Note Apapret virtue in prosperis; at emin et aduersie Bern: cant. 7: Dan: lib: And passe farre vnder what your births behoud In losephs bondage to endure compeld And in a willing patience mildly yeild By cruell Egypt, or a Turke affected, And Daniell like ouer all respected. Be ye in midd of bloody Lyons cast, Your cause (is good) his issue good at last. The more the perill, the more prouidence And greater glory God in mans defence. Then's only time for him to spread his power, When dangers seeme most suddaine to deuoure So haue I seene, but often heard it tould, Men by the very sea stormes made more bould. And in the midd of likely losses gaine, And (more abroad then neare home) grace attaine. And lesser cares in forraine cases serue Then where their birth more mercy did deserue, Yea more abroad rich then in father land, See! trauailers help, in the Almighties hand. Infine a sixe sayes, what need this a doe Vs now in peace to traueiling to woe? Sir we are well seated vnder mothers whinge Ill neuer trauaile further then my king! Obiecti 6. Fond How sworme keepe thy chimny corner still, To win vnwilling sots tis not our will, Let euery man in his condition stay. To Gad is not to trauaile but to stray. The church, and euery christians militant, Yea euery soyle supplies anothers want Thers most need man of trauaile in a peace Fac quod fecit. The cause of plenty; author of increase. Natiue comodius good to vtter forth Iaia ost west thuys best. Causing a citty, or a countryes worth, Such men whose causes sute to sit at home
And the vnwilling may reside alone, Traficke and peace reciprocall suruiuers Still where the one, to wonder both are thriuers None hact Callrs A bo enten∣durilnefut que demye parol Carpere vell noli nostra, vel ede¦tua Martiall. In warts no time for free recourse to bee This wee by tryall, and experience see, Embrace thy mothers dugg in promisd peace Embrace thy slothfulnesse thy shames increase Till times of tryall or confusions come Then runnst thou (as a madd man) bout thy home If not thy pride is clownish ignorance, The plow or cart thy vttermost aduance. See now my muse no more of momus crue Appeare as yet thy progresse to pursue Recollectio. Generalis Att male dum recitas incipit esse tuus Mar∣tiall: The wise can tell sots soone can cauill more Thers worth respondence, or a rea ding ore: And man may sooner Change the moorish hue Then force a fooles beleefe, be't neere so true. To the ingenious traueller I bend, Thus by a short suruay the totall end His wonders great in skie, on sea, on earth Hauing each day, and way, a newer birth His worth in pleasure, and true profits gaine How they both soule, and sences entertaine, His worths the persons highly dignifie, How rares declard in royall property, His way worth note, in persons fitnesse stands Nature, birth, parts, and ablenesse commands The place wherein he passes, pious good, For god our state, and selfe is vnderstood. Next note we vertues common worth embrace And vices ready trauaile to disgrace The circumstantiall place and time attend So did my muse against the criticke bend Who with the dart of truth expelled thence. Gaue cause (least tedioue now) wee hy vs hence. Trauailes a rose, man the industrious bee Wise trauailers sucke, and hiue vp swauity
Badd spider like suck poisons to deuoure Tiauai e is as the rose: a curious flowre, None can come neere its colloures curious sents Dat rosa mell apibus qua sugit aranea virus Granger. Delicious rosall rites, and ornaments: The base neere lesse to uenome vertues change, And if growe worse by trauaile tis not strange, One as the Bee sucks hony from this flower, The spider gale, and venome to deuoure, Not that the venome in this rose doth grow Exemplo tangi¦nen propriore potes For tis of natures sweets most rare we show But that the others humour poysonous Conuerts these sweetes to Aconita thus: In all the parts of mannage more pernitious, Ouid: amor: As is the subiect in affection vitious. Well mannagd trauailes only ornament, In Christian, ciuill; and a true intent. Diuersorium enim hic commo∣randinon habit andi habemus. Cic: desennt Als vse: the heuens, planets, and spherall pace, The soule, and sences progresse, trauailes grace. Mans ages childhood, youth, and midd age hye To summ at death account of destiny Which destiny in secret set by God, From all beginnings sealed by his word, Proceds in progresse with vnknowne envent Man cannot stop his makers iust intent: He cannot hast his fate, it keepeth pace Nor stayes while periods added to the race, Its trauaile mazeth all the earth to see The strange effects in destiny there be From birth to nonage, midle gray and graue Which some at sea, some land all some way haue. Some poore of rich, some high of low arise, Thus wanders man, in him his destinyes. A sparrow cannot faile but by his fate Who could ere? once prolong; amend abate? True Christian trauaile makes the mortall blest And him that in the two is interest, The course of ciuill trauaile was our taske,
Daily, diuines the other two vnmaske, Trauails welfare to be added. The issues seene (if worthy uiew) tis well, Many more learned the forme may happ excell, Veritas e and The matter founded on the rocke of truth, Both recreations of my muse in youth Courage then trauailes noble sonnes aduance Arme and expect a mapp of crosse mischance: Rockes pirates gulphs straights sirens storms & store Of remoraes and monsters of the shore. Ille quidem dus gratus est eu: coginat hoc sunt: omnia sue  re¦rum se  ad usus Hefio. Behould as vertues vices are attendants ye must be both assailants and defendants: Hange not on aiery hope of fate alone, Prouidence only industry will owne. Suppose the worst in trauaile that may come Scorning those flashy preconceyts of some, Who guesse all done, to doo strange things effected The goulden meane of modesty neclected When if a losse, or crosseth wart there intent The gaines dispaire the end astonishment Ep: Eronn. Leuell thy doubts and hopes so though all lost Thy patient soule of gaine in losse may host: Ephilegu Thus trauailes wonders worths and wayes declard And trauailes walfares as a fourth prepard, Caliope by Cinthius cald: flyes forth Denying trauaile wellfare to his worth: ax pocali Patriaeque alus, & gloria regni, Carol. Since oh the times, fell mars his wellfare crosses By pirats rapins ruins murders losses Mourne o my muse in secret and retire, Till Europe liue in peace, his long desire. when on his welfares thou more ee mayst sing, And Brittaine blesse Iehoue who wrought the thing. Then for a fourth her wellfar  shall ascend And untill then my tryall hath an end. Si bene quid feci deo gratare Datori Si male quid feci noueris esse meum. Olimpiad: in seriptit FINIS
