13131 99855020 20490
A Discourse and true recitall of euerie particular of the victorie obtained by the French King, on Wednesday the fourth of March, being Ashwednesday. Also of his good successe that he hath had since that time, in taking of cer∣taine Townes. Out of French into English. Seene and Allowed. BY WISDOME PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY T O printer's device of Thomas Orwin AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Orwin, for Richard Oliffe, and are to be sold at his shop in Paules Church-yard, at the Signe of the Crane. 1590.
A Discourse and true recitall of euerie particular of the victorie ob∣tained by the King of France, on Wednesday the 4. of March be∣ing Ashwednesday. YOV vnderstood by my last aduertisement how God had giuen victorie to the king o∣uer his enemies: since which rime I haue endeuoured my selfe to learne the truth of all things, as neere as I could, of such as were present at the fight, who say the victorie as it fell out, was a mira∣culous worke of God: for the forces of the Duke de Maine were 4500. horse, aswell armed as possi∣ble, amongst which were 1600. Launces, and the rest Petronells armed, and 18000. footmen, and the forces of the King were 2000. horse, and 12000. foote. The King was aduertised that the Duke de Maine was passed the Riuer at Maunte, and that he iornied with great boldnes towards him: where∣vpon it was aduised in counsell to raise his siege be∣fore Dreux, which had sustained two assaults, and so vpon monday the 2. of March the King raised
his siege, & encamped himselfe so neere the Duke, that the same night certaine Marshalls of the Duke lodged in certaine Villages were dislodged by the King, and there lodged himselfe by force. The next morning the King did put himselfe into the field in a faire plaine, and sawe that the Duke was retur∣ned betweene Saint Andre and Yury nere Annet, three quarters of a mile further than he was the day before, which troubled the King much to seeke him so farre; which was great aduantage to the e∣nemie, and perill to the King to approach them, which made them to leaue a Village that they held. This day was nothing performed but skir∣mishes. The Wednesday morning the King cau∣sed euerie man to bee put in aray, he himselfe orde∣red the whole, and gaue order that so soone as they heard one peece of Ordnance shot of, they should prepare themselues to the battaile. The Duke by his Espialls had discouered the signe of the Cannon, but vnderstood it had been to haue prepared for their departure, and therefore sought by all meanes to knowe which way the King ment to flee, and trussed vp his baggage to followe: but it fell out otherwise, for at this signe euerie man was prepared. The Tuesday before, the Duke sent to knowe how the King was apparelled, whereby to knowe him, the better to lay to kill him. The King being aduertised hereof, sent a Trūpet to tell him, that he was sorie he took so much paine, & that he would case him of that care, and that he gaue him to vn∣derstand,
that (if he had desire to see him) he should finde him mounted vpon a gray horse, with a great white feather in his crest armed in blew and black, and desired to knowe how he would be armed and mounted, for that he desired to speake with him verie neere; vnto the which he answered, he would be armed in red, but the gallant was armed in black. The King hauing commaunded all into battaile a∣ray, did command euerie one to pray, which they all gladlie did in particular. This done, the king be∣gan to march forward with some part of his Cor∣net of horse, and caused one of the squadrons of his horse to approach behinde him, in the which was the Artillerie, which was shot with such furie a∣mongst the Reisters, thrice out of euerie Cannon, that he made at euery shot a faire breach: notwith∣standing they did not let to come to the charge, where they were well receiued; and of the Can∣nons which the enemie discharged, there was but one shot that hurt, wherewith was slaine of the Kings Cornet foure or fiue persons. The Cornet of the King was so hardlie assailed by 1600. horse in 4. parts, that he that bare the Cornet was throwne downe, & all that troope forced to retire. The King which was in another Cornet than in his owne, hauing left Chiccot apparelled like himselfe, sauing he had two Foxe tailes hanging in his Helmet, was merueilously charged, thinking it had bin the king, for the which Chiccot did mock them, & defended himselfe valiantlie. The King seeing the said Cor∣net so hardlie assailed, came to the head of the ene∣mie
encouraging his Armie, which began to retire crying Amoy enfans, it is I that am the King, and his feather being high mounted, serued fora stan∣dard, and then euerie one began to returne to the King, and charged the Spaniards and Wallons, which shewed themselues valiant men: but if it had not been for the comming of the King, all his men had fled. Vpon which returne and charge, the Spaniards and Wallons sodainlie began to flee, who were pre∣sentlie pursued by the King and his men, who gaue them no time, once being broken, to ioyne againe, charging them in sundry places. The Marshal Dau∣mont charged the Reisters, and passed and repassed twise through them: wherevpon the faid Reisters seeing the Spaniards and Wallons flee▪ which were 1600. Launces wel mounted; fled also. The Marshal Daumont pursuing them, met the Launce Knights, who charged him, and caused him to stay to fight but the Launce Knights stood but a while, and re∣tired into a small Wood, whether the footmen of the King went to them, and put thē al to the sword. While this battaile was fighting, the Lord of Humieres of Picardie arriued with 300▪ horse to the King, who charged also the Wallons, and came in good time. The King fearing at the first he and his companie had been enemies that had come to charge him: but when he sawe them to assaile the Spaniards, hee reioyced and was glad, and then sent to knowe what he was, and it was answered, that it was Humieres. This man helped the King much to ouerthrowe the Spaniards and Wallons, who
stood  valiantlie before▪ and to saie trueth, there was none that fought well of the enemies side that day but they: By the opinion of those that were at the battaile; that first without the helpe of God, and secondarelie, the valiantnes of the King, and thirdlie the happie comming of Humieres, the bat∣taile had been lost on the Kings side. But marke a notable miracle, in a moment out men retired, in a moment againe returned, & after in a moment put the enemies to slight: for so soone as the King had gathered againe his men together, setting vppon them, the feare of God strooke them, (for by the iudgement of men, they had no other occasion) and so fled: also it was thought they feared the Marshall Byron, who all this while stood in a heape with 600. Horse to sustaine and giue helpe to the weakest parte of the Kings bartaile, but when the King sent him word to giue helpe to his Cornet which was sore oppressed, he made answere; that his lying still did giue more terror & feare to the e∣nemie making signe euerie mynute to set vpon thē, than if he had entred the battaile, for if he had char∣ged the enemie, they should no longer haue feared, seeing all the Kings forces to bee imployed. There were three Cornets of the Kings, which at the first retired, of the which S. Bonet which bare the corner of Captain Rowlet vvas one. The said Rowlet remai∣ned still in the Kings Camp onlie with 12. Lasices, but afterwards did put himselfe into another Cor∣net to fight Gerponuile who carried the Cornet of the Gouernour of Deepe fel vnder his horse, where∣vpon
one of the greatest and ritchest Barons of Caux, being the commanders Lieftenant ran to the baggage to keepe it obtaining thereby great ho∣nour. In briefe, there were many astonied, and sure∣lie had it not been thorough the great endeuour of the King who with Marshall D'aumont and others hauing their hearts & minds fullie bent, stil incou∣raging his people all had been lost. De Maine seeing this hard onset, stayed not the charging of himselfe although he had with him 500. horse but betooke him to his spurres, by Deuery vpō the riuer of Eury, which stoode by good hap for him. The Knight D'aumal and D'namures without fight ran awaie, then euerie one pursued the enemie by the com∣mandement of the King. The footemen seeing the Tragedie, (that is to sate) the Frenchmen and Swit∣zers, kept their place, & holding downe their pikes cried for mercie. The King sent to take away their Ensignes, and then took them to mercie: the Lance-Knights were all put to the sworde for their Trea∣son at Arkes. De Maine ran away by the bridge of Deuery, and cast awaie his Cassock and tooke a Mandilian of a Soldier, and passing through his owne men slew foure or fiue whereby more easie∣lie to passe, and caused a Barricado to bee made at the bridge and placed soldiers there to defende the pursuite, the King comming to the said Barricado, and seeing some let beeing conducted by Chiccot, who assured him that hee knew the waie, did re∣turne to passe by a shallowe, and pursued De Maine to the Suburbes of Maunte, which was 7. leagues
from the place. The Duke de Maine was an houre at the gates intreating entrie, which at the first they denyed, telling him they feared least the King should enter with him in the pursuite, whereupon hee sware hee had killed the King with his owne hands, but in trueth had lost the battaile, by which meanes he entred, & if he had staied but one quar∣ter of an houre longer he had been dispatched, and had it not bin for the Barricado at the bridge of De∣uery, which letted them, and his speedie departure from the battaile, he had been either slaine or taken. He saued himselfe from thence to Pontois and so to Saint Denis: hee caused all the Pesants to rise by the reporte of his men that were prisoners, to kill al them that should flee: he commanded all the nobi∣litie of France to be slaine without sparing any: he ordered also meanes to kil the King, in which God hath changed his purpose. There were taken in the place of the battaile foure Cannons and other small peeces, all his baggage, powder and munition, a great number of Charriots and horses of the Rei∣sters Germaines and Wallons: in briefe, the Pesants are by that meanes rich, a great number of the sol∣diers were drowned. The Barricado of Deuery, was after taken by the Kings side, and many men slaine there. In the battaile were slaine not past 1500. but in the pursuite of the flight was the great slaughter. The confusion was so great, that the baggage of Monsieur the Prince of Conte were carried away by the enemie fleeing to Vernone, but afterwards were recouered. There were 60. Ensignes & 40. Cornets
taken, the white Cornet of de Maine, the King (ha∣uing slaine the bearer) tooke himselfe. The King hath licensed the Switzers to depart, and hath giuen them a cōuoy to their Cantons, allowing them sixe pence a day during their trauell home, with aduer∣tisement that they should come no more against the Crowne of France. There is 6000. footmen French, which haue sworne seruice to the King, cursing de Maine that he left them to the butcherie of the Vic∣tor, praising greatlie the King for his great mercie. The King as yet will not accept of their feruice. The Countie Egmond was slaine there by the hands of Marshal Daumont, who was Colonell of the Wal∣lons. The Duke of Brunswicke cannot bee found, but is thought to be dead: Founrden Martell dead, Bas∣sonpierre, Chattenneraies, Baddolphen, & diuers others dead in the place. There is of the Wallons past at A∣miens 350. or 400. whereof 120. left in the Hospital being hurt. De Maine did send after them to A∣miens to come to him by the Signeur Belleanglise: to whom they answered, they would not returne, cal∣ling de Maine Runne-away. The King commanded all the strangers to be slaine, and the French to be sa∣ued. There are few Spaniards or Italians left aliue, except those which saued themselues by flight▪ for although they offered great sommes of money for their ransume, yet were they all slaine. The Pesants mocked de Maine, saying he caused them to come to kill the Kings men, but yet killed the others, and cryed, God saue the King. It is the most norable vic∣torie that of late was heard of, and being throughly
considered, must be confessed to come of God. The Tuesday night before the battaile, there was seene in this place two Armies in the Skie, the one greater than the other, and the lesse ouercame the greater. This sight was seene at the time of the pre∣paring of the Battaile; & the like at the same time in the Camp; & now we vnderstand the issue there∣of by the victorie. God hath shewed himselfe ap∣parantlie to fauour the cause, in so much that they say in the Campe, that the praiers of the Hugonots are much auaileable in the sight of God. Vernone yeelded on Friday after, and the King entred it on Saterday: Maurte yeelded vpon Monday, and the King entred it vpon Tuesday. There was found 3. great Cannons with powder and shot, and there the King refreshed himselfe well. The 28. day the King departed out of Maunte to go to Corbell, Mens & Mullen, where the Duke of Longueuile hath 2500. horse, and 6000. footmen: which Townes are like to bee deliuered to the King, the which will bee a great helpe to aduance the parlie of them of Paris, which they seeke. Monsieur de Villeroy hath bin at Maunte, & hath since twise spoken with the Marshall Byron. The King hath licensed the Gentlemen of base Norman∣die to goe home to their houses to refresh them∣selues, hauing sufficient forces besides. Monsieur de Tauannes fleeing from the Battell, hath retired him∣selfe to Roan, in shewe, to keepe them assured to de Maine. Monsieur de Villiers Gouernour of Newha∣uen
comming thether, being called by the Countrie to take the gouernment and strong places, hath bin repulsed by Monsieur de Tauannes and Milray. And although they make great shewe to withstand the King, yet haue they resolued in their priuate coun∣sell to yeeld, the King comming by force, not ex∣pecting any rescue at all. The Duke de Aumale is in Picardie, and the Duke de Maine hath withdrawne him, his wife and children out of Paris, and conueied his wife and children to Perone. Himselfe is now at Sois∣sons gathering what forces he can; but not likelie to gather any at this present, hauing no other hope, but the accustomed lyes of his preachers, and o∣ther his wonted practizes. From Deepe the 20. of March. 1590. FINIS.
