13098 99847850 12913
A LETTER FROM THE KING, to his Court of Parliament of Burdeaux, touching the death of the Duke of Guyse. (***) AT BVRD EAVX By S. Milanges, ordinary Printer vnto the King, 1589. By commaundement of the said Court. Newly translated according to the French Coppie. CANTABO IEHVAE QUIA BENEFECIT MIHI printer's or publisher's device Printed for Thomas Woodcocke, dwelling in Pauls Church yard at the signe of the Black Beare. 1589.
The King his letter vnto his Court of Parliament of Burdeaux. Trusty and welbeloued, although you are sufficiently enformed of the occasions which the Duke of Guise now deceased hath gi∣uen vs, to reuenge our selues of those troubles which hee hath spread in our Realme, and of the enterprises and attempts which hee hath made of later yeares against our state and Crowne, yea our ho∣nour and life: neuerthelesse (expecting vntill we geue you more perticularlie to vnderstand how he hath v∣sed himselfe ingratefully towardes vs insteede of a mendes, whereas wee pardoned him all thinges pas∣sed, in hope that our gentlenesse, and the good turnes and honour which since then wee haue done vnto him, and did euerie day, to the misliking of our good and Loyall seruantes and Subiectes, which were still offended with it, might bring him to the right way agayne.) Wee will onelie signifie vnto you, that of late his insolencie was growen so farre, that despising our Authoritie, hee hath omitted nothing of that which hee might doe, to bring vs into trouble, and to
take our crowne from vs, yea our owne life. And if he hath not done it, it is because hee coulde not doe it, which hath geuen vs iust occasion to make him knowe that GOD hath geuen vs the Authoritie, the meanes, and the courage to chastice him, according to his desart, by the losse of his life. Whereof wee haue not thought amisse to aduertise you by these presentes, to the ende you may knowe the truth of it, least by salse reportes it be colourably altred vnto you, geuing you moreouer to vnderstand, that we will by no meanes leaue our holy entrprise to make warre against the Heritickes, and to roote them out: but rather, as it was not grounded eyther vppon the late deceased Duke of Guyse his life or death, nor his ambition; but vppon the zeale and affection which we haue allwaies borne, and will alwayes haue en∣graued in the bottome of our hearte, to the glory of GOD, and the encrease of our Catholicke, Aposto∣licke, and Romane Religion; so likewise it cannot be by any occasions whatsoeuer remooued from vs. Our will therefore is, that our Subiectes of our iurisdicti∣on be enformed of the iust causes of the punishment which they haue receiued, and of our good and holy purposes. And that likewise, you endeuour your selues to keepe euery one in their obedience which they owe vnto vs, whereby they may assure them∣selues to be eased as much as we can, and whiles they shall continewe in their duty, they shall finde vs al∣wayes their gratious King, readie to gratifie them as farr as their fidelitie shall deserue; and likewise to chastice them if they forget their dutie, and with∣drawe
themselues from the respecte and obedience which GOD hath commaunded them to geue vs. Geuen at Bloys, the 24. day of December. 1588. Sygned thus, HENRY. And lower, REVOS. Presented the second of Ianuary 1589. And on the backe side To our trustie and welbeloued of our Court of Parliament at BVRDEAVX. FINIS.
Drawen out of the Regesters of the Court. THe Court and Chambers thereof being assembled by request made vnto them by word of mouth from the King his general At∣torney, hath, and by these presentes doth make speciall inhibition vnto all manner of persons of what estate, qualitie, or condition soeuer they be, and vnder what pre∣tence soeuer it bee; to make or renewe anie league or association, to withdrawe and entice the Subiectes of our sayd Lorde the King from his seruice, nor spread or vse any wordes ten∣ding to withdrawe them from the Loyall heart, fidelitie, and obedience which they owe vnto him, vppon daunger to bee accounted as Re∣bells and guiltie of high treason. Enioyning all Bayliffes, Stewards, Vnderwardens, their de∣puties,
and all others to whom it shall belong, to make enquirie of them that oppose themselues herevnto, and to proceede against the offen∣ders, according to the rigor of the Kings edicts, and to signfiie vnto the same Court of their endeuour done in that behalfe within one moneth vnder payne to answere it themselues at their owne perill and daunger. Enacted at Burdeaux at the Parliament, in the Chambers thereof being assembled, the 2 of Ianuarie. 1589. Sygned thus D. ARNAL.
