13126 99850143 15329
AN ABSTRACT of the proceedings of the French King. The defeating of the Duke of Parmas Forces. The preparation of his Maiestie for the reducing of his townes in Normandie. The request of the Leaguers of Roane to the Go∣uernor of Diep. And the wofull estate of the Citie of PARIS. ƲƲritten by a French Gentleman to his friend. LONDON Printed for VV. Wright. 1590.
❧A BRIEFE Abstract of the late particular proceedings of the French King in France. THe care of affaires in absence (my most as∣sured friend) bindeth me to remember with no fmal thankes your great kindnes. Your Letters dated the 11. of Noumber I rece∣ued, wherby I am as fully satisfied of those doubtes, which for a time kept me (as it were) from my natiue home▪ as if my selfe in presence had taken all paines for their dispatch, beeing in all thinges comforted, were it not I want your comfortable presence. But to be briefe, I wil, as you earnestly request
in few wordes express the present estate of the arraires of our  Christian King ere   sundry espials as by many other  that the greatest part  the Duke of are by the Kinges power defeated, and all his baggage or the greater part thereof lost: wher∣by the Leaguers, who eped on them on the piller of their weale, are dismaied with the wearie expectation of their vaine hope, which is nowe turned to despaire, the Duke himselfe being withdrawen to Bruxils. Also it is most certaine, that the Kings ma∣iesties forces doe foorthwith come downe into Normandie, to reduce those places which stand for the disloiall Leaguers. His Maiestie mea∣ning to beginne at those little Townes which stand betweene Roane and New-hauen, from whence no succour can come vnto Roane, as they haue expected. Also, those of Roane since the defeate of the Duke of Parmaes forces, haue beene at Diep, and required to haue libertie for all those wo∣men and children that are vnder the age of sixteene yeexes, whose parents and husbandes were withdrawen into places of force, leauing theyr dwellinges desolate, to retourne to theyr pos∣
, to manure theyr grounde, repayre theyr houseswhich they haue bene compelled to dispearse abroade among theyr friends where they haue thought good, for the safegard thereof▪  which the Gouernour will not make answare, vntill the Kings maiesties pleasure be therein fther knowen. Lastly and briefly, there is great lykelyhood that the kings Maiestie will shortlye chase and driue awaie all his enimies, and not seeke, as they haue presumptuouslie boasted, to conclude anie peace with them. But when wee do con∣sider the assured resolution of the kings maie∣stie, builded vppon a firme perseuerance in vn∣doubted faith, his right, and the neuer chaung∣ing promise of Almightie God, who hath promi∣sed to race out the remembraunce of such as lay violent handes on his annointed. Wee haue no doubt, but dare boldly affirme, & will houre∣ly expect the dounfall of those degenerate mon∣sters, who hauing builded on the weake sand of mans power and inuention, shal not bee able to indure the breath of the Lordes wrath, but bee swallowed with Corah in the swelling surges of theyr owne abhominations, and theyr Arch-counsellers the rewarde of Achitophell: theyr ring-leader the ende of Absolom: which the Lord at his good will and pleasure will bring to passe.
It is also most certaine that Paris is become a∣bandoned; her beautious habitations being either Thus haue I truelie satisfied you concerning the French Kings pro∣ceedings, and the successe of his e∣mies, I haue sent you that whereof I am assured, and you may boldlie affirm. FINI.
