13161 99857431 23169
The Order and Solemnitie of the Creation of the High and mightie Prince HENRIE, Eldest Sonne to our sacred Soueraigne, Prince of VVales, Duke of Cornewall, Earle of Chester, &c As it was celebrated in the Parliament House, on Munday the fourth of Iunne last past. Together with the Ceremonies of the Knights of the Bath, and other matters of speciall regard, in∣cident to the same. Whereunto is annexed the Royall Maske, presented by the Queene and her Ladies, on Wednesday at night following. Printed at Britaines Bursse for Iohn Budge, and are there to be sold. 1610.
THE ORDER AND SOLEMNITIE OF THE creation of Prince HENRY, eldest sonne to his sacred Maiestie, Prince of VVales, as it was celebrated in the Parli∣ament house on Monday the fourth of Iune last past. HIs Maiestie aswell to shew the bounty of his affection towards his deerest Sonne the Prince, as to settle in the hearts of his louing Sub∣iects a liuely impression of his Royall care for continuance of the happy, and peacefull Gouernement of this land, in his issue and posterity; hauing determined to inuest his Princely Highnesse, with those ti∣tles and dignities which the former Princes of this Realme haue vsually beene adorned: It seemed fittest, both in regard of his High∣nesse
yeeres, now arriuing at mans estate, and shewing rare proofes of heroicall vertue, and also for that it would be a matter most grate∣full and acceptable to that honorable Assem∣bly, to haue the solemnities thereof perfor∣med in this present Parliament. Wherefore the time approaching, his Ma∣iesties pleasure signified, and preparation made accordingly, on VVednesday, the thir∣tieth of May last, his Highnesse accompani∣ed (besides the ordinary traine of his house∣hold) with diuers young Lords and Gentle∣men of speciall marke, departed from his house of S. Iames, towards Richmond, where being come towards euening, he supped and reposed himselfe for that night. Next morning, being Thursday about nine of the clocke, he tooke water to returne againe to London, attended only with some few Barges of his owne followers, and such Noblemen and others, as accompanied him thither the day before. Passing softly downe the streame, he was seuerally encountered by diuers Lord, swhich came to meete him on the way: the Thames
began soone to flote with Botes and Barges, hasting from all parts to meete him, and the shores on eyther side, where conueniency of place would giue way to their desires, swar∣med with multitudes of people, which stood wayting with greedy eyes to beholde his tri∣umphant passage. About eleuen of the clocke, vnderstanding that the tide was falne so low, as there would not be conuenient roome for all the Barges in his traine to go orderly downe, notwithstan∣ding his first appointment was to haue come to London about noone, and dinner prepa∣red for him accordingly at White-hall, hee made stay at Barne-Elmes, and there landing, refreshed himselfe in an Arbour by the water side, and tooke a short repast of such sweete meats and other things, as could there be pro∣uided on the sudden. By this time the Lord Mayor and Alder∣men of London with the seuerall Companies of the Citie, honorably furnish't and appoin∣ted, and disposed in faire order, were ready at∣tending with a great traine and sumptuous showe, to receiue his highnesse at Chelsey:
their Barges deck't with banners, streamers and ensignes, and sundry sortes of loud-soun∣ding Instruments, aptly placed amongst them. There were also two artificiall Sea-mon∣sters, one in fashion of a Whale, the other like a Dolphin, with persons richly apparrelled, sitting vpon them, who at the meeting and parting of the Lord Mayor and his company, with the Prince, were to deliuer certaine spee∣ches vnto him. In this goodly manner this well furnish't Fleete of the City receiued his Highnes some∣what beyond Chelsey about two of the clock in the afternoone: and after the Lord Mayor and Aldermens salutation, humbly presented and gratiously accepted by his Highnesse, they turned their stemmes, and so proceeded towards London: obseruing this course, that whereas at their approach the Lord Mayors Barge, came foremost, and the Companies e∣uery one in their degrees followed after; now that order being chaunged, the Companies went before, the meanest in place first, the rest according to their seuerall rankes successiuely
ensuing, and lastly the Lord Mayor atten¦ded with his two Sea-monsters on eyther side, going immediately before the Prince and conducting his ioyfull passage to the Citie. Next after the Princes Barge followed his seruants, & the Barges of sundry Noble∣men, and others which had met him on the way; and on euery side, such a confu∣sed company of Botes of all sortes fraught with beholders, as it seemed the Riuer (though then enlarged to her vtmost limits by the tides friendly aduantage) was too little to containe them: as likewise the land on eyther shore, which neuer felt the weight of such an infinity of people vpon any former occasion. Approaching neereto VVhite hall, the King and Queene with the young Duke of Yorke and Lady Elizabeth stood in the pri∣uie Gallerie window, to see the order of their comming, and that his Maiestie might take the better viewe of the Lord Mayor and Citizens show, they were ap∣pointed to passe along on London side,
whilst the Prince in the meane while fet∣ched a Compasse about by Lambeth; and so comming to VVhite-hal bridge (where the Lord Maior and Aldermen tooke leaue of his highnesse) there landed, his landing being congratulated with a loude peale of Chambers from the other side of the water: which in their thundring voyces carried vp to the skie, the ioy of the peo∣ples hearts conueyed in the issue of these happy triumphs. At his highnesse comming on shore his seruants attended vpon the bridge to re∣ceiue him, making a Guard for him to passe thorow to the hall, where he was en∣tertained by the Lord Knols, and the Lord Wotton Treasurer and Controller of the houshold: likewise in the great chamber by Vicount Fenton Captaine of the Guard, in the Presence by the Earle of Suffolke, Lord Chamberlaine, and lastly by the King and Queene in the Priuy chamber. After which his highnes reposed himselfe, and so ended that dayes solemnity. On munday following the Lords and
Peeres of the Realme being all assembled in Parliament, his Maiesty accompanied with the Prince, who was that morning to be inuested in his Principalitie, tooke water at the priuy staires at White hal, and landing together at Westminster bridge, his Maiesty passed directly to the Parlia∣ment-house, and the Prince to the Court of Wardes, from whence, after a whiles tarry∣ance for the disposing of things in due or∣der, his highnesse proceeded in this maner to his Creation. First went the Heralds and Officers of Armes in their rich coates, next followed the Knights of the Bath, being fiue and twentie in number, apparrelled in long Roabes of purple Satin, lyned with white Taffata; then Garter principall king of Armes, bearing the Letters Patents, the Earle of Sussex the purple Robes, the train borne by the Earle of Huntingdon, the Earle of Cumberland the sword, the Earle of Rutland the Ring, the Earle of Derby the Rod, and the Earle of Shrewsbury the cap and Coronet. His Princely highnesse
supported by the Earles of Nottingham and Northamp: on came bare headed, and so entring the Parliament chamber, where the king was set in his Throne, and the whole state of the Realme in order (diuers strangers and forraigne Ambassadours be∣ing present) he made low obeysance to his Maiestie three times, and after the third time, when he was come neere to the king, kneeled downe on a rich pillow or cushi∣on, whilst the Earle of Salisbury read his Letters Patents. Then his Maiestie at the reading of the wordes of Inuestiture put the Robes vpon him, and girded on the sword, inuested him with the Rod and Ring, and set the Cap and Coronet on his head; with which ceremony the creation being accomplished, he arose, and was by the Earles of Worcester & Suffolke brought and seated in his place of Parliament on the left hand of his Maiestie. Hauing so remained a while, all ceremo∣nies finished, his Maiestie with the whole Court of Parliament, rose vp and discen∣ded into the hal, passing forth towards the
bridge in solemne and stately manner: the foremost as they proceeded in order, were the Clerkes and Masters of the Chanceie, with the Kings Councell and other Mini∣sters of the law: next came the officers of Armes, and then the Knights of the Bath as before: after them the Iudges, and so suc∣cessiuely the Barons, Vicounts, Earles, Marquesses and Dukes, according to their degrees in the Parliament house and offi∣ces of state all in their Parliament roabes; and lastly, the King himselfe, with the Prince, who tooke water together, the trumpets sounding in the Row-barge all the way as they went, and the Heralds go∣ing before them in the same. At White-hal staires they landed, where the knights of the Bath and Noble-men being landed be∣fore, stood ready on the bridge in goodly and gallant order to receiue them, and go∣ing all before them, conducted them in this manner vp to the great Chamber. The king that day dined aboue, but the Prince dined in the hall & was serued with great state and magnificence. He was ac∣companyed
at his table with diuers great Lords, as the Earles of Notingham, Salis∣bury, Worcester and Derby, and namely all those that exercised any place or office a∣bout his creation. At another table in the same roome on the left hand of the Prince sat the knights of the Bath, all vpon one side, and had like∣wise great seruice and attendance. About the midst of dinner Garter princi∣pall king of Armes, with the rest of the he∣ralds, approached the Princes table, and with a loud and audible voyce, proclaimed the kings stile, in Latine, French, and En∣glish, thrise, and the Princes in like manner twise, then the trumpets sounding, the se∣cond course came in, and dinner done, that daies solemnity ceased. At night a stately maske was presented before his Maiestie, the inuention & man∣ner whereof I leaue to the author when he shall thinke good to publish. The same day the deuise of the fireworks & Seafight vpon the Thames should like∣wise haue bene shewed, but for some re∣spects
were put of till the wedensday fol∣lowing, and then performed to the much content and admiration of the beholders. The Names of such Noblemen as were imployed in seuer all places of Office or attendance at the crea∣tion of the PRINCE. The Earle of Salisbury. The Earle of Suffolke. The Earle of Notingham. The Earle of Northampton. The Earle of Worcester. The Earle of Derby. The Earle of Shrewsbury. The Earle of Cumberland. The Earle of Huntingdon The Earle of Sussex. The Earle of Rutland.
Other Noblemen that were pre∣sent in the Parliament house at the Princes creation, besides those which were employed in attendance about him. EARLES. The Earle of Arundell. The Earle of Bath. The Earle of Southampton. The Earle of Bedford. The Earle of Penbroke. The Earle of Hertford. The Earle of Lincolne. The Earle of Exceter. The Earle of Montgomery. VICOVNTS. The Lord Vicount Mountague.
The Lord Vicount Bindon. The Lord Vicount Lisle. BARONS. The Lord Aburgauenny. The Lord Audley. The Lord Zouche. The Lord Willowby. The Lord Barkley. The Lord Morley. The Lord Sroope. The Lord Dudley. The Lord Herbert. The Lord Monteagle. The Lord Mordant. The Lord Eu're. The Lord Rich. The Lord Sheffeld. The Lord Paget. The Lord Effingham.
The Lord North. The Lord Chandos. The Lord Hunsdon The Lord Saint Iohn. The Lord Burgleigh. The Lord Compton. The Lord Norreys. The Lord Knolles. The Lord Wotton. The Lord Ellesmere. The Lord Russell. The Lord Grey. The Lord Peter. The Lord Harrington. The Lord Gerrard. The Lord Spenser. The Lord Say. The Lord Denny. The Lord Stanhope. The Lord Carew.
The Lord Cauendish. The Lord Kniuet. The Lord Clifton. Hauing thus briefly described the man∣ner of his Highnes creation, I should here set a period to my discourse, but that the knights of the Bath being a principall part and ornament of his princely triumphes, and my selfe particularly bound to many of them, I could not passe them ouer with∣out some remembrance. Therefore thus much out of the note of directions from the office of armes, and some obseruation of credit, concerning the order and cere∣monies of the knighthood. The manner of the Creation of the Knights of the Bath, and the ceremonies obserued in so∣lemnizing the fame. ACcording to the order giuen from the Commissioners appointed for the ouersight and direction of
these ceremonies, the Lords & others that were to receiue the honourable order of the Bath, repaired on Saterday the second of Iune to Durham house in the Strond, and there in the afternoone heard euening prayer, obseruing no other ceremony at that time but only passing through the hall, the heralds going before them with their Coates vpon their armes, into the Chappel, from whence after seruice ended they returned into the chamber they were to suppe in. Their supper was prepared all at one table, and all sat vpon on side of the same, euery man hauing an Escutcheon of his armes placed ouer his head, and certaine of the kings officers beeing appointed to at∣tend them. In this manner hauing taken their repast, the tables were remoued, and seuerall beds made ready for their lodging, in the same place, after the same manner, al on one side, and each one as afore, right vnder the scutcheon of his owne armes. Their beds were pallets with coueringste∣sters or Canopies of red Say, but they vsed no curtaines.
The knights in the meane while were withdrawne into the bathing chamber, which was the next roome to that they sup∣ped in, where for each of them was proui∣ded a seueral bathing tub which was lined both within and without with white lin∣nen, and couered with red Say. After the bath they betooke themselues to their rest. Early the next morning they were wa∣kened with musicke, and at their vprising inuested in their Hermits habits, which was a gowne of gray cloth girded close, & a hood of the same, with a linnen coyfe vnderneath, and a handkercher hanging at his girdle, cloth stockings soled with lea∣ther, but no shooes; and thus apparrelled, their Esquires gouernours, with the heralds wearing the coats of armes, and sundry sorts of winde instruments going before them, they proceeded from their lodging downe through the hall, the meanest in or∣der for most as the night before, till they came to the chappell. Where after seruice ended their oath was ministred vnto them
by the Earle of Worcester and the Earle of Suffolke, in a solemne and ceremonious manner, all of them standing forth before their stalles, and at their comming out ma∣king low reuerence towards the Altar, by which the Commissioners sate; then were they brought vp by the heralds by two at once, the chiefest first, and so the rest till all successiuely had receiued their oath: which in substance was this. That aboue al things they should honour God and maintaine true Religion, loue their soueraigne, serue their country, help maidens, widdowes, & orphans, and to the vtmost of their pow∣er cause equity and iustice to be obserued. This done whilest they were yet in the Chappell, wine and sweet meates were brought thē, & then they departed to their chamber to be disrobed of their Hermits weeds, & new reuested againe in Robes of Crimson taffata lined with white sarcenet, hauing white hats on their heads with white feathers, white boots on their legs, & white gloues tyed to the strings of their mātles. Al which performed, they moūt on
horsbacke, their saddles being of black lea∣ther, and bridles of the same, with white crosses vpō their brests & cruppers of their horses; each Knight betweene his two es∣quires well apparrelled, his footeman at∣tending, and his page riding before him, carrying his sword with the hilts vpward, and his spurres hanging thereon. In this order rankte euery man according to his degree, the best or chiefest first, they rode faire and softly towards the Court, the trumpets sounding, and the heralds all the way riding before them. Beeing aligh∣ted at the Court gate, they were conducted by the heralds and others appointed for that purpose, into the hall, where his Maie∣stie sitting vnder his Cloth of estate gaue them their knighthood in this manner. First the principall Lord that is to re∣ceiue the order comes led by his two Es∣quires, and his page before him bearing his sword and spurres, and kneeleth downe before his Maiestie. The Lord Chamber∣laine takes the sword of the page and deli∣uers it to the King, who puts the belt ouer
the necke of the knight aslope his brest, pla∣cing the sword vnder his left arme. Then two noble men of the chiefe about the King put on his spurres, and so is the cere∣mony performed. In this sort the Earle of Oxford which was the principall of this number, beeing first created, the rest were al consequently knighted alike: and when the solemnity thereof was fully finished, they all returned againe in order as they came, sauing some smal difference, in that the youngest or meanest knight went now formost, and their pages behinde them. Comming back to Durham-house, their dinner was ready prepared in the same roome, and after the same fashion as their supper was the night before, but being set, they were not to taste of any thing that stood before them, but with a modest car∣riage and gracefull abstinence to refraine, diuers kindes of sweet musicke being play∣ed the while, and after a conuenient time of sitting, to arise & withdraw themselues, leauing the table furnished to their E∣squires and pages.
About foure of the clocke in the after∣noone they rode againe to Court, to heare seruice in the kings Chappell, keeping the same order they did at their returne from thence in the morning: euery knight ri∣ding betweene his two Esquires and his page following him. At their entrance in∣to the Chappell, the Heralds conducting them, they make a solemne reuerence, the the youngest knight, beginning the rest or∣derly ensuing: and so one after another take their standing before their stalles, where all being placed, the eldest knight maketh a se∣cond reuerence, which is followed to the youngest; and then all ascend into their stalles, and take their accustomed places. Seruice then beginneth, and is very so∣lemnely celebrated, with singing of diuers Antheames, and playing on the Organes. And when the time of their offertory is come, the youngest knights are summoned forth of their stalles by the Heralds, doing reuerence first within the stalles, and againe after they are discended: which is likewise imitated by all the rest. And being al thus
come forth, standing before their stalles, as at first, the two eldest knights with their swords in their handes, are brought vp by the Heralds to the Altar, where they offer their swords and the Deane receiues them, of whom they presently redeem them with an Angell in golde, and then come downe to their former places, whilst two other are led vp in like manner: so doing successiue∣ly till the whole ceremony be performed: which done, and seruice ended they depart in such order as they came, with accusto∣med reuerence. At the Chappell doore as they came forth, they were encountered by the kings Master Cooke, who stood there with his white Apron and Sleeues, and a Choping-knife in his hand, and challenged their spurres, which were likewise redeemed with a noble in money, threatning them neuerthelesse that if they proued not true and loyall to the King his Lord and Mast. it must be his office to hew them from their heeles. On Monday morning they al met toge∣ther
again at the Court, where in a priuate roome, appointed for them, they were cloathed in long roabes of purple sattin with hoods of the same, all lined and edg∣ed about with white taffata. And thus ap∣parrelled they gaue their attendance vpon the Prince at his creation, and dined that day in his presence at a side-bord, as is alrea∣dy declared. THE NAMES OF SVCH Lordes and Gentlemen as were made Knights of the BATH, in honour of his Highnesse Creation, in order as they were Knighted on Sonday the third of Iune. 1610. THe Earle of Oxford. The Lord Gourdon, sonne and heire of the Marquesse Huntley. The Lord Clifford, sonne and heire to the Earle of Cum∣berland. The Lord Fitz-walter, sonne and heire to the Earle of Sussex. The Lord Fitzwaren, son and heire to the Earle of Bath. The Lord Hay, sonne and heire to the Earle of Arroll.
The Lord Erskin, sonne and heire to Vicount Fenton. The Lord VVindsor. The Lord VVentworth. Master Charles Somerset, third sonne to the Earle of Worcester. Master Edward Somerset, fourth sonne to the Earle of Worcester. Master Francis Stuard. Master Ferdinando Dudley, sonne and heire to the Lord Dudley. Master Iohn Cary, son and heire to the Lord Hunsdon. Master Oliuer Saint Iohn, sonne and heire to the Lord Saint-Iohn. Master Gilbert Gerrard, sonne and heire to the Lord Gerrard. Master Charles Stanhope, sonne and heire to the Lord Stanhope. Master VVilliam Stuard. Master Edward Bruse, sonne and heire to the Lord Kin∣losse. Master Robert Sidney, second sonne to Vicount Lisle. Master VVilliam Touchet, second sonne to the Lord Audley. Mast. Peregrine Berty, second brother to the Lord VVil∣loughby. Mast. Henry Rich, third sonne to the Lord Rich. Master Edward Sheffeild, second sonne to the Lord Sheffeild. Master William Cauendish, sonne and heire to Sir Charles Cauendish.
The Lords Commissioners for or∣dering the Ceremonies of the Bath, were The Earle of Worcester. The Earle of Suffolke.
TETHYS FESTIVAL: OR THE QVEENES WAKE. Celebrated at Whitehall, the fifth day of Iune 1610. Deuised by SAMVEL DANIEL, one of the Groomes of her Maiesties most Honourable priuie CHAMBER. LONDON Printed for Iohn Budge. 1610.
THE PREFACE TO the Reader. FOr so much as shewes and spectacles of this nature, are vsually registred, among the memorable acts of the time, beeing Complements of state, both to shew magnificence and to celebrate the feasts to our greatest respects: it is expected (according now fo the custome) that I, beeing imployed in the busines, should publish a discription and forme of the late Mask, wherewithall it pleased the Queenes most ex∣cellent Maiestie to solemnize the creation of the high and mightie Prince Henry, Prince of Wales, in regard to preserue the memorie thereof, and to satisfie their desires, who could haue no other notice, but by others report of what was done. Which I doe not, out of a desire, to be seene in pamphlets, or of forwardnes to shew my inuētion therin: for I thank God, I labour not with that disease of ostentation, nor affect to be known to be the man digito{que} monstrarier, hic est, hauing my name already wider in this kind, then I desire, and more in the winde then I would. Neither doe I seeke in the divulging hereof, to giue it other colours then those it wore, or to make an Apologie of what I haue done: knowing, howsoeuer, it must passe the way of censure,
whereunto I see all publications (of what nature soeuer) are liable. And my long experience of the world hath taught me this, that neuer Remonstrances n Apologies could euer get ouer the streame of o∣pinion, to doe good on the other side, where contrarie affection, and conceipt had to doe: but onely serued to entertaine their owne partialnesse, who were fore-per∣swaded, and so was a labour in vaine. And it is often∣times an argument of pusilanimitie, and may make vt iud  nostrum, metus videatur, and render a good cause suspected by too much labouring to defend it, which might be the reason that some of the late grea∣test Princes of Christendome would neuer haue their vndertakings made good by such courses, but with si∣lence indured (and in a most wittie age) the greatest batterie of paper that could possibly be made, & neuer once recharged the least ordinance of a pen against it, counting it their glorie to do whilest other talked. And shall we who are the poore Inginers for shadowes, & frame onely images of no result, thinke to oppresse the rough censures of those, who notwithstanding all our labour will like according to their taste, or seeke to a∣uoid them by flying to an Army of Authors as idle as ourselues? Seeing there is nothing done or written, but incounters with detraction and opposition, which is an excellent argument of all our imbecillities & might allay our presumption, when we shall see our greatest knowledges not to be fixt, but rowle according to the vncertaine motion of opinion, and controwleable by any surly shew of reason, which we find is double ed∣ged and strikes euery way alike. And therefore I do not see why any man should rate his owne at that valew,
and set so low prises vpon other mens abilities. L'hom∣me vaut l'homme, a man is worth a man, and none hath gotten so high a station of vnderstanding, but he shall find others that are built on an equall floore with him, and haue as far a prospect as he, which when al is done, is but in a region subiect to al passiōs & imperfections. And for these figures of mine, if they come not drawn in all proportions to the life of antiquity (from whose tyrannie, I see no reason why we may not emancipate our inuentions, and be as free as they, to vse our owne images) yet I know them such as were proper to the busines, and discharged those parts for which they ser∣ued, with as good correspondencie, as our appointed li∣mitations would permit. But in these things wherein the onely life consists in shew: the arte and inuention of the Architect giues the greatest grace, and is of most importance: ours, the least part and of least note in the time of the performance thereof, and therefore haue I interserted the discription of the artificiall part which only speakes M. Inago Iones. TETHYS FESTIVALL. WHEREIN TETHYS QVEENE OF the Ocean, and wife of Neptune, attended with thirteene Nymphs of seuerall Riuers, is represented in this manner:Tethys mate Nympharum & fluuiorum. FIrst the Queenes Maiestie in the figure of Tethys. The Ladies in the shape of Nimphes, presiding se∣uerall
Riuers, appropriaten, either to their dignitie, Sig∣niories or places of birth. 1 Whereof the first was the Ladie Elizabeths grace re∣presenting the Nymph of Thames. 2 The Ladie Arbella the Nymph of Trent. 3 The Countesse of Arundell the Nymph of Arun.Arun, a Riuer that runs by Arundell Ca∣stle. 4 The Countesse of Darbie the Nymph of Darwent.Darwent, a riuer that runs through Dar∣bie. 5 The Countesse of Essex the Nymph of Lee.Lee, the riuer that bounds Essex. 6 The Countesse of Dorcet the Nymph of Ayr.Ayr a Riuer that runs nere Skipton where this Lady was borne. 7 The Countesse of Mongommerie, the Nymph of Severn.Seuerne rises in Mongom∣mery shire. 8 The Vicountesse Haddington the Nymph of Rother.Rother, a ri∣uer in Sussex. Medway a Ri∣uer in Kent. 9 The Ladie Elizabeth Gray the Nymph of Medway. These foure Riuers are in Monmouth shire. The Ladie Elizabeth Guilford, the Nymph of Dulesse. The Ladie Katherine Peeter, the Nymph of Olwy. The Ladie Winter, the Nymph of wy. The Ladie Winsor, the Nymph of Vske. The discription of the first Scene. ON the Trauers which serued as a curtaine for the first Scene, was figured a darke cloude, in∣erser with certaine sparkling starres, which, at the sound of a loud musick, being instantly drawne, the Scene was discouered with these adornements: First on eyther side stood a great statue of twelue foot high, representing Neptune and Nereus. Neptune holding a Trident, with an Anchor made to it, and this Mot. His artibus: that is, Regendo, & retinendo, alluding to
this verse of Virgill, He tibi erunt artes, &c. Nereus holding out a golden fish in a net, with this word In∣dustria: the reason whereof is deliuered after, in the speech vttered by Triton. These Sea-gods stood on pedestals and were al of gold. Behinde them were two pillasters, on which hung compartments with other deuises: and these bore vp a rich Freeze, wherein were figures of tenne foote long, of flouds, and Nymphes, with a number of naked children, dallying with a dra∣perie, which they seemed to holde vp, that the Scene might be seene, and the ends thereof fell downe in foldes by the pillasters. In the midst was a compart∣ment, with this inscription, Tethyos Epinicia, TETHYS feasts of triumph. This was supported with two win∣ged boyes, and all the worke was done with that force and boldnesse on the gold and siluer, as the figures see∣med round and not painted. The Scene it selfe was a Port or Hauen with Bul∣workes at the entrance, and the figure of a Castle com∣maunding a fortified towne: within this Port were many Ships, small and great, seeming to lie at Anchor, some neerer, and some further off,The figure of Zephirus might aptly dis∣charge this re∣presentation in rt that messages are of winde, & verba dicuntur alaa waged word besides  is a character of youth, and of the spring. according to per∣spectiue: beyond all appeared the Horison or termi∣nation of the Sea, which seemed to mooue with a gen∣tle gale, and many Sayles, lying some to come into the Port, and others passing out. From this Scene issued Zephirus with eight Naydes, Nymphs of fountaines, and two Tritons sent from Tethys to giue notice of her intendement, which was the Ante-maske or first shew. The Duke of Yorke presented Zephirus, in a short robe of greene satin imbrodered with golden flowers
with a round wing made of lawnes on wyers, and hung down in labels. Behind his shoulders two siluer wings. On his head a Garland of flowers consisting of all co∣lours, and on one Arme which was out bare, he wore a bracelet of gold set with rich stones. Eight little Ladies neere of his stature represented the Naydes, and were attired in light robes adorned with flowers, their haire hanging downe, and wauing with Garlands of water ornaments on their heads. The Tritons wore skin-coates of watchet Taffata (lightned with siluer) to shew the Muscles of their bo∣dies. From the waste almost to the knee were finnes of siluer in the manner of bases, a mantle of Sea-greene laced, and fringed with golde, tyed with a knot vppon one shoulder, and falling down in foldes behinde, was fastened to the contrary side: on their heads garlands of Sedge, with trumpets of writhen shels in their hand: Buskins of Sea-greene laid with siluer lace. These per∣sons thus attired, entred with this song of foure parts, and a musicke of twelue Lutes. YOuth of the spring, milde Zephirus blow faire, And breath the ioyfull ayre, Which Tethys wishes may attend this day, Who comes her selfe to pay The vowes her heart presents, To these faire complements. Breath out new flowers, which yet were neuer knowne Vnto the Spring, nor blowne Before this time, to bewtifie the earth,
And as this day giues birth Vnto new types of State, So let it blisse create. Beare Tethys message to the Ocean King, Say how she ioyes to bring Delight vnto his Ilands and his Seas, And tell Meliades The of-spring of his bood, How she applaudes his good. The song ended, Triton in the behalfe of Zephirus deliuers Tethys message with her Presents (which was a Trident to the King, and a rich sword and skarfe to the Prince of Wales) in these wordes. FRom that intelligence which moues the Sphere Of circling waues (the mightie Tethys, Queene Of Nymphes and riuers, who will straight appeare, And in a humane Character be seene) We haue in charge to say, that euen as Seas And lands, are grac'd by men of worth and might, So they returne their fauours; and in these Exalting of the good seeme to delight. Which she, in glory, lately visiting The sweete, and pleasant Shores of Cambria, found By an vnvsuall, and most forward Spring Of comfort, wherewith all things did abound, For ioy of the Inuestiture at hand Of their new Prince, whose Rites, with acts renownd Were here to be solemniz'd on this Strand: And therefore streight resolues t'adorne the day With her al-gracing presence, and the traine,
Of some choice Nymphs she pleas'd to call away From seuerall Riuers which they entertaine. And first the louely Nymphe of stately Thames, (The darling of the Ocean) summond is: Then those of Trent and Aruns gracefull streames, Then Darwent next with cleare-wau'd worthinesse. The beauteous Nymph of Chrystall-streaming Lee Giues next attendance: Then the Nymph of Ayr With modest motion makes her sweete repaire. The Nymph of Seuerne follows in degree, With ample streames of grace: and next to her The cheerefull Nymph of Rother doth appaere With comely Medway, th'ornament of Kent, And then foure goodly Nymphes that beutifie Cambers faire shores, and all that Continent The graces of cleere Vske, Olwy, Dulesse, Wy All these within the goodly spacious Bay Of manifold inharboring Milord meete, The happy Port of Vnion, which gaue way To that great Heros HENRY, and his fleete, To make the blest coniunction that beg at A greater, and more glorious far then that. From hence she sends her deare lou'd Zephirus; To breath out her affection and her zeale To you great Monarch of Oceanus, And to present this Trident as the seale And ensigne of her loue and of your right. And therewithall she wils him, greete the Lord And Prince of th' Iles (the hope and the delight, Of all the Northerne Nations) with this sword Which she vnto Astraea sacred found, And not to be vnsheath'd but on iust ground. Herewith, sayes she, deliuer him from mee This skarffe, the zone of loue and Amitie, Tingird the same; wherein he may suruay, Infigur'd all the spacious Emperie That he is borne vnto another day. Which, tell him, will be world enough to yeeld
All workes of glory euer can be wrought. Let him not passe the circle of that field, But thinke Alcides pillars are the knot For there will be within the large extent Of these my waues, and watry Gouernement More treasure, and more certaine riches got Then all the Indies to Iberus brought, For Nereus will by industry vnfold A Chimicke secret, and turne fish to gold. This charge she gaue, and lookes ith such a cheere As did her comfort and delight bewray, Like cleere Aurora when she doth appeare In brightest roabes to make a glorious day. The Speech ended, the Naydes daunce about Zephi∣rus, and then withdraw them aside, when suddenly at the sound of a loud and fuller musique, Tethys with her Nymphes appeares, with another Scene, which I will likewise describe, in the language of the Architector, who contriued it, and speakes in his owne mestier to such as are vnderstāders & louers of that design. First at the opening of the heauens appeared 3. circles of lights and glasses, one within another, and came downe in a straight motion fiue foote, and then began to mooue circularly; which lights and motion so occupied the eyes of the spectators, that the manner of altering the Scene was scarcely discerned: for in a moment the whole face of it was changed, the Port vanished, and Tethys with her Nymphes appeared in their seuerall Cauernes gloriously adorned. This Scene was com∣parted into 5. Neeces, whereof that in the middest had some slender pillowes of whole round, and were made of moderne Architecture in regard of roome: these were of burnisht gold, and bare vp the returnes of an Architraue, Freeze, and Cornish of the same worke:
on which, vpon eyther side was a Plinth directly ouer the pillers, & on them were placed, for finishings, two Dolphins of siluer, with their tailes wreathed together, which supported ouall vases of gold. Betweene the two pillers on eyther side were great ornaments of elieuo, the Basement were two huge Whales of siluer. Aboue in an action mounting were two Sea-horses, and aboue them, on each side of Tethys seat was placed a great Trident The seate or Throne it selfe was raised sixe steps, and all couered with such an artificiall stuffe, as seemed richer by candle, then any cloth of gold. The rests for her armes were tvvo Che∣rubines of gold: ouer her head was a great skallop of siluer from which hung the foldes of this rich drapery. Aboue the Skallop and round about the sides was a resplendent freeze of iewell glasses or lights, which shewed like Diamonds, Rubies, Saphires, Emralds, and such like, The part which returned from the two Plinthes that bare vp the Dolphines, was circular, and made a hol∣lownesse ouer Tethys head, and on this circle were 4. great Cartuses of gold, which bore vp a round bowle of siluer, in mannner of a fountaine, with mask-heads of gold, out of which ran an artificiall water. On the middest of this was a triangular basement formed of scrowles & leaues, and then a rich Vayle adorned with flutings, and inchased worke with a freeze of fishes, and a battae of Tritons, out of whose mouthes, sprang wa∣ter into the Bowle vnderneath. On the top of this was a round globe of gold full of holes, out of which issued aboundance of water, some falling into the receipt be∣low, some into the Ovall vase, borne vp by the Dol∣phines, and indeed there was no place in this great A∣quatick
throne, that was not filled with the sprinckling of these two naturall seeming waters. The Neeces wherein the Ladies sate, were foure, with Pillasters of gold, mingled with rustick stones shewing like a mine∣rall to make it more rocke, and Cauern-like, varying from that of Tethys throne. Equall with the heads of the Pillars was an Architraue of the same work, aboue was a circular frontispice, which rose equall with the Bowle of the fountaine fore discribed. On the rustick frontispice lay two great figures in Rileue, which see∣med to beare vp a Garland of Sea-weeds: to which from two antick Candlestickes which stood ouer the Pillasters were hanging Labells of gold. And these were the finishings of the top of the two Neeces next to that of Tethys. In the space betweene the frontispice and the Ar∣chitraue stood a great Concaue shel, wherein was the head of a Sea-god, and on either side the shell to fill vp the roome, two great mask heads in perfile. The other two Neeces which were outermost, were likewise borne vp with Pillasters of gold, and for variation had square frontispices, and against the streight Architraue of the other was an Arch. All these were mingled with rustick, as before. In the middle betweene the frontispice & the Arch, was a Bowle or fountaine made of foure great skal∣lops, borne vp by a great maske head which had like∣wise foure aspects, and lying vpon this Arch (to fill vp the Concaues) were two figures turned halfe into fi∣shes, these with their heads held vp the sides of this Bowle: aboue this were three great Cherubines heads spouting water into the Bowle. On the middest of the square frontispice stood a great vase adorned.
The rest of the ornaments consisted of maske-heads, spouting water, swannes, festons of maritime weedes, great shels, and such like; and all this whole Scene was filled with the splendor of gold and siluer: onely some beautifull colours behinde to distinguish them, and to set off the rest. The whole worke came into the forme of a halfe round: there sate three Ladies in each Neece, which made sixe of a side: the Queene in the middest, and the Lady Elizabeth at her feete. Now concerning their habite: first their head-tire was composed of shels and corrall, and from a great Muriake shell in forme of the crest of an helme, hung a thin wauing vaile. Their vpper garments had the bod∣dies of sky-colored taffataes for lightnes, all embrode∣red with maritime inuention: then had they a kinde of halfe skirts of cloth of siluer imbrodered with golde, all the groūd work cut out for lightnes which hung down ful, & cut in points: vnderneath that, came bases (of the same as was their bodies) beneath their knee. The long skirt was wrought with lace, waued round about like a Riuer, and on the bankes sedge and Sea-weedes, all of gold. Their shoulders vvere all imbrodered vvith the vvorke of the short skirt of cloth of siluer, and had cypresse spangled, ruffed out, and fell in a ruffe aboue the Elbow. The vnder sleeues vvere all imbrodered as the bodies: their shoes vvere of Satin, richly imbrode∣red, with the worke of the short skirt. In this habite they discended out of their Cauernes one after another, and so marched vp with winding meanders like a Riuer, till they came to the Tree of vi∣ctory, which was a Bay erected at the right side of the state, vpon a little mount there raised, where they offer
their seuerall flowers in golden vrnes which they bare in their hands: whilst a soft musique of twelue Lutes and twelue voyces, which entertained the time, exprest as a Chorus, their action in this manner. WAs euer houre brought more delight To mortall sight, Then this, wherein faire Tethys daignes to shew Her, and her Nymphes arow In glory bright? See how they bring their flowers, From out their watry bowers, To decke Apollos Tree, The tree of victory. About whose verdant bowes, They Sacrifice their vowes, And wish an euerlasting spring Of glory, to the Oceans King. This songe and ceremony ended they fall into their first daunce, after which Tethys with drawes and re∣poses her vpon the Mount vnder the tree of victory, entertain'd with Musicque and this Song. IF ioy had other figure Then soundes, and wordes, and motion, To intimate the measure, And height of our deuotion: This day it had beene show'd But what it can, it doth performe, Since nature hath bestowd No other letter, To expresse it better, Then in this forme; Our motions, soundes, and wordes, Tun'd to accordes, Must shew the well-set partes, Of our affections and our harts,
After this Tethys rises, and with her Nymphes per∣formes her second daunce, and then reposes her againe vpon the Mount, entertaind with another songe. ARe they shadowes that we see? And can shadowes pleasure giue? Pleasures onely shadowes bee Cast by bodies we conceiue, And are made the thinges we deeme, In those figures which they seeme. But these pleasures vanish fast, Which by shadowes are exprest Pleasures are not, if they last, In their passing, is their best. Glory is most bright and gay In a flash, and so away. Feed apace then greedy eyes On the wonder you behold. Take it sodaine as it flies Though you take it not to hold: When your eyes haue done their part, Thought must length it in the hart. After this songe Tethys againe arises, and with her Nymphes, taketh out the Lordes to daunce their Mea∣sures Corantos and Galliardes, which done they fall into their third and retyring daunce, wherewith they returne againe into their seuerall Cauernes, and so∣dainely vanish. VVhen to auoid the confusion which vsually attendeth the desolue of these shevves; and when all was thought to be finisht, followed another entertainement, and was a third shew no lesse delight∣full then the rest, whose introduction was thus. Zephirus marching a certaine space after Tethys and her Nymphes, attended with his Tritons, a so∣daine flash of lightning causes them to stay, and Triton deliuereth this speech.
BEhold the Post of heauen, bright Mercury Is sent to sommon and recall againe, Imperial Tethys with her company, Vnto her watry Mansion in the maine: And shift those firmes, wherein her power did daigne T inuest her selfe and hers, and to restore Them to themselues whose beauteous shapes they wore. And then bowing himselfe to wardes the State, cra∣ueth their stay, and prepareth them, to the expectation of a returne of the Queene and her Ladies in their formes, with these wordes. ANd now bright Starre the Guidon of this state, And you great Peeres the ornaments of power With all these glittering troupes that haue the fate, To be spectators of this blessed houre. Be pleasd to sit a while, and you shall see A transfirmation of farre more delight And apter drawne to nature, then can be Discrib'd in an imaginary sight. Triton hauing ended his speech, Mercury most arti∣ficially, and in an exquisite posture descends, and som∣mons the Duke of Yorke, and six young Noble-men to attend him, and bring backe the Queene and her La∣dies in their owne forme, directing him to the place where to finde them; with this speech. FAire branch of power, in whose sweete feature here Milde Zephirus a figure did present Of youth and of the spring-time of the yeare I sommon you, and six of high discent T attend on you (a hopefull worthyes borne To shield the Honour and the cleare Renowne Of Ladies) that you presently returne
And bring backe those, in whose faire shapes were showne The late-seene Nymphes in figures of their owne Whom you shall finde hard by within a groue And Garden of the spring addrest to Ioue. Hereupon the Duke of Yorke with his attendants depar∣ting to performe this seruice, the lowde Musicque soundes, and sodainely appeares the Queenes Maiesty in a most plea∣sant and artificiall Groue, which was the third Scene, and from thence they march vp to the King conducted by the Duke of Yorke, and the Noble-men, in very stately manner. And in all these shewes, this is to be noted, that there were none of inferiour sort, mixed amongst these great Personages of State and Honour (as vsually there haue beene) but all was performed by themselues with a due reseruation of their digni∣ty. And for those two which did Personate the Tritons, they were Gentlemen knowne of good worth and respect. The introducing of Pages with torches, might haue added more splendor, but yet they would haue pestred the roome, which the season would not well permit. And thus haue I deliuered the whole forme of this shew, and expose it to the censure of those who make it their best show, to seeme to know: with this Postscript. Pretulerim scriptor delirus inersque videri Dum mea delectant mala me, vel denique fallant, Quam sapere & ringi. S. D.
