15416 99842467 7121
THE MOSTE PROFITABLE AND commendable science, of Suruey∣ing of Landes, Tenementes, and Heredi∣tamentes: Drawen and Collected by the Industrie of Ʋalen∣tyne Leigh. Whereunto is also annexed by the same Authour, a right ne∣cessarie Treatise, of the measuryng of all kyndes of Lande, be it Meadow, Pasture, Errable, wood, Hill, or Dale, and that aswell by certaine easie and compen∣dious Rules, as also by an exact and be∣neficiall Table, purposely drawen and deuised for that behalfe. ¶Imprinted at London for An∣drew Maunsell. Anno Domini. 1577.
Valentine Leighe to the gentle Reader. SEyng that J doe novve at this tyme entreate, not of any vaine fable or triflyng toye, but of suche earnest and serious matter, as tou∣cheth the profite of moste men, and the benefite and commoditie of eche maner of per∣sone: J humbly beseche all men (inasmuche, as the thyng it self, appertaineth to euery manne) that in readyng thereof, thei vvill vouchsafe, to harken, attribute, and graunte, suche diligent and vvillyng eare, mynde, and attention, as thei are accustomed, and vse to doe, in those, or suche cases, vvhiche thei accoumpt moste vvaightie, graue, and necessarie; & vvhiche thei are moste desirous to knovv, learne and vnderstande. And firste, let this one thyng, bee vvell pondered emongeste you, vvho is it of vs all, that hauyng any thing (vvhatsoeuer it be) vvhich maie bee made double or treble more profitable, to hym by good gouernemente, vsage, and ouersighte thereof, then the same is at this present, and had ra∣ther suffer it to runne to losse, and decaie, then he vvould once (by giuyng a little earneste attentiue
diligence) read, heare, and vnderstande the meanes by vvhiche he maie, or might, not onely better the thyng vvhiche he possesseth, but also thereby so muche encrease his aduauntage, grovvyng by the same. And seyng the sciēce of Surueiyng of landes, is the matter, vvherupon this present booke entrea∣teth, vvhiche teacheth the gouernmente of the Mannours, landes and tenementes of eche persone, and hovv to make a perfecte Surueye of the same, to moste profite. And also, hovv to engrosse your terrors and Rentalls thereof. And finally, hovv to measure all kindes of lāde, be it Meadovv, Pasture, Errable, VVoodde, ill, or dale, & in vvhat forme or figure so euer it is fashioned, or cōmōly lieth, vvith the forme, hovv to vnderstande the contentes ther∣of, asvvell by a beneficiall Table, already & plain∣ly made for that behalfe, as othervvise by the ordi∣narie Rules to the same appertainyng. All vvhiche thinges, I haue (gentle Reader) not vvithout pain∣full trauell for thy commoditie, hereafter described. J shall therefore, for my revvard, or recompēse thereof request no more at your handes, for my trauell therein, but onely, that it maie please you, to
take my poore good vvill, and intente in thanke∣full parte, and the rather, because J humbly submit my vvhole vvorke, vnto the correction of the lear∣ned, if J haue (by ouersight or othervvise) mista∣ken the matter. And although some perchaunce shall thinke, thei could haue doen the same muche better then J haue doen, J vvill not muche contende, in the con∣fessyng and grauntyng thereof. But yet seyng I am one of the first, that attempted the collectyng of the same Arte into a volume, to the publication there∣of, for the benefite of the common vvealthe, J doe not mistruste, but euery indifferent persone, vvill thinke these my labours (ioyned vvith some stu∣die, and taken in hande for his instruction) at the leaste vvise, so muche vvorthe, as the deser∣uyng of a bare good vvorde, and frendlie reporte: alvvaies remembryng, that although moste men, can perhappes amende a deuise once begun, yet that euery first deuise, in euery thyng, is moste harde, & troublesome: and therefore albeit here novv, not so exquisitely handled in euery point at the first, as it maie be hereafter, beyng (as the Prouerbe saith) muche easier to amende, then to inuente: yet I hum∣blie
praie thee, not by carpyng or othervvise, to depraue the aucthors honest meanyng. And J as∣sure thee, by this thy frendlie acceptation of these firste fruites of my simple studies, thou maiest per∣chaunce so animate my vvillyng mynde, that thou shalt gaine to thy self thereby, the fruition and cō∣moditie, of my other like studies in suche behalfe. And thus I can saie no more, but vvishe euery man asmuche profite, and benefite in readyng here∣of, as my vvillyng attempte herein hath entended them. And so J ende bid∣dyng thee gentle Reader moste hartely vvell to fare. This .xxvij. of October. Anno Christi. 1562.
❧The true and moste liuely and per∣fecte description, and instruction, of the most necessarie and commendable Science of Sur∣ueiyng of Landes: drawne and deuised by the industrie of Valen∣tyne Leighe. LIke as Landes and Tenementes, and like reuenewes of enheritance are the cheef and moste principall liuelode, and suretie of liuyng, that any persone or persones, of all ma∣ner of degrees whatsoeuer, haue or stande seased of, or possessed, in this life: Euen so, the Surueiyng, go∣uernyng, and prudent improuyng, preseruyng, augmentyng, and guidyng of the same, is the moste waightie, profitable, and necessarie function, or office, that any persone can haue, or ought chéefly and circumspectly to prouide for, as the meane and onely thyng by whiche, and of the whiche, euery maner of persone, yea, with his wife, chil∣dren, and family (if thei haue any) while thei be in this world▪ are sustained and maintained: and therefore, the same is  other thynges, requisite moste vigilantly to bee sought for, learned and knowen. And like also, as euery other Science, or Arte, hath some special rules and groundes, vpon whiche the whole Science dependeth. Euen so also, this facultie hath his distincte natu∣rall principles, vpon the due vnderstandyng, and obseruyng wherof, all the residue of the Science or office, or in any wise thereto appertainyng, consisteth and is grounded. It behoueth therefore hym, whosoeuer coueteth to bee a good and perfecte Surueiour (either of his owne landes, or other mennes) specially to note and consider, that in takyng, or makyng of euery Suruey of any Honour, Lordship, Man∣nour,
Borough, Village or Hamlette, or other Landes, Te∣nementes, or hereditamentes, he ought diligently to obserue the preceptes and instructions hereafter mencioned, whiche doe declare not onely the perfecte maner and forme, firste of vewyng and Surueiyng the same, but also (the same so Sur∣ueyed) how to penne, keepe, set out, order, enter, and engrosse the seuerall bookes of Suruey, Terrours, and Rentalles of the same, euery one in their due order and forme, without any disorder or confusion. Wherefore you shall vnderstande, that there be tenne so∣uerall Principles, or Rules, to bee had in memorie, whiche are these that doe orderly ensue. ¶The firste Principle, or Rule. FOrasmuche as euery maner or parcell of Lande, that is called a Mannour, is not properly or naturally a Mannour, except it haue those thynges that doeth make a Mannour: It is therefore moste necessa∣rie, that he whiche will bee a good Sur∣ueiour, doe vnderstande, whiche bee the speciall notes and groūdes, by whiche he maie, or shall know or discerne, whiche is properly a true, and verie Mānour, and whiche not. That he doe not wrongfully tearme that to bee a Mannour, that of it self is none (& e conuerso) that to bee none, whiche in verie deede is a Mannour. I haue therefore drawen this breef enclosed description, and definition of a Mannour here now nexte and immediatly followyng, to en∣forme and enstructe you, bothe what is naturally a Mannour, and also the diuision and partes of the same, that ye maie rea∣dily, euen at the eye, perceiue the same described plainly vn∣to you.
The true descriptiō definitiō, and diui∣sion of a Mannor.Euery Mannour, that is properly a Mannour, must firste be knowen to haue been called and vsed as a Man∣nour, since before tyme of memorie of man. For no man can make a Mā∣nour at this daie, ne ioyne twoo se∣uerall Mannours in one, though the one were decaied, and that the Lorde would bryng the tenauntes of bothe to one Courte, and make but one ho∣mage of bothe, or assigne one Bailie or Collectour for bothe, or let the se∣uerall values of bothe, be aunswered in one ministers particular accōpte, yet in nature thei are, and euer shall continue twoo distincte Mannours at the common Lawe, what waie soe∣uer the Lorde can, or would take for the ioynyng of them, by the better o∣pinion of moste learned in the Lawe, vnlesse the one Mannour doeth hold of an other, and that the Mannour, whiche so doeth holde of the other, doe excheate to the Lorde, and so by that meanes it maie be vnited, or an∣nexed to the other, and so bothe of theim reduced into one Mannour. And more ouer note specially, that euery Mannour hath properly, and naturally these three seuerall princi∣pall thynges ensuyng (in the righte margente hereof) whiche alwaies make it a Mannour, or els can it ne∣uer be properly a Mannour.
videlicet Landes, tenemen∣tes, rentes, serui∣ces, and heredita∣mētes, that be par¦cell in Demeasne, and thei dooe con∣taine Euery Scite of any Mannour, some∣tyme called the Halle place, or Courte lodge, or Mannour house, and also the Demeasne landes, thereto of old time belongyng, be thei reserued still in the Lordes hande, or lette out to any Te∣naunte or Tenaunces by Copie, In∣denture, or otherwise. And those lan∣des are euer properlye Demaines, whiche the lorde of any Mānour hath tyme out of mynde of manne vsed, to kepe in his owne handes, or continual¦ly to manure or occupie them with his Mannour house. Landes, tenemen∣tes, rentes, serui∣ces, and heredita∣mentes, that are percell in seruice, and thei containe, All maner of rentes of assise, of Frehold, or Custumarie, or Copiholde landes, tenemen∣tes, or hereditamētes whiche are parcell of the Mannour, and yet no Demeane landes, and these (and also Demai∣nes) are deuided into three natures of rentes. Videlicet. Rente seruice Rente sacke. Rente charge Also a Court Ba∣ron at the leaste, a Mannour oughte to haue, if it haue a Lete, or Lawday to it, then is it of more efficacie, and to a Court doe ap∣pertaine perquisi∣tes, and casualties whiche are these. Fines Terrarum. Amerciament. Cur. Herriott. custumar. Releuia. Wauiat. Straia. Forisfactur. Escact. Proficua plitm̄. Curie Baronis, autlete. Curie trium Septimanarum. &c.
These thynges also are, or commonlie maie bee, belongyng, or appurte∣naunte, regardaunte, or appendaunt, also goyng out, repried, or deducted, of, or to any Mannour or Lordshippe, and yet the lacke of them, or hauyng of theim, cā neuer make, or els vnmake any Man∣nour. Wardes, Marriages, Patro∣ges, fréegiftes, or Presentatiōs, Nominations, or Aduousons of Parsonages, Vicarages, Chap∣pells annexed, free Chappelles, Prebendes, &c. Also Villaines, Neifes, and their sequeles, &c. Commons of Pasture, Moores, marshes, frewarrēs, effouers &c. Customes, liberties, frāchesies, and priueledges. Also reprises of all kindes that is to saie, yerely rente resolute, paimentes, or deductions. Suite of Court, tēthes or seruices go∣yng or repried out of any Man∣nour or landes, to any other Mā¦nour or Landes, or Persone or Persones. ¶The seconde Principle or Rule. SEcondarily (The firste rule knowne) hée that will diligently, and perfectly, suruey a Mannour, or other Landes, muste pru∣dently consider, all maner of Rentes, Is∣sues, profites, and other thinges whatsoe∣uer, doth or ought, or may be, belongyng, or appertainyng, to a Mannour, or bee parte, parcell, or membre of a Mannour, or be appendaunt, or regardaunt, to a Mannour or suche other landes, or Tenemē∣tes. And likewise what Rentes, Resolutes, reprises, or dedu∣ctions, may bee commonly paied, deducted, or yerely repried, out of any Mannour, landes, or tenemētes, to any persone, or
persones, or els he can neuer, make any good suruey. And for your better instruction herein (although I haue partely, in the first Rule, briefly touched the same) I do now here in this seconde Rule, not onely more amply, and distinctly, declare the same: but also plainly, and particulerly describe the seue∣rall natures and definitions of euery kynde of thyng, that commonly doth, or can belong to any maner of Landes or te∣nementes. And therfore you shall vnderstand, that euery Ho∣nour, Lordship or Mannour that is of it self, properly a Man∣nour, it hath commonly, and for the moste parte, these Sixe thinges ensuyng, belongyng to the same, that is to saie. 1 Rentes. 2 Demaynes. 3 Perquisites or casualties. 4 Thinges appendaunt, and regardant. 5 Customes, Liberties, and Priuiledges. 6 Reprises resolute, or deductions. And first J vvill beginne to declare of all maner Rentes. Rentes of Lands, and Tenemēts holden at will. THere maye belonge to a Manour, Rentes of Lan∣des, Tenements, Mesua∣ges, Burgages, Cotta∣ges, Curtillages, Toftes Roueles, Tenemēts, mil∣les, Douehouses, barnes, Stables, Gardeines, Orchardes, Parkes, Warrens, Meares, Waters, Pondes, Sta∣gues,
Fishinges, Meadowes, Cloases, Crof∣tes, Fieldes, Pastures, Woodes, Groues, Heathes, Firzes, Moores, Marshes, Turba∣ries, &c. Graunted, to any persone, or perso∣nes, at the Lordes pleasure, or will, for some yerely rent, certaine, paiable, at two or fower feastes of the yere, vsuall by euen porcions. And suche parsons, are commonly called, Te∣nauntes at will, and these are remoueable, at the pleasure, and will of the Lorde, and these also, commonly are not chargeable, with re∣payring their tenementes, or holdynges, but they are punisheable for waste, by action of trespasse, if thei commit any in the same, and are straineable for their rente. Rentes of Lands and Tenemēts holden for tearme of yeres.There may also belong to a Mannour yere∣ly rentes, of any Landes, Tenements, Bur∣gages, &c. (as aforesaide) that are demised, to any persone or persones, by Indenture, or without Indenture, or writing (by worde or parolle onely) for tearme of yere, or yeres, for some yerely rent, certaine, paiable, at twoo, or fower feastes, of the yere, by euen porcions, and suche parsons, are called Tenauntes, for tearme of yeres, and are bound, to suche repa∣racions, and other duties, as the couenaūtes, or promises in their leases doe containe, and they are chargeable with waste, if they doe commit any, and are strainable, for their rent of common right, or maye bee iustly sued for the same, by action of debte if it be arrere. And suche are not bounde to appeare vpon Iuries at Westminster, nor at Assises or Sessions, vnlesse they may Dispende .xl. s. of
Fréehold otherwise. Rentes of freeholde Landes.Also, there may belong to a Mannour, ren∣tes of Fréeholders, that holde their landes, Tenementes, or hereditamentes, of the lorde of the Mannour, some in Capite, by knights seruice, escuage vncertaine, or Graundser∣geauntie, and some by Soccage or Burgage tenure, by paiyng yerely a Rose, a pounde of Pepper, or Capons, Hennes, or suche like, and some (both the Fréeholders) Tenauntes in Capite, and Tenauntes in soccage) paie a yerely rent besides their seruices, and some time no Rent. And suche Landes and Tene∣mētes, &c. thei haue to them and to their hei∣res, and the same is commonly called Free∣holde, and those Tenauntes and Tenauntes for tearme of life, are alwaies called Fréehol∣ders. And sometyme also, they holde by cer∣taine Seruices. And euery suche Tenaunt, oweth fealtie to their chiefe lorde. And suche Tenauntes alwaies, if thei maye dispende by their said Tenementes, xl. s̄. a yere or aboue, are likewise chargeable vpō Iuries at West¦minster hall, and at Assisses, and Sessiōs, and may also impleade, and be impleaded (if occa∣sion so require) for their Tenementes, at the courtes at Westminster without the lordes licence as aforesaied. But suche Tenauntes are not cōmonly chargable with wast, if they doe any vpō their said fréeholde tenementes, tenaūts for terme of life onely excepted. And you must note there are sondry kindes of frée holders. Some hold their lande by Charter, some by newe Feoffamente, and some by olde
Tenure, and by many maner of rents, Custo∣mes and seruices. And some be Tenauntes in fée simple, and some Tenauntes in taile, and many suche like, and may holde their Landes by diuers customes, seruices and tenures, as by homage and fealtie, and as I said before by knightes seruice, graundsergeanty, petieser∣geauntie, escuage, Frankalmone, Homage aūcestrell, tenure in Soccage, Burgage, and villanage: for the further knowledge wherof, I referre you to maister Littleton. And note also, that the Lorde of suche Tenauntes, if he haue any rentes, customes or seruices, detai∣ned from him, whiche he can by any euidence, rentals or Court Rolles, proue a possession therof, in himself, or his Auncestors since the limitation, in the statute of Westminster, the second: Then hee may lawfully distraine for the same. And these Tenaunts be straineable by their Lordes, if their Rentes or seruices be arrere, vnpaied, or vndon. And also a writ of Cessauit, lieth against them, if occasion so serue. Also the Lorde maie haue a writ of ex∣cheate, if any suche tenaunt doe commit felo∣ny, or dye without Heires generall, or speci∣all. And such Tenaunts, doe commonly paie, a releefe to the Lorde at euery alienation, ex∣chaunge or death of any tenaunt of the same. And note also, there may be also forrain frée∣holders, whiche holde not of the Mannour, and yet holde of the Lorde. And it is further to be specially remembred, that all suche Te∣nauntes as holde any Landes, tenementes or hereditamentes by charter, déede, or Inden∣ture,
for the tearme of their owne liues, or by le curtyze de angleterre, or for the tearme of a¦nother mans life, are alwaies Fréeholders. Rentes of Lands hol∣den by aun∣cient de∣meane.There may bee also belongyng to a Man∣nour, rentes of Landes, tenements and here∣ditamentes, holden of the Mannour, by cu∣stome, called auncient Demeasne. And in some places the whole Mannour is Aun∣cient Demeasne. And the tenaunts also paie some a Rose, some a pound of Pepper, some Capons, some Hennes, and suche like, both with an yerely rent in money, and some with∣out a rent, and by certaine homage, and feal∣tie, and suche seruices. And the Tenauntes of suche Landes and tenementes, haue the same to them and their Heires, accordyng to the custome of auncient demeasne. And such Te∣nauntes can not impleade or bee impleaded for their Landes or tenements, in any other court, but in the Lordes courte of the Man∣nour, without the Lordes licence. And these Tenauntes, are not chargeable vpon Iuries at Westminster, or at Assises, or Sessions, vnlesse they may dispende other freehold lan∣des of xl. s. a yere. These Tenauntes also, are straineable, if their rentes be arrere. If they cōmit waste, they forfeite their Tenauntries by their custome. These Tenaunts, paie com∣monly at euery alienation, death or exchange, a fine certayne, by their custome. In some Mannours suche Landes are heritable, in some Mannours not. There may be also belongyng, to a Man∣nour, Rentes of other Landes, Tenementes,
Mesuages, Cottages, &c. (as aforesaid) that are customary and demised to any Tenaunts of the same Mannour, by copy of court rolle, at the will of the Lorde, accordyng to the cu∣stome of the Mannour there, either by the verge, rodde, or otherwise. And in some Man∣nours, the tenauntes, holde their saide custo∣mary tenemēts, to theim and to their heires, in fée Simple, or in fée tayle, by copy of court Rolle, and in some Mannours, for tearme of yeres, and in some Mannours for tearme of thrée liues, accordyng as the custome of eue∣ry Mannour hath bene tyme out of mynde of man vsed. And these lands, be properly called Copie holdes or customarie tenements. And in some place they bee called olde aster lands. And in Somersetshire, Deuonshire, Corne∣wal, Dorsetshire and Glocestershire (where most Mannours haue commonly those custo∣marieRente ser∣uice which is properly all such lan∣des as are holden of the lord by Fealty, and certaine rent, or by homage, Fealty, and Rent, or by any other seruice, and certaine rent, of which na∣ture are these, of custo∣marie Landes and Te∣nemen∣tes hol∣den by copie of Courte Roll at will, ac∣cording to the custome of the Man∣nour &c. Landes. (suche landes and Tenements are there called Bar∣gaines) and these cannot impleade or be impleaded, for their tenemen∣tes out of the Lordes courte, of the Mannour whereof they are holden without the Lordes licence, nei∣ther are they chargeable vpon Iu∣ries at Westminster, nor at Assi∣ses, or Sessions, vnlesse they may also dispend other fréehold, of xl.s. yerely or aboue. Also if these Te∣nauntes commit waste, they com∣monly forfeite their landes, to theRentes Lorde. And these tenaunts cannot
sell, alienate nor exchaunge, their Landes by Déede, Fine, or Feoffa∣ment. But must surrender the same into the Lordes handes before the Stewarde (or in some place in the presence of twoo other Tenaunts of the Mannour) to the vse of hym or theim that shall haue the same lāds, be it in fée simple, fée taile, for tearme of life or yeres, accordyng to the custome of the same Man∣nour. And that persone that should haue it, muste in the Courte take of the Lorde or his Stewarde, the same Landes and Tenementes so surrendred And these Tenauntes are euer also straineable, if their Rentes bee arrere. And they also paie commonly at euery alienatiō, death, or exchaunge, and surrender of their Tenements a fine (in some Mannours certaine and knowen) but in moste Mannours vncertain and at the Lordes will, as he or his Surueiour, or his Stewarde be∣yng thereto auctorised, pleaseth to assesse the same, with the agrement of the Tenaunt that taketh it. And in moste Mannours these Landes are heritable. And note speciallie for a generall Rule, that there may bee of Customarie, or Copie holde Lande, all maner of like estates, as there maye hee, of free holde lande,
at the common lawe. Rentes of custo∣marie lande, holdē by custome called tenaunt right.There are also Rentes, of muche like nature, of customary and copie holde Landes, and Tenementes belongyng to Mannours, in di∣uers places, and specially in the Counties of Yorke, Westmerland Cumberlande, Chester, Lancaster, and the Bishopricke of Durham, and some other Counties, dimised also accordyng to the Custome of suche Mannours, to the tenauntes of the same, in some places to hold to theim and their heires, and next of kinne, so long as there is any of the same stocke, kinred or linage remainyng. And in some Man∣nours, but onely so long, as there is any lefte of the name, and they commonly call suche holdinges in those places, Tackes, and in some other places, they are called Te∣naunte rightes. And these also can not impleade, or be impleaded out of the Lordes Court, of the Man∣nour, for their Landes or Tene∣ments without the Lords licence, nor are chargeable vpon ries, at Westminster, or at Assises, or Ses∣sions, excepte they maye dispende yerely xl. s. of other freeholde land, as is aforesaide. These also com∣monly by their custome, forfeite to
the Lord, their Tackes or Holdin∣ges, if thei commit any wast. They are also strainable for their rents, if they be arrere. And the Fines (v∣pon euery exchaunge or death of tenaunts is in fewe of those Man∣nours also, certaine and knowen. But in moste of those Mannours, vncertaine, and to be assessed, as the Lorde or his Officer, and the Te∣naunt can agree for the same. And commonly also their said Tackes, Tenaunt rightes or holdings are heritable. Memorandum, no maner of par∣son, can make his Landes, Copi∣holde, or Custumarie at this pre∣sente daye, vnlesse the same haue bene custumarie lande tyme out of mind of man vsed. But a man may make Copiholde, freehold, euen at this daie. Memorandum, Also there may be, belonging to a Mannour in one shire or place, yea and parcel of the same Mannour, diuers landes and tenementes in other Tounes, and sometyme in other Counties, a greate distance from the Mannor, and aunswerable, and to be valued in the value, or accoumpte of the same Mannour, and as parcell of the same. And now that I haue treated of
Rentes, of Landes and tenements, and hereditamentes at large, in a generalitie, whiche doe or may be∣long to a Mannour, I will nowe touche in a specialtie the nature of certaine Rentes, of seueral names or kindes which are contained al∣so in the compasse of the Rentes a∣boue generally declared, and yet, for your better instruction) hereaf∣ter particulerly touched, whiche are these ensuing, and suche like. Reddi∣tus Agi∣staments & her∣bagij.Rent of Iuistement, or herbage, is where a Te∣naunt holdeth, or occu∣pieth onelie the feeding, grasing, or pasture, of a Parke, or anye other grounde, paled, or en∣cloased, wherein anye Deare, or suche like are: and commonly the Te∣naūt of such Iuistement or herbage in some place muste put but a nomber of cattaill certaine, and at some speciall times of the yere, and perchaunce but the Tenauntes bea∣stes of the Mannor one∣ly, & in some other place the Tenaunt may put in beastes saunce number,
and when hee will, and yeldeth a yerely rent for the same. Reddi∣tus mo∣lendino∣rum, cu∣iuscun{que} generis.Rent of milles, is where the Lorde of a Mannour hath belongynge to his Mannour any maner of corne milles, horsmilles, watermilles, windemil∣les, or quarnes for grain or other milles, as smith∣milles, yron milles, ful∣lyng milles, Sieth mil∣les, cutler milles, Tinne blaste milles, Lead blaste milles, or suche like, and hath lett the same to hys Tenaunt, at a Rente, or hath demised ye Socome, which is the grindyng of his customarie Tenaun∣tes Corne, at his Corne mille to any person for a yerely rent, &c. Reddi∣tus Gar∣borum & feni.Rente of Corne, or Hay, is where the Lorde hath graunted any Landes, or Tenementes to his Te∣naunt, yelding the yerely rent of some certaine nō∣ber of corne, or Haie. Al∣so it is properly, where a Tith is impropriated, to a Mannour, and the
Lorde hath demised the same to his Tenaunt at a rente. Reddi∣tus Pis∣cariorū.Rēt of Fishings, is wher the Lord of a Mannour, hath demised to any par∣son, any Weares, Gar∣thes, or suche like in any Creeke, Riuer, Meare, Poole, pond, or common Sewer or seueral water, or suche like, or ye fishyng called the Kettels at the sea side, or the dredgyng of Oysters, Muskels or Cockles in any Crekes, or other places, within his Mannour, at a yere∣ly Rente reserued, for the same. And note, that if a∣ny Fishe the seuerall wa∣ters of the Lorde, with∣out the Lordes licence, the Lorde may bring his action against the partie, vppon the statute West∣minster the first. Reddi∣tus Ci∣gnorum.Rent of Swannes, or for Swannes, is where the Lorde hath great Ri∣uers, Meares or fennes, and hath Swannes bree∣dyng within the precinct of his Mānour, and hath
demised them to a tenaūt for a yerely rente reser∣ued: this rent is muche in vre in Lincolneshire, Cambridgeshire, &c. The like Rente, maie be and in some Mannours, is of Herneshawes, Sho∣uelors. &c. Reddi∣tus Mi∣neraliū.Rent of Mines, is where the Lord of a Mannour, hath demised any Mines of Tinne, Lead, Copper, or Coale to anye of hys tenauntes, therefore re∣seruing a yerely Rente, out of the same, or any o∣ther suche like Mines. Reddi∣tus Quar¦rium.Rente of Quarries, is where the Lord of a Mā∣nour, hath likewise de∣mised anye Quarires of Free stone, Harde stone, or of Marble, Slate, Whetstones, or suche like, or of Grauel, Sand or Chalke, or suche like to any Tenaunte, reser∣uing to hym out of the same an yerely rente. Muche like this rent, is the Rente of a peece of ground hauyng slimy or Clayie Earthe, whereof
Rentes of all natu∣res or kin∣des.Bricke & Tyle is made, when it is let to a Te∣naunt at an yerely rente. Rent of frée Warrēs, is where the lorde of a man∣nour, hath in his Parke, Wodds, Heathes, Com∣mons, or other grounds, wast or seueral, any War∣ren of Conies, Hares, Herneshawes, or anie o∣ther beastes, or foules, & yt he either kepe the war∣ren in his owne handes, or demiseth ye same to any parson, at a yerely Rent.Reddi∣tus libe∣rorum Warren∣nium. And note, that if any par∣son kill anye suche his game, within the Lords ground, the Lorde maie haue an action of Tres∣passe against hym, at the common lawe. Memorandum, no man can haue a frée Warren, but he haue the same, by the Kynge, or Quéenes speciall graunt of Char∣ter, except it haue bene v∣sed time out of mynd and allowed before Iustices of Oyer. Annuall rent of pencion, or porciō, is where, there
Reddi∣tus pen∣cionum & por∣cionum.is any yerely Rente, or pencion in money, or o∣ther Portion goyng or growyng due, out of any other lordships or Man∣nours, Landes or Tene∣ments, Parsonages, Vi∣carages or Tithes, belō∣ging to a Mannour, and before time graunted to the same Mannour by some composition, or for some liberty of waie, wa∣tercourse, or suche like. Some accompte this no Rente. Reddi∣tus ope∣rum cu∣stuma∣riorum.Rent of workes, is com∣monlie where the custo∣marie Tenauntes, of a Mannour are bounde by their custome to help the lorde in Sowyng tyme, Mowyng tyme, or Har∣ueste, some with thrée Daies worke, some with fower daies worke, some with moe, and some with lesse, accordyng to the cu∣stome. And where ye lorde is agreed, or at composi∣tiō with euery of his Te∣nauntes for a yerely rent for the same, or els hath demised the whole day∣works
of the whole man∣nour to some one tenaūt, at one certaine and en∣tire yerely rent reserued, then is suche rent called Redditus operum custm̄. Els is it no Rente. Reddi∣tus pro licentijs.Rent yerely reserued for licences, is where the cu∣stomarie Tenauntes, by their custome can not let or set their landes aboue a yere, or but from three yeres to thrée yeres. And that they giue the Lorde a yerely rente, to licence theim, to lett or sett the same for moe yeres or longer time. And also it is where the customarie tenaunt cannot stocke a woodde, or till his Laie ground, without the lor∣des licence, and for the li∣cence herof, yeldeth an yerely rent. But in some Mānours the Tenaūts geue but a Fine for the same, and no yerely rent. Rent called newe rent, or encrease of Rente, is where the Lord hath suf∣fered his Tenauntes, or any of theim to builde or
Nouus Reddi∣tus.sett anye Walle, Barne, stalle, or House, vpon any parte of the Lordes wast, or some, or that the Lord hath graunted any Te∣naunte to encloase anye parte of his common or wast ground, or such like, and reserueth to himselfe an yerely Rente for the same and suche like. Memorandū, there are some kindes of Issues, and yerely Profites ari∣sing in some Mannours, which are not properly called rentes, because of ther vncertaintie, because some yere they may bee more, and some yere lesse, and suche are these foure ensuyng, and their like, and where they are certaine, they are in na∣ture of rentes. Profi∣cua nun∣dinarū siue mer∣catuum.Rent or yerely profite of Faires and Markets is wher there is any Faire kepte within ye Mannor, once or twise a yere, and the Lorde hath demised the profites of Bothes, standinges, Tolles, and such like profites, of the Faire, at a rent, to any of his Tenauntes. And in like maner of profites of Bothes, stādinges, sham∣bles
and tolles or other profits of a wekely mar∣ket, kept once or twise a wéeke within the Man∣nour. Venditio boscorū & Sub∣boscorū.Profites of woodsale, is where somtymes the LORD of a Mannour doeth make a yerely sale of his woodes, and som∣tyme it maie be a yerely rent also, when the lorde of a Mannour, hath lett to Fearme at a rente, to some of his tenaūtes, the sale of a greate Woode, whiche is perchaunce growyng in his Com∣mon or waste, or suche a Wod wherof he kepeth the herbage for hymself, or other his tenauntes, and reserueth an yerely rente, and in like maner maie it bee of Bushes, Thornes, and gorsse. &c. Rent or profit of Heath, Furses, or Turbarie is euen like, where somety∣mes the lorde of a Man∣nour doeth either make a yerely sale of the same,
Venditio Iampno∣rū, Bru∣ere & Turba∣rie &c.or els let to Fearme the Furses, Heath, or Tur∣ues of some Moore, or enclosed groūd, to some of his tenauntes, for Fe∣well at a Rente. And in like maner it is in some Mānours of Broome, & Fearne, or Brakens. &c. Panna∣giū Por∣corum.Pannage, is where the lorde of a Mannour hath a Parke, or some greate woods, that hath store of Maste, of Oke, Bech. &c. and hath vsed to take of his tenauntes, for euery of their Swine that shal goe there betwene Mi∣chaelmas, & Martilmas, in some place i. d. a peece, in some Mannour ij. d. a péece &c. by his Bailie or Fermer of the same Mā∣nour, who either yeldeth a yerely rente therefore, or els a yerely accompte of the saied Pannage to the Lorde. &c. There maie also belong to a Man∣nour, Rent charge, whiche is com∣monlie where the Lorde hath alie∣nated, or graunted some parte of
Rente chardgehis Mannour, or Landes, to any persone and his heires in Fee, by Indēture enrolled, Fine, or Feoff∣mente, or otherwise: Reseruyng a yerely rent to hymself, and his hei∣res, paiable at .ij. or .iiij. Feastes of the yere, and in the same graunte therof, hath put a prouiso, or clause of distresse, that he maie lawfullie distraine, if the Rent bee arrere, af∣ter any feast of paiment, in whiche it shalbe due. Also euery Fée ferme, where the Lorde maie distraine for his rent, if it be vnpaied, is a Rent chardge. And a rent chardge can in no wise be apportioned, if the graū∣tée or his heires, doe purchase any of those landes, that are chardged with suche rente: the grauntee and his heires may be chardged in per∣sone for this rente, vnlesse there be expresse woordes in the Deede by prouiso made to the cōtrary therof. Rent seckeThere may also belong to a Mannour, Rent Secke, whiche is alwaies where the Lorde or his auncestours, Lordes of the same Man∣nour, haue graunted to any person, any par∣cell of Lande, to hym, and his heires, in Fee simple, or in fee taile, with remainder ouer to an other in Fee or suche like, reseruyng a ye∣rely Rente. And yet in the saied graunte, or writyng thereof made, there bee no clause of distresse, or prouiso of Reentrie: that the lorde
may distraine, or reentre for non paiment of the Rente, if it be behinde vnpaide after any feast or day of paiment. And therfore it is cal∣led a drie Rent, because it can not be strained for: And if the persone and his heires, to whō the Rent, Seche is graunted, or reserued, had neuer season therof, he is as some men iudge, nere without his remeadie for recouery ther∣of. But if he haue had once season thereof, he maie recouer it well enough, by a Writte of nouelle Disseason at the common lawe. Annuall Rente.There is also an other maner of Rent, called annuall Rente, whiche is commonly when a man graunteth to an other by Deede, an An∣nuitie of x. s̄. or xx. s̄. a yere, or suche like, more or lesse. And that there is in the Deede, no lande charged, with, or for, the paiment there∣of. This rente is neither Rente charge, rente seruice, nor Rente secke: (and it chargeth the persone of the graunter, by writte of Annui∣tie) as some mennes opinion is thereof. Demaines, princiyallie is the Mannour place, whiche is sometyme called the halle place, som∣tyme the halle courte, sometyme the Mannour house, &c. with all the houses, buildynges, edifi∣ces, Barnes, stables, roomes, courtelages, and yardes, & courtes to the same adiacent, or with in any wall, or preciucte of ye Scite of the same. Also the Douehouses, and all Orchardes, Gar∣dens, Pondes, Pooles, Motes, Stagnes, wal∣kes, and like places, adioynyng to the Mānour
house, or neare the Scite of the same, are com∣monly also parcell of the Demeanes. Also all suche Landes, Meadowes, Pastures, Féedyngs, Closes Croftes, and enclosures, as the Lorde of the Mannour, hath commonly v∣sed to manure or keepe in his owne handes, or occupation, together with his Mannour place, is also commonly parcell of the Demeasnes. Demai∣nes of a Mānour.In like maner, a Parke, or any Woodes, or Groues, or any Meares, Riuers, Pondes, or Fishynges, maie bee parcell of the Demeanes of a Mannour, if the Lorde or his auncestours, haue tyme out of mynde of man, occupied the same with his Mannour place. Also (some exempte) Wastes, Moores, Mar∣shes, Fennes, and also Turbary, which may be parte of the Demaines, if the Lorde haue vsed tyme out of minde, to occupy them in his owne handes. And finallie, for a generall rule, all those lan∣des, tenementes, and her editamentes, are com∣mōly called, knowen, and taken for Demeisnes whatsoeuer the Lordes of any Mannour, or Lordshippe, and their auncestours haue béen ac∣customed, tyme out of memorie of man, to occu∣pie in their owne handes, with the Mannour place or hedde haile house of his Mannour. Memorandum, by the better opinion of the learned in the Law, no Demeasnes can at this daie, bee demised by Copie, but by Indenture,
vnlesse the same haue been so vsed to be let, time beyonde all mennes remembraunce. Quaere. Fines terrarū.Fines of landes, is commonly where any Copiholde lande falleth into the lordes handes of the Mannour, or in∣to his disposition, by death of tenaun∣tes, excheate, forfeiture, or otherwise. And the Lorde or his officer graun∣teth the same to any Tenaunte, for tearme of three liues, or for yeres, or to hym and his heires, or by tenaunte right, accordyng to the custome of suche Mannour, whereof the same is holden, and for suche customable rēt, and seruices as before hath been ac∣customed. And for suche estate to bee had in the same, the Tenaunte com∣monly geueth the lorde, some summe of money, whiche is called his Fyne. And somtyme suche customarie fines in some Mannours, are alwaies one, and certaine, and neuer augmented: And in some Mannors, their Fynes are moste commonly vncertaine, and at the choise of the Lorde, how much he will take. Also when the Lorde of a Mannour letteth a peece of Lande customarie, or not customarie, by an Indenture or Lease, for tearme of life, or yeres, to any person, and reserueth an yere∣ly Rente, and taketh a fine, or income
for suche graunte, or demise: the same is also called Finis terrarum. Also where one Copie holder, will, or doeth make surrendour of his te∣nemente or holding to an other, and giueth the Lorde a Fyne for the same Surrendour, it is also called Finis terrarum. Also where a Tenaunte giueth the Lorde a Fine, to licence him to Tie and are his laye grounde, or to let or set his customarie Lande to an other for yeres, by Indenture, or otherwise and suche like, it is commonly entred emong the title of Fines terrarum. Amerciamentes are also parcell of the per∣quisites of courtes, and are diuerse, and they are all Summes, Penalties, and mīas, wherein the Tenauntes are amerced, by the Homage or Ferros, of euerie Courte, Lete, or lawe daie of a Mannour, for lacke of suite of Courte, and other sondrie faultes, and of∣fences. And as when they be Fréeholders, or Copie holders, and owe Suite of courte to a Man∣nour, and make defaulte, or bee absent at the Lordes Court, and be not there, and be ther∣fore amerced. And some suche fréeholders, are at their fine certaine, for their suite of Court, and that is called communis finis, which common fine is set on the heddes of suche Suiters, in the
margent of the courte Rolle. All other Suiters, that are not at their co∣men Fine for Suite of Courte, are amerced for their absence, by the title of miā. vppon their heades, in the said margent of the court Rolle. Amercia∣ments of al sortes, for Suite of court, com∣mon tres∣passes, &c.Likewise, when any tenaunte hath bene com∣maunded by the Court, Surueior, Stuarde, and homage, to amende an high way, or to re∣paire a bridge, or to repaire his custumarie holding, or tenement, by a daie assigned, or to auoide some  parson, out of his house, or to yoke and ring his Swine by a daie vpon forfeiture of a paine and doth it not. And the same, at the next court be presented by the ho∣mage. Then the same default is an Amercia∣ment, when it is totted cōmonly ouer against the heades in the leee that gente vnder the  of ā. And Tenauntes being amerced, for not re∣uing their Mixns, or dounghilles, out of ye high waie, by a day or for not making their Hedge or Soyse, by a daie▪ For not pollyng their  hanging ouer an high waie, and letting carriadge, by a daie, or for not auoi∣ding their hodes, or grathoundes by a day (if they cannot Dispend xl. s. by yere, accor∣ding to the Statute) or for breaking and ca∣yng awaie the Lordes Pales, or hedges, or for Suffering their beastes to wander in the highwaie, or to destroie the Lordes woddes, or for not ayng open againe by a day, a way by the Tenaunt before wrongfullie encloa∣sed, or for uenyng of any streame, brooke or
water, out of his right or el course, or for cutting doune, any custumar woddes, with∣out the Lordes licence, or for remouing any markes or mere stones. All these and manie moe suche like, are called Amerciamentes when the Tenauntes are amerced by seueral paines with the title of miā. Also the amerciaments of Bakers, Bruers, Butchers, and Tipplers, for not keping the Assise, are totted on their heades, with the ti∣tle of miā. Also all suche persons, as do commit fraies, or bloudsheds, in any Manour, and presented, are amerced with the title of miā. You must specially note, that there are twoo maners of Herriottes one called by the name Heriot Custome, & another called by ye name of Herriot Seruice. Herriot seruice is euer expressed in a mans graunte or déede, and the other is, wheras Herriottes haue béene paied time out of minde by custome. And now to the description of an Herriot. Parquisi∣tes or ca∣sualties of Courtes, belonging to a Man∣nour.An Herriott is properly called the best Oxe, Cowe, Horse, or other thing, that the Lordes Tenaunte holdyng of a Mannour, hath when he dieth. Whiche Herriot after the Tenaun∣tes death is commonlie seased to the Lordes vse, by the Bailife, Reue, Beadle, or Borse∣holder, of the Mannour, and is commonlie, or ought to bee presented by the Homage, orHerriottes sworne Tenauntes of the Mannour, at the nexte Courte, Lete, or Lawdaie, of the same Mannour to be holden. And if the Tenaunte haue no quicke good,
then the Lorde will haue the beste dead good, that his Tenaunt hath when he dieth, for his Heriot. And in some Mannours, if the Tenaunte, do voluntarily depart out of his house, or ferme, not discharged of the Lord, he shall paie to ye Lord his best quicke good, nomine Heriotte. Also in some Mannours, the Tenaunt shall paie his farewell, to the Lorde for his depar∣ting, whiche is called his fare fée, or farewell, and that is in some places two shillinges, and there also the tenaunt must before his depar∣ting doe all maner of reparations. Relieffes.A Relief is after the death, chaunge, or alie∣nation of euerie Fréeholder, or of a Tenaunt by auncient demaisne, and ought to be paied to the lord, as a knowledge. And the relief in some place, is the whole yeres Rente of the Fréeholder, or Tenaūt so doyng and in some place or Mannour, it is but halfe the yeres rent by custome. A Reliefe is alwaies to bée paied at one whole paimēt. Also, for the same the Lorde may straine of common right, in euerie parcell of lande, if it be vnpaied. Also if a Fréeholder hold of the Lord of the Mannor by knights seruice, his Heire being of full age, the Lorde shall haue of the Heire for euerie Knightes fée .C. s. noīe Releuij. And if the Knightes Fées bee more or lesse, Then the Tenauntes Relief to bee aportio∣nated thereafter. Waiues, is commonly where a Theefe hath stolne certaine goodes, and Cattailles, and brought them into a Mannour, and then by
Waiues.reason of pursuite, fléeth awale, leauyng the said goods and cattailes within the iurisdic∣tion or circuite of the Mānour. And then are thei the lords of that Mannour, and are to be seised by the Bailife, or Rent there, to the lor∣des vse, and are to bee presented at the nexte court, to be holden within the same Mannor. Straies.Straies, is where any Horses, Coltes, O∣xen, Rine, Swine, or other cattailes, do come or straie, and there doe tary one yere, and one daie, and the owner fetche them not, and that the same straie haue been Proclaimed, three seuerall Sondaies, in three of the nexte Pa∣rishes, and three tymes at the nexte markette toune, nexte by the Mannor, then thei are the lords, and thei are alwaies presentable at the nexte Courte, after the straie happeneth to come into the Mannour. Forfeitu∣res.Forfeiture, is wheras any tenaunt holdeth a∣ny Copie holde, or Customarie Lande of the Lorde of any Mannour, and for non paiment of his rentes, customes, or seruices, or by sel∣lyng of the woodes of his Copie holde, or by lettyng the houses goe doune, or by makyng waste, or by alienatyng, lettyng, or settyng his customarie Landes, without the Lordes licence, forfeiteth his Copie holde Lande, in∣to the Lordes hande, whiche is to be so found by the presentment of the homage, at the next Courte thereto bee holden, and to bee seased into the Lordes vse: Also tenauntes by deede indented for life, or yeres, maie forfeite their
estates. ExcheatesExcheates is commonlie, where a Free∣holder of a Mannour committeth Fellonie, then after the Kyng hath had the yere & daie, the Lorde shall haue the Lande by Excheate. Likewise if a Tenaunt doe dye, without law∣full heires generall, or speciall, his lande Ex∣cheateth to the lorde of the Mannour, where∣of the same is holden, and this is commonlie of Free holders, and of Tenauntes by aun∣ciente Demeasne. And the Excheate is alwa∣yes to bée presēted by the homage, at the next courte of the Mannour then to be holden. Plees and Processe of Courtes.Plees and processes of Courtes, or where the Lorde of a Mannour in his Courte, Lete, or Lawdaie, or three weekes Court, holdeth Plea of his Tenauntes, for their landes hol∣den of the saied Mannour, or for any debtes, trespasses, or sommes of money, vnder the va∣lue of xl. s̄. debte and damage. Memorandum many other thynges maie be accompted, or noumbred emongest perqui∣sites, if the same growe but casuallie, and not yerely. Wardes.Is where any Free holders hold of a Mā∣nour in Capite, Escuage, vncertaine, Graūd∣sergeauntie, or otherwise by knightes Ser∣uice, and dieth his heire male, beyng within the age of xxj. yere, and his heire Female be∣yng within the age of .xiiij. yere. Then the Kyng, or Lorde of the Mannour, or of whom
suche Lande is holden, oughte to haue the wardeshippe of suche heire: that is to saie, the garde, and custodie of the bodie, and landes of suche heire, vnto their full age. And also the mariage of suche heire, if thei happen then to bee vnmaried. And as for the residue of the vnderstandyng of this pointe, I referre you to the instruction of the lawe. Patronage of a Churche, is where the Lorde of the Mannour is verie vndoubted patrone of the Parsonage, Vicarage, frée Chap∣pell, &c. belongyng to his Man∣nour, and maie, or ought to giue the same, when, and as often as it falleth voide. Presentation, is whē the lorde maie present any lawfull Clerke, to any Parsonage, Vicarege. &c. continually, or but at euery secōd or thirde auoidaunce, by force, or in the right of his Mannour. Patrona∣ges, presen∣tations, no∣minations, and aduou∣sons of par∣sonages, vicarages, prebendes, Churches. &c.Nomination, is where the lord or any other, maie in the right of his Mannour, or otherwise, no∣minate a condigne Clarke, to any Parsonage, Vicarage &c. Aduouson, is where the Lorde maie, or hath graunted, or giuen his right of presentyng, or nomi∣natyng
Such thin∣ges are ap∣pendaunte, regardaūte or exspec∣tante, to a Mannour, are these.of a Clarke to any Vica∣rage, or Parsonage, &c. in the life of the Incumbent, or Parsone of the same Parsonage, or Vica∣rage, &c. The same graunt or Ad∣uouson to take place, immediatly vpon, or after the nexte aduoy∣daunce of the same, be it by death, Depriuation, Surrender, or Se∣questration of the Parson, Vicar, or Incumbent of the same. And note, the lorde maie graūt out twoo, or three Aduousons of one benefice, the one to take place after the other. Villaines, and Nieffes, is where Bondmen, and Bondwomen be∣long to a Mannour, the bondman is called a Villaine, and the bond∣woman is called a Nieffe. And in some Mannours all the Te∣nauntes are Villaines and Neif∣fes, and then is it saied that lande is, a tenure in Villanage. Villaines & Nieffes.Note, the proper Landes of a Villaine and Neiffe, and all his goodes, and cattaills, are the lor∣des, to whom he is Villaine, if the Lorde so please, vnlesse he haue made thē a Manumission, or that thei bee enfranchised otherwise. There are sometymes Villaines engrosse, whiche are neither re∣gardaunte,
nor appendaunte to a Mannour: but the Lorde or his Auncestours, haue boughte the same and therefore thei are called Villaines engrosse: their landes, goodes, and cattalls, are likewise at the Lordes pleasure and dispo∣sition. And as touchyng other thyn∣ges, that be appēdaunte to a Mā∣nour, some maner of Commons are appendaunte to a Mannour, aswell as appurtenaunte. Also Free Warrens, in some place maie bee appendaunte to a Mannour aswel as appurtenaūt. Also euery Mannour, hath com∣monly his peculie seuerall custo∣mes, and priuiledges belongyng to the same. The descri∣ption, what a custome properly is.And it is to bee specially noted, there can be no custome, vnlesse it haue been vsed, time out of memo∣rie of man: and all suche customes as hee of that continuaunce, bee lawfull, so long as thei be not vn∣reasonable, nor haue any incon∣uenience that bee against reason. And note also, that no man can at this daie make, or bryng vp any newe custome, but the same muste be of auncient tyme but of mynde of man vsed, as is aforesaid, or els
t is no custome. And for as muche, as the son∣drie customes of all Mannours, cānot bée recited, yet for enstruc∣tion sake (emongest many) I will now note a fewe, moste common. Some Mānour hath a custome, that surren∣dour can not be made of Landes holden of that Mannour, but to the Stewarde hymself: and yet in some Mannours it maie be doen to twoo of the Tenauntes, or Homage of that Mānour. And in some Mannour, he Surrendour muste bee made by the circumstaunce of deliueryng a rod, strawe, or mote, els is it a voide surrendour and in some Mannours it maie bee doen with∣out it. Also in some Mannours the Tenauuntes cā¦not lease, or set their landes aboue a yere, with∣out the lordes licence, vpon paine of forfeiture of the same. And in some Mannours, for three yeres or more. Insome Mannours, the Tenauntes maie not fell, ne loppe, the woodes growyng vppon their tenementes, no, not to repaire their hou∣ses, without the lordes licence: and yet in some Mannours, thei maie doe bothe, yea, and sell the woode awaie, without the Lordes licence. In some Mānours, which is cōmonly in De∣uonshire, Somersetshire, Dorsetshire, Corne∣wall, Witshire, and part of Glocestershire, the Tenauntes take the customarie Landes of the Lorde, for tearme of three liues, and not aboue, paiyng a fine vncertaine, as the Lorde and Te∣naunte
can agree. And cōmonly in suche Man∣nours the wiues of the Tenauntes, after their housebandes deceasses, haue their widowes e∣state, by their custome, which is as long as thei kepe theim selues vnmaried, and honeste, and in some Mannours it is otherwise and common∣ly also in these Mannours, the lorde hath a her∣riotte, after the death of euery Tenaunte. In some Mannours, the Tenauntes haue their tenementes, to them and to their heires, paieyng to the Lorde a fine certaine, at euery chaunge, and there onely the wife, hath no wi∣dowes estate, and also commonly suche Tenaū∣tes paie Herriottes. In some Mannours, the Tenauntes are bounde by their custome, to serue the Lorde in the Quenes warres, so it be within the realme, against Rebels, or suche enemies, at their own proper costes and charges: And in some Man∣nours it is otherwise: But note, that now by a statute therefore made, all customarie tenaūtes must serue their Lordes against Rebelles, vpon paine of forfeiture of their holdynges. Also in some Mannours, the tenaūtes ought by their custome, for three or fower daies in so∣wyng tyme, and asmuche in mowyng tyme, and likewise in Haruest, to helpe to tille the Lordes grounde, to make his Haye, or to helpe in with his Harueste, whiche bee called commonlie opera custumaria, that is to saie, daie woorkes, and suche like, and in some place thei vse to doe it, onely with their persones, and in some Mā∣nours bothe with their Teames, Waines, ser∣uauntes, and persones, and in some place other∣wise.
Also in some Mannours, the Tenauntes by their custome, muste grinde their Corne at no Mill, but at the lordes mille, belongyng to the Mannour, and this is commonly called So∣come, as is aforesaid. In some Mannours, the Tenauntes haue their Fewell out of the Lordes wooddes, and this in moste places is properly called estouer, and in some Manours but onely timber, for re∣pairyng their tenauntries. In some Mānours, their custome is to haue common for their beastes, in all the lordes wast grounde, and cōmons. And in some Mannours but in a parte of theim, and that onely for a cer∣tain nūber, and some speciall kinde of cattaile, yea, and also in some places, at certaine tymes onely accustomed, or prefixed. And as touchyng the description, of the sun∣drie kindes of Common, that is to saie, Com∣mon appendaunte, Common appurtenaunte, Common engrosse. &c. I leaue thre to the in∣struction of master Littleton, And note for a speciall Rule: a tenaunte that hath Common in the Lordes Commons, maie haue there nothyng by reason of Common, but alonely bitte of mouthe with their cattaile, nei∣ther maie Geese or Swine haue common, but by the lordes sufferaunce, without speciall wor∣des in the charter, or copie of the Tenaunt. Sometyme customarie Tenauntes in some Mannours, haue also common of Fishing, with shouenettes, castyng neetes, small pitches, and trodde nettes, and suche like.
Some Countries haue customes by theim selues, as the custome of Gauell kinde in Rent, and parte of Wales, where the sonnes of Free holders, shall haue their fathers landes equally deuided emongest theim, touchyng the whiche and all suche like customes, I committe you to the instruction of the learned in the lawe. Priuiledges, are all suche liberties and fraū∣chesies, as are graunted to a Mānour, or toune by the Kyng Quene, or Princes greate Char∣tre, or letters patentes, or by acte of parliamēt. The descri∣ption what reprises cō∣mōly & pro∣perly are.Also there are commonlie goyng yerely out of moste Mannours sondrie Deductions, Paimentes, and dueties, and these are alwaies called Reprises. And of suche there bee diuers natures, where∣of some goe out of one Mannour and some out of an other, as bee these ensuyng, and their like. Suites of Courte, or annuall fine, for suite and seruice of Courte, to any other Courte. Rent charge, or rent secke, yerely goyng out of any Mannour. Sometymes also Rente seruice, either of Capons, Hennes, Peper, Cūminséede, or suche like, maye be yerely paied, out of one Mannour to an other. And also a Rente, or a Suite, maie bee some∣tymes paied out of a Mannour to a Hundred, or Sheriues Tourne. Also an annuall pencion or porcion maie bee
paied out of some one Mannour, to some other Mannour, Personage, or Vicuarage. Item a Rente resolute, maie sometymes bee yerely goyng out of one Mannour, to some o∣ther Mannour or Parsonage, for a high waie, or a Water, course, or a libertie of foldyng, or suche like. Also out of some Mannours or Landes, an yerely tenth is reserued, to the Kyng or Quée∣nes highnes. Reprises of al natures.Also yerely Fées to any Receiuour, Bai∣life, Collectour, high Stewarde, or vnder Ste∣warde, charged by the Lordes Letters Paten∣tes, or otherwise, to bee goyng out of a Man∣nour, or suche Landes, are called Reprises. Likewise euerie other yerely Fee, that is paied to anye other parson, out of any Man∣nour, Landes or Tenementes. Corrodies also for Tearme of life, or in Fée to any Parsone or Persones, yerely paied out of any Mannour. Stipendes, Salaries, or Annuities of Chapleynes, men of Counsell in the Lawe or suche like. Memorandum, all these Reprises, aforesaied, and their like, are to bee diligently learned, that thei maie be deducted, when thei ought out of any Mannour, in the makyng of the valewe thereof. And when these sixe principall thinges before in the saied seconde rule set out and described, are perfectly knowen, and well vnderstanded of him that would bee a Surueiour, then hath he some entraunce in the knowledge of his Office. And
now here next ensuing, for his further enstruction, shall ensue the thirde Rule, whiche shall containe in a brief rehearsall the summe of all suche partes and duties which doth or ought to belong to the Office of a Surueiour, and whiche then (after followyng in order) the speciallest pointes of them are per∣ticulerlie by them selues, more at large to be touched and de∣clared. ¶The thirde Rule. A Breef Recitall of moste of the poin∣tes, dueties, and speciall thynges, what, or whiche are belongyng ge∣nerally to bee doen, and obserued of euerie Surueiour, as the mem∣bers & partes, wherin generally the Office con∣sisteth, and therefore here sett together, that thei might the better be holdē in memorie, most wher∣of be hereafter more at large discoursed & set out. Also euery Surueiour ought to be as skilfull, and well in∣structed how to make and certifie to the Lorde, the true and iust value of his Lordeshippe, Mannour, Landes, Tenemen∣tes, &c. or any parte, parcell, or member thereof, when he shall be thereunto required and commaunded, and to make and set out the same in a plaine and breife particuler, whether it bee for the purpose or intente that the Lorde would sell or leasse out any suche Mannour, or any parcell thereof to any parson or parsones, as an Auditour. And truelie it were much to the Surueiours shame and reproche, if he cannot make as true and perfect a particuler thereof to the Lorde, when occasion requireth (Surueiyng the same, once or twise in euerie yere as he ought to dooe) aswell as the Auditour thereof, who maketh commonlie his Particuler of a Suruey taken per∣chaunce
ten or fiftene yeres before or such like, or perchaunce but onely by his bare recorde of Ministers accoumpte, with∣out suruey. And surely, in this case the Auditour (who in déede is a verie néedefull and profitable member of the com∣mon wealth) is worthie muche more commendation (that he is ready and can make a particuler by his President or Mi∣nisters accoumpt, or such like record,) then some Surueiour who neither can, nor hath learned how to doe it at all. Also the Surueiour ought to knowe how to take the sur∣uey and perfect vewe of a Mannour, or other Landes or Te∣nements, and how to butte and bounde the same in due order, and for moste plainest knowledge of the Tenauntes, and for moste long continuaunce, an example whereof you shall haue hereafter. Then also how (when he hath surueied a Mannour) to en∣ter, and engrosse the same, whiche he ought to doe, and also to make a terrour of the same, in due fourme as hereafter shall be declared. Moreouer, the Surueiour should kéepe a suite rolle, wher∣in all suche persons as ought to yelde suite of Courte, of the Mannour or seruice should bee written, and a Copie thereof he should deliuer to the Stewarde, that they maie bee called at euerie Courte, or Lete holden, that the Lorde loose none of his suites or seruices, a fourme whereof also ensueth. Likewise, it is the Surueiours duetie, to make and keepe a Rolle or booke, called a customary of the Mannour, wherin all the customes of the Mannour should bee registred. That the Tenauntes maie at no time claime any more, or other cu∣stomes then they ought to haue, ne the Lorde bee preiudiced by any newe custome, by his Tenauntes claimed. And this Customarie would bee Indented, the one parte to remaine with the Lorde or his Stewaade, and the other parte with his Tenauntes. And yet neuerthelesse should the Suruei∣ours haue the originall Copie thereof, in the ende of the ter∣rour
of the same Mannour, a brief forme whereof also you shall haue hereafter. Also the Surueiours should geue to euery Bailife, Colle∣ctour, or Reue of euery mannour, a parfite rentall of the yere by Reuenues of the same Mannour, to gather it by, whiche rentall also should be endented, the one parte to remaine with the Lorde or his Surueiour, and the other with the Bailife. A shorte example whereof ye shall see hereafter. Also the Surueiour should haue and kepe the Inrollment of all Indentures and Copies, by which any tenaunt holdeth that he may see the Lordes duelie aunswered, of his Rentes, Duties and couenauntes in their writinges contained, and also be ascertainee, of their Estates and grauntes to them by the Lorde made. And let the Surueiour that hath to doe in the west parties, looke diligently to this one pointe, that the name of a yong Infaunte crepe not into the place of an olde man, for they vse muche there (I will not saie for that intent) if the Father or Mother who haue state for life, in possession or reuersion, bee named Ihon and Agnes, or suche like, then if they haue ij or thrée boyes, or as many girles, their names shalbe all christened as they or those, who haue state in their holdinges are named. But now this is more narowly looked to, then in tymes past. Also although euerie Steward is bound by lawe and con∣science, to be an indifferent iudge, betwene the Lorde and his Tenauntes, and also to geue at the Court a true, full and sub∣stantiall Charge to the Homage, and also to make a good en∣trie, aswell of euery Tenauntes particuler estates, as of all other thinges in his Court Rolles, and to see the Tenaunts Copies truely made out accordingly: Yet because it is the duetie of a Surueiour, to haue suche skill in the thinges a∣fore rehearsed, that hee may not onely keepe a note of all the stewardes doynges, but also be able to enforme, or peruse the doinges of hym, I haue also hereafter therefore set breifly
out (the charge which a Stewarde ought to giue in a Court Baron) and also the forme of makyng out their Copies, as hereafter doth appeare, Furthermore, the Surueiour ought to haue some sight, or knowledge in ye common lawe, or els he shall many tymes, by his ignoraunce, deceaue both the Tenaunt, and the Lorde, and also make euill Presidentes and Recordes, and thereby muche trouble and inconuenience maie arise and growe ma∣ny a daie hereafter, to the perill of his owne soule and many others. Also he ought to grow ripe and perfect, in the Lordes eui∣dences, and recordes of euery Mannour, and in the ordering and sorting of them, that he maie bee able to aunswere or en∣forme the Lorde of the Mannour, or his counsaill, when anie title or clayme is made or other doubte put, and for this pur∣pose the Court Rolles woulde bee kept in Chestes made for that purpose, within any Mannor vnder lockes & keies. &c. Also by the erection of the late Courte of Augmentation, and reuenue of the Kinges Crowne lately in the first yere of Quéene Marie, dissolued, and reduced in the Exchequour, a∣mongest other things (there appointed to the office and due∣tie of a Surueiour) it was thought méete, that the Surueior sitting with the Stewarde, after thrée Proclamations made in the Courte, should assesse Fynes, make grauntes of Copie hold, and customarie Landes, being within the limites of his Office, according to the custome of the Mannours, thereto such parson or parsons, as should giue best Fine for the same, which the Stewarde then furthwith in open court, ought to chardge, and enter into the Court Rolle. And therof to make out the extractes to the Bailife, Reue or Collectour, that the same might be iustely leuied, and gathered accordingly. And also that the Surueiour should sée truely aunswered, all such Rentes, Reuenues, perquisites, casualties, and other things whiche maye growe profitable or beneficiall to the Lorde at
the next audite, for which purpose the Surueiour must kéepe a booke of all suche grauntes, to the intent that the same shall and may be the more truely aunswered at the said accoumpt: for els may happe the Steward either for lucre, or for negli∣gence of hym selfe or his Clerke, may conceale, or omit some of ye same, to the deceipte aswell of ye Lord as of his Tenaūts. Also the Surueyour should be partly skilled, in the rule of Apportionation, that he may when néede is, apportionate the Lande with the Rente, accordyng to the Acre, a shorte forme whereof shall bee hereafter declared, but this rule is some∣what vncertaine. Also the Surueiour should haue some skill in measuryng of Lande, that is to saie, what an Acre is, how muche it con∣taineth, &c. and how moste readily, and truely to meate lande by line, or by rodde, be it in the plaine, in the valley, or vppon the hille, or in woodde, or bee it square, triangle, rounde, or of any other proportion: A small brief enstruction, he shall here∣after finde, set out with a readie table, for the contentes of all maner of lande. And now, as touchyng the maner and forme, how a true breef, and perfecte particular of any Mannour, Landes, Te∣nementes, or Hereditamentes, should be made, and what thin∣ges are to be obserued therein, I haue now (vnder correctiō) here vnder shewed you. 1 You muste specially note, that your particuler ought, should, and must consiste in three principall poinctes, or nota∣ble thynges. The firste is, that the true value of all the par∣celles of Landes, Tenementes, and Hereditamentes, be seue∣rally (but breefly) described, and sette out with their seuerall sommes at the ende of them, and then all in the lefte margent (all ioyned in one line) the totall to be set out. 2 The second is, that there vnder must, immediatly, plainly, and breefly be described, and set out, all the reprises, that is to saie (as I haue before declared) all deductions, fees, or paie∣mentes,
goyng out of the saied value, to any persone, or perso∣nes, and the summes at the ende: And then altogether in the lefte margente, to be in a line ioyned, and the totall to bee set out, as before in the value. 3 Thirdlie, vnder theim bothe should bee sette forthe, the Remanet clare, written in Texte, and drawen out a long, with the summe in the ende of the same. Vnder all whiche, if there be any other thyng, needefull to bee considered, or remembred for the Lordes aduauntage, or otherwise: either touchyng the sale, or leassyng of the saied Mannour, Landes, &c. to any persone, and whiche is not in the value mentioned: then the same shall be written vnder the particuler, in the title of a Memorandum. &c. NOw forasmuche, as nothyng can bee by any meane so well vnderstanded, as by waie of example, when it is set before the eye: Therefore I haue de∣uised, an exāple of a very ample particuler here∣after ensuyng, and hereunto annexed. Wherein I haue fained, or supposed a Lordshippe or Man∣nour, by the name of the Mannour of Dale, to haue all maner of Rentes, and other thynges, a∣foresaied, and in my seconde Rule specified, or suche like, as commonly to any maner of Lorde∣shippe, Mannour, Landes, or Tenementes, can or doeth belong: and there out I haue deducted in reprises, all maner of deductions, or paimentes, that can, or doeth commonly, yerely, go out, or be deducted out of any Lordship, or Mannour, Lan∣des &c. with the Reamnēt clare there after folow∣yng, and a memor and there vnder, as amply as I can presently also gather, that to suche, a value should, or maie appertaine.
¶The Fourth Rule. How a Surueiour should take a per∣fecte Ʋievv or Suruey of a Mannour or such Landes Tenementes or Hereditamentes. FIrst the Surueiour in takyng his Sur∣uey, should well remember that he ought, moste diligently and vigilauntly to vewe and suruey the Buttes, and Boundes of the whole Mannour, and then the Buttes and Boundes, of euery perticuler Te∣naunts landes, Tenements, Meadowes, Cloases, Pastures, &c. within the same Mannour, and euery parcell thereof, that it may remaine in perpetuall remem∣braunce hereafter, what and whiche Tenementes, Landes, Meadowes, Pastures, &c. euery man had, when the Suruey was taken, and where the same then did lie, and howe they were then bounded and butted, and vpon whom, and how ma∣ny Acres, euery parcell did containe, and how muche lande or pasture did at the same tyme belong to euery Tenauntes hol∣dyng, or to the Mannour house: aswell for the preseruation of the inheritaunce of the Lorde of the Mannour, as of euery freeholder, Copy holder or customary holder, or other Te∣naunt of the same. The whiche Surueiour when he goeth about to vewe or suruey a Mannour, Landes, Tenementes or other Heredita∣mentes, should haue with hym redy prouided a Paperbooke, wherein he may roughly and spéedily note as he goeth about the vewe thereof, the first drought of his Suruey of the same, leste if it be doone in loose papers, some parte may happen to be losse, or els vnsorted or alter misplaced in the ingrossyng, and so perchaunce, as good neuer written. And in the begin∣nyng
of the same paper booke, let hym write the title in this fourme, if he please, writing the Mannours name in the mar∣gent on this wise. Mane∣rium de Sale.Superuil. Maner̄ de Sale ibidem capē, fact et examinat per diligent, et exact vis. perambulatio∣nem, examinationem et mensurationē, tam A. B. general superuisor̄, terr̄ Iohīs at Stile, dn̄i Ma∣ner̄ pred et per mandat eiusdem, quam per Sacra∣ment R. S. F. H. T. B. ac multorum tenentium, et Homagij Manerij pred, tunc ibm̄ existen̄ xij. die Augusti. Anno dn̄i M. D. lxij. Annoque Regi∣ne Elizabeth Dei gratia Anglie, &c. Quarto. Or rather if ye will, you may in your first wast paper boke, (so it be not in English in your engrossed booke of Suruey) write the title in Englishe in a shorter fourme, which is this ensuyng both will serue. ¶The Toune of Dale. The vewe of the Mannour of Dale, taken the x. day of May in the xiiii. yere of the raigne of King Henry the eight. By A. B. generall Surueiour to the right honourable lorde. C. D. Lorde of the same by his Commaundement, and also by the o∣thes of E. F. & G. H. and many other tenauntes of the same, as hereafter ensueth. Then in myne opinion, (vnder correction) the Surueiour should first beginne with the Scite of the Mannour or prin∣cipall Mannour place, if there be any, and firste to set out the boundes thereof by euery side, that is to saie by East, Weast, North and South. And then the contentes what it contai∣neth
in length and breadth. Thou what edifices, buildinges, and houses of offices Barnes, Stables, Stalles, and Doue-houses are standyng vpon the same, and whether builded with Tymber, Bricke, or Freestone, Tyled, stated, shingled, or thatched. And what Gardens, Orchardes, Motes, or Pon∣des, be about the same, or adioynyng thereto. And then if ye will (though maister Fitz Harbert, haue not altogether so set foorth) he may goe straight to the surueiyng of the Demai∣nes, that is, what seuerall, or particuler Closes, Meadowes, Pastures, arable lande, &c. they are of, which be the Demai∣nes. And where they doe lie, and if they haue any proper or peculiar names, then what euery parcell of ground is called, and how many Acres euery parcell doth containe, and howe they butte and bounde. And what woodes bee thereof, and how many yeres grouth: also what Shawes, or good hedge∣rowes of wood be about euery fence, of any Close of the said Demaines. And then if a Feour holdeth it, what is his name, and what yerely rent he paieth, and at what feastes the some is paiable, and also the date of the Farmours Inden∣ture of Leasse (if he haue any) and for what tearme of yeres or liues he holdeth it, and vnder what couenauntes, as by ex∣ample hereafter. Then in like maner of the Scite of the Parsonage (if there be any) Buttyng, boundyng, containyng and recityng, the same in all pointes as is before expressed in the Scyte of the Mannour. Adding who is Person, or Vicar there, to whom the gifte thereof belongeth, who occupieth it, and what it is yerely worth. And also likewise namyng, buttyng, bounding, and shewing the contentes and names of euery parcell of the glebe landes, thereto belongyng accordingly. Then to take the viewe of Tenementes, of Freeholders, and of their Landes, Meadowes and Pastures, &c. Alwaies buttyng, boundyng, containyng, and recityng the contentes and proper names of euery parcell thereof, accordyng as is
aforesaide. And specially remembryng by what rent, seruice, reliefe, Fyne, Herriot, Suite of Court, or custumary workes, they doe holde the same of the Lorde. And in like maner to vewe the Tenementes and Landes of all manner of Tennauntes at wille, Tennauntes by In∣denture, or by Copie, &c. Alwaies buttyng, boundyng, contai∣nyng, recityng, notyng and declaryng the seuerall contentes and names of euery particuler parcell of Lande, Meadowe, Pasture, Close, Crofte, Wood, Shawe, &c. And also the seue∣rall yerely Rentes, suites, seruices and workes, and the Fy∣nes, Heriottes, and customes, of the same. &c. And it were good, that ye vewed the Fieldes, in a generall maner, euery fielde seuerally by hym self. Hauyng if ye be not the skilfuller, a Diall in your hande (accordyng to maister Fitz herbertes counsaile) I meane that thereby, who so ta∣keth the suruey, may thereby know perfectly, which is Easte, Weste, North and South. And the Surueiour should stande in the middes of the fielde, or where he may best see euery side or corner thereof. And as touchyng the buttyng and boun∣dyng of the fieldes, before he doe begynne to enter the buttes and boundes of any particuler mans grounde, or lande in the same fielde, he should enter the buttyng, and boundyng of the whole fieldes on euery side, how it doth lie, naming the boun∣dynges thereof, alwaies vpon the most notable knowen mar∣kes, or Mearestones as he can: as these and suche like be that follow: Marelepittes, grauell pittes. Brokes, pondes, Wind∣milles and Windmill hilles, crosse waies, Lanes and suche like boundes, not remoueable and of continuaunce. And after he hath so butted and bounded the whole fielde, on all partes, Then to beginne at one place certaine, and so from thence a∣long to bound & butte euery tenaunts particular furlonges, Landes, Hedlandes, Bawkes and groundes, be it by the lande or by the Acre, as he shall thinke best, or deuise to do the same, for surer, longer, and mens better knowledge thereof, as in
example hereafter shal appeare. Maister Fitzherbert would haue the Meadowes, pastures and Closes also likewise sur∣ueied generally. And the like maner & forme in all pointes, is to be vsed by the Surueiour, in buttyng, and boundyng of the Meadowes that bee common Meadowes, with their seuerall contentes of Acres, by their seuerall markes, and Mearestones, as exā∣ple shall shewe also hereafter. And as for Closes, Croftes, Pastures, or Woodes that bee enclosed, he should butte and bounde them seuerallie, en∣tryng their contentes of Acres, and names if he can, with the value what thei bée yerely worthe, and who holdeth them, as is afore saied, whereof ye shall also haue an example here followyng in his place. And after like maner and forme, maie the Surueiour, if he will, butte, bounde, and enter the contentes of Acres, of all maner of Pastures, where Herdmen keepe cattalle. And also all Commons, Moores, Marshes, Heathes, Common Woodes, or suche like. Hereafter doe followe the examples, how the pre∣misses should be entred orderly. And first how the Mannour place, or Scite should bée entred, But∣ted and bounded. SCitus Maner̄ de Dale pred Scituatur, et exi∣stit, inter Cemiterium Ecclesie de Dale, super le Borial, et Regiam viam dicest, a villa de B. vsque villam de A. super Austral et communem campum eiusdem ville, super Orient, et Tentm̄ siue Mesuagium R. F. super occident. Et continet in latitu∣dine triginta perticas, et quatuor pedes terre, vnaqueque pertica existen̄ xvi. pedes dī. Super quem Scitum le Man∣nour
place scituat sufficient edificat cum vna Aula, & duabus cameris, ex lapidibus quadrat construct, cum omnibus domi∣bus, edificiis, cameris, structur̄, et duobus atriis eidem Sci∣tui pertinen̄. Necnon vnum Columbarium, in exteriori A∣trio ibm̄ voc̄ le greate Courte, scituat, cum vno Gardino cir∣cūmurat cont vnā acr̄ dī. Ac vnū hortū cūt quatuor Acr̄, vnde vnum caput abbuttat super Regiam viam predictam, verfue Boreal, et super scitum pred versus occident, et super campū pred versus Austr̄, et clm̄ rectoris ibm̄ super Orient, Ac etiā cum duobus Horreis, continent quatuor Bayes, le peece, vna domo vocat le Stalle, als le Oxe house, continen̄ iii. Baies, edificat, vnum Srabul cont vi. Baies, edific̄ Qui quidem Scitus, et cetere damus, et edificia, sunc coopert, cum tegu∣lis siue lapi, voc̄ Tyle, preter dict duo Horrea que coopert sunt cum le Shingle &c. Et qui quidem Scitus, & cetere do∣mus, ac edificia, ac cetera premiss. cum omnibus et singu∣lis dominicis terr̄, prat, pasc. pastur̄, boscis, et subboscis, cum pertin̄ (if it bee out of the Lordes owne hande, demised to a Fermour, ye must saie) modo dimittuntur, R. H. executor̄ et assign̄ suis, (Some vse to specifie the Farmours estate, with the date of his Indenture, and for what liues, or how many yeres he holdeth it) and this is more then is in Master Fitz∣harbertes presidente (and then must ye saie) Hend et Tenend pred R.H. executor̄ et assign̄ suis a festo sancti Michaelis ar∣changeli prox. futur̄ (vel vltīo preterito, as the feaste is, and if it be for his life, saie) ad terminum et pro termino vite na∣tural ipsius R.H. (And if it bee for yeres, then saie) vsque ad finem et terminum xxj. annorum (or so many yeres as it is) extunc prox. sequend et plenarie complend. And then name the rente, saiyng. Reddend inde annuatim dict Iohanni at Stile dn̄o Manerij pred xxxi. li. x. s̄. (or naming what other rēt he paieth, & thē at what feastes as) ad duos āni terminos vsuales, viz ad fest Annunciationis beate Marie virginis, et sancti Michaelis Archangeli, per equal portiones duran̄ ter∣mino
pred. (And then some doe touche partly the couenaun∣tes in the Indenture, on the tenauntes behalfe to bee perfor∣med, in this or like forme.) Et pred R. H. et executor̄ fui te∣nentur omnibus reparationibus premissor̄ ad sumptos suos proprios preter grande meremium, et in fine termini dabit dn̄o xl. s̄. nomine Herriott, et habebit sufficien̄ Hedgebdote, Houseboote, Fireboote, Ploughboote, Carteboote, et Haie∣boote super premiss. crescen̄ et ibm̄ expendend, et non alibi, duran̄ termino pred, et hēit cōmuniam in omnibus commu∣niis et vastis dn̄i et continet etiam in Indentura pred vnum promso; {quod} si Reddūs pred aretrofuerit in parte vel in tot per spatium vnius mensis post aliquod festum solutionis pred, et litime demandat, quod tunc potest dn̄s et heredes sui in premissa, et quamlibet inde percellam reintrare &c̄. And likewise you maie bréefly in the same maner, rehearse any o∣ther couenaunte in the Indenture declared) all whiche is more then master Fitz harbert declareth, and it is muche v∣sed at this daie. And then ye muste drawe all together, and set the rente thereof in the middest of the right margente, that it maie be ready to the eye. How the Srye of a Personage or Rectorie, and Vicaredge may be bounded. SCitus Rectorie de Sale scituatur et existit inter Regiam viam pred super austr̄ et eccliām {per}ochial ex parte Occidental et campum Boreal ex parte Boreal, et Tentm̄ R.F. ex parte oriental. Et Re∣ctor ecclesie pred habet vnum Croftum iacent inter campum Boreal et Cemiteriū ecclesie pred ex parte Austral. Ac dict Crostum continet detem perticas ex parte Boreal et duo∣decim perticas ex parte Austral, et Triginta perticas in longitudine ex Oriental parte, et viginti perticas et dimi∣diam ex parte occidental. Et R.T. est modo rector ibm̄, et ha∣buit
rectoriam pred ex dono domini huius Manerij de Dale, cui donatio eiusdem pertinet im{per}{per}m̄, vt vero et iudubitato patrono eiusdem in iure Maner̄ sui predicti. Et predit. R. T. clīcus tenet rectoriam pred, cum omnibus Terris, Glebis, Pratis, Pascuis, pasturis, decim̄, oblacoī{bus}, prouencoī{bus}; ab∣ueucoī{bus} & alijs proficuis quibuscunque in occupatione sua propria, et valor annuus eiusdem in libris Dn̄e Regine ex∣tendit ad xiij. l. ij. s̄. sed valet per annum vltra repris̄ xxij. l. And note that the cause why I haue neither in the Scite and Demaynes of the Mannour afore mencioned, nor in the entrie of the saide Scite of the Personage aforesaide, here butted, bounded or set out the names, contentes of Acres of the said Landes, Meadowes, Pastures, Closes, &c. of the De∣maines or Glebe Landes, or of the Landes, Meadowes, Pa∣stures. &c. belonging to any tenement of frée holders, or copy holders, (the fourmes of thentries whereof nowe also ensue) is, because the same must and should appeare in the generall vewes of the fieldes, Meadowes and closes of the hole Man∣nour by them selues as hereafter shall appeare. How the Tenementes or Mesuages of Fréehol∣ders should be butted, bounded and entred. VNum Mesuagium siue tenementum, quod D. C. tenet libere per chartam cum omnibus ter∣ris, prat, pastur̄, &c. eidem tenemento siue Mess. {per}tin̄, de Dn̄o huius Manerij: quod quidem me∣suagium siue Tenementum iacet inter regiam viam pred ex parte Austral, et campum Borial pred ex parte Borial, et rectoriam pred ex parte Occidental, et Ten̄tū W. R. ex parte Oriental, et continet xiii. perticas ex parte Au∣stral eiusdem in latitudine et xxi. perticas et tres pedes in longitudine, et xvi. perticas in latitudine apud caput Bo∣reol.
Et tenet Mesuagium siue Tenementum predict cū per∣tin̄ de dēo domino per homagium, fidelitatem et duos solidat reddit per annum, et vnam libram Piperis, ac sect ad curiam dn̄i de tri{bus} septīanis in tres septīanas, et ad duas letas dn̄i ibm̄ annuatim tenend. And thus must ye enter the Mesuages, Landes and pastu∣res of all free holders beyng alwaies sure to expresse the but∣tes & boundes of the same, and the seruice and yerely Rent of euery free Tenaunt as nere as ye can, in the entrie of the same. How other Mesuages, Tenementes or Cotages, holden of the Lorde at wille, or by Indenture, or by Copy of Courte rolle, should be butted, boun∣ded, contained and entred. VNum Mesuagium siue Tenementum dimissum. S.H. (if it be at wille, say, ad voluntatem dn̄i (if it be by In∣denture, say) per Indenturam gerent dat, &c. (if it bee by Copie of Court roll) saye, per copiam Curie ad volunta∣tem dn̄i, secundum consuetudinem Manerij, cuius dat est, &c. Scituat inter regiam viam predict ex parte Austral, et cam∣pum Borealem predict ex parte Boreal, et dictum Tenement D.C. pred ex parte Occidental, et cōem Campum ibm̄ vo∣cat Le Est fielde ex parte Oriental, et continet in latitudine quatuordecem pertic̄, et tres pedes assise, et xviii pertit̄, et de∣cem pedes assis̄ in longitudine, hēnd &c. (as his estate is, fol∣lowyng the fourme set out in the entrie of the Scyte of the Mannour before expressed.) Reddend inde annuatim dict Io∣anni Style dn̄o Maner̄ predict xxiiii. s̄. vi. d. ad duos āni ter∣minos vsual, vz. ad festa Annuntiationis beate Marie virgi∣nis, et seī Michaelis Archangeli per equales porcoēs. (And then if it be by Indenture, touche also the couenauntes ther∣in in this or like fourme.) Et pred. S. H. et executor̄ sui per
Indentur̄ pred tenentur omnibus reparationibus premisso∣rum ad sumptus suos proprios (grandi maremio solummodo ercept) Et in fine termini sui dabit domino optimū Animal quod hēt nomine Herriott. Et pred S. H. et execut sui habe∣bunt (ex conuentione dn̄i predicti,) Sufficient hedgeboote, houseboote, fyreboote, Ploughboote et Carteboote, super p̄∣mis. crescen̄, et ibm̄ expendend. duran̄ termino predicto. Et faciet Sectam ad curiā domini quotiēs legaliter summoītus fuerit. Et dabit annuatim dn̄o predco, duas gallinas ad Fest natal dn̄i, &c. Et si reddūs predict aretro fuerit in parte vel in toto per spacium vnius mensis post aliquod festum solucon̄ pred et litīme demandat, quod tunc potest dn̄s et heredes sui in p̄miss. reintrar̄, &c. (And euen in like fourme let hym enter al other couenauntes contained in the Indenture.) And if it be by Copy ye muste recite the seruices and woorkes whiche the Tenaunt should doe if hee should or ought to doe any, &c. and in this fourme make your entrie of all suche like. Now touchyng the entrie of the Fieldes, Landes, Closes and meadowes of euery Tenement (after Maister Fitzhar∣bartes fourme) they must be recited in the vewe of the whole mannour, as next hereafter ensuyng shall appeare. Howe to Butte and Bounde the whole common fieldes belonging to a Mannour. CAmpus Austral ibm̄ iacet ex australi parte vil∣le de Sale pred, et incipit apud le Crucem ibm̄ vocat Shawcrosse, apud quoddam furlongū vo∣cat Well Furlong. Quod quidem Furlongum continet sexaginta acras terre arabil et abbut∣tant ex parte boreal et occidental, super magnum Clausum dm̄ de terris dominicis voc̄ wrangclose, et ex parte oriental super communem viam ibm̄ voc̄ longlane, et ex parte austral
super Riuulum ibm̄ vocatur Kernebroke, vnde Dn̄s habet tres acras et vnam rodam, rector ibm̄ iii. acr̄ et iiii. pertic̄. R. F. quatuor acr̄. G.H. vnam acram et vnam rodam, S. R. se∣ptem acr̄ et tres rod. et sic de ceteris. Ye may doe the like if ye will by the Landes as I haue doen by the acres. Also if there bee any mo common Fieldes, enter them and bounde them in like maner, as I haue doen this South fielde aforemencioned. How to but and bound the Meadowes of a Man, nour, and specially when they are common Mea∣dowes. PRatū commune Maner̄ de Sale predict vocat Brodemeade, iacet in Orientali campo coīs cā∣pi ibm̄ vocat Southfield, inter campum pred et Riuulum predict vocat Kernebrooke, et ex par∣te Occidental abbuttat super viam vocat long∣lane pred, et ex partibus Austral et Oriental abut super claus. dedn̄icis dn̄i vocat Wrangclose, et ex parte Borcal abbut super Crofta I. H. et W. H. Et Pratum predictum continet lxiii. acr̄ et vnam rodam, et iacet in diuersis partib. vocat Shootes. Et incipiens apud longlane pred in australi parte eiusdem, rector ibm̄ habet tres Acras et vnam Rodam, dn̄s Maner̄ vt de dnīcis suis sex Acras. R. S. v. acras et dī. I. B. quatuor acras et vnam rodam. F. H. sex acras et dī. T.B. v. acras, Dn̄a Regina ix. acras, Rector predict tres a∣cras et dī, &c. et sic de ceteris his Sili{bus}. And if there bee any moe or other Meadowes, vse the lyke fourme of entryng of their Buttes Boundes and contentes, notyng alwayes their knowen names specially if you can. How a man should enter, butte and bound the se∣uerall
Pastures, Croftes and Enclosures belon∣gyng to a Manour. VNam Clausur̄ Pastur̄ de Dn̄icis dn̄i conti∣nen̄ quadraginta acr̄ iacet inter Pratum ibm̄ vocat Brodemeade ex parte oriental, et v∣num clauss. pastur̄ in tenur̄ R. F. vocat Wel∣croft, et Riuulum predic̄ vocat Kernebroke ex partibus Occidental et austral, ac cōem Campum ibm̄ vocat Northfield, ex parte Boriale, et valet per annum vi. l. Vnum aliud clauss. Pastur̄ ibm̄ quod R.F. tenet libē de dn̄o pred vt libō ten̄to suo {per}tinen̄, voc̄ Welcrofte cōt xiii. acr̄ iacet inter wrangclose predict. super Occidental et clm̄. S. T. vocat olde Acre, ex parte Oriental & riuulum predict̄ vo∣cat̄ Kernebrooke, ex parte Austral, et campum predict vocat Northefelde, et val per annum. xxx. s̄. iiii. d. Vnum aliud claus. Pasture quod G. H. tenet de domino, vt Ten̄to suo custumario pertinen̄, cont xxiiii. acr̄, et iii. Rodas vocat Marlefelde, iacet iuxta Wrangclose pred, abbut super Longlane pred versus Oriental et clm̄ I. M. vocat Short-acre, versus Occidental, et clm̄ Rectoris ecclesie ibidem voc̄ Parsones Close ex parte Austral, et dict clm̄ ibidem vocat Well crofte ex parte Boreal, et valet per annum xxxii. s̄. Vnum Claus. pastur̄ ibidem vocat Parsones close, conti∣nen̄ xxii. acr̄ dī, et vnam Rodam iacet super clauss. pred vocat Shortacre versus Boreal, et claus. vocat Welcrofte, versus Austral, et Longlane versus Occidental, et claus. R.F. ver∣sus Oriental, pertinen̄ Rectorie de Sale pred, val per an∣num. xxvi. s̄. viii. d. And after this and like maner, ye maie peruse, vewe, butte and bounde, and enter all maner of Closes, Pastures and Croftes in any Mannour, or about any Mannour.
And you shall note, that this maner and forme of vewyng, buttyng, boundyng, and entryng of the saied Messuages, or Tenementes, Fieldes, Meadowes, and Pastures, or Closes, is almoste whollie accordyng to the forme, prescribed by ma∣ster Fitz Harbert, and is a very exacte and moste perfect way. But there is now vsed of some, an other maner of Suruei∣yng, Buttyng, and Boundyng, but specially of entryng of the same in these latter daies, whereof I would not haue you also ignoraunte, & that is in this forme: Thei entre seuerally euery mannes Messuage, or Tenement, and Butte and boūd first the Scite therof accordingly, and then euen in the same entre all in one (infra) thei doe particularly butte and bound, and also entre euery mannes errable lande, also his Meado∣wes, Closes, and Pastures, belongyng to euery of the same seuerall Tenementes, all together, and then see out the rente in the right margent thereof, and the fine and Herriot there∣fore, to bee due in the lefte margente thereof, as for your in∣struction, I will sett out hereafter onely one example. ARnoldus at Noke tenet per In∣dentur̄ gerent dat xii. die Ianua∣rij, anno regni Regis Henr̄ viii. xxxiiii. dnum magn̄ Ten̄tum siue capital Messuagium ibidē vocat Halle greene, scitual et existens apud plateam siue vicū ibidem vocat Strowde crosse, inter v∣nam viam ibidem vocat Strowdelane ex parte Oriental et coīam ibidē vocat Strowdegrene ex Austral et quādam Croftam in tenur̄ Ioan∣nis ap Moore, ex parte Boreal, & cuiusdam alii croft vocat Hall crofte, in tenura eiusdam Ar∣noldi ex parte Occidental, et continet in lon∣gitudine triginta octo perticas, et xi. pedes as∣sise,
et in latitudine viginti nouem pertit̄, vna∣queque pertic̄ existens xvi. pedes et dī. Super quam Scitum et predict capitale Messuagium scituatur sufficienter edificat viz vna aula cum vna camera, et vna parua camera vocat a Gar∣ret, super Aulam pred ex quadrat lapid con∣struct &c̄. cum ceteris domibus et edificijs, et structuc̄ eidem annexat, acetiam vnum atrium quadrat eidem aule adiacen̄, necnon vnum xiiii. l. xiii. s̄. co∣lumbar̄ dicto atrio contingen̄ ac etiam vnum gardinū et vnum pomarium adiacen̄ circum∣percat siue palat, continen̄ in toto tres rodas, & quatuor pertic̄, vnde vnum caput pomarij pred abbutt super Regiam viam vocat Strowde∣lane pred versus Orien̄, et abbutt su{per} le Grene pred &c̄. ac etiam vnum pratum vocat Longe Meade, continen̄ xii. acres, quod quidem pra∣tum iacet in Occidental parte campi voc̄ Red∣felde, et abbutt super Riuulum ibm̄ voc̄ Lowe-water super Orient &c̄.) and so namyng euery Close, Meadowe, or parcell of lande arable, ap∣pertainyng to the same Tenemente, and But∣ting the same on al sides, as I haue before part∣ly shewe you, then saiyng) cum omnibus et sin∣gulis suis pertinentijs quibuscunque, hend sibi executor̄ & assignatis suis a feft sancti Michae∣lis Archī vltimo preterito ante dat Indenture pred, ad terminū viginti et vnius annorum ex∣tunc proxime sequen̄ et complend. Reddend inde annuatim dn̄o Mauer̄ pred hered & assign̄ suis xiiii. l. xiii. s̄. legalis monete Anglie, ad fest natal dn̄i, et natiuitatis sctī Ioannis Baptiste per equal portiones, vt per Iudentur̄ pred in∣ter al plenius apparet. &c.
And this fourme aforesaid semeth also very commodious, for it sheweth together plainely to the eye, what, how, and where the parcells of landes be, that doth belong to euery te∣nement or mesuage, wheras after the fourme afore surueied, after ye haue founde in your suruey, a tenauntes mesuage or house, ye must be faine to séeke and pike out in the general∣tie of the whole suruey of Fieldes, Meadowes and Cloases of the same Mannour, euery tenauntes parcelles particuler∣ly. Whiche is a trouble and somewhat diffuse to hym that is but a young surueiour. Mary, to helpe that, it is vsed (after the suruey of a Mannour is generally taken in fourme afore∣said: Then immediatly therout to make your Terrour wher∣in euery mans parcelles of Lande are set out with his tene∣ment, partely in fourme of the last example aforesaide. ¶The fifte Rule. The description and enstruction for the makyng and engrossyng of a Terrour, of a Mannour or suche landes, tenements and hereditamentes. THough some men make no difference be∣twene a Suruey & a Terror, accompting all to be one thing, yet truely as farre as I could euer learne and vnderstand, there is muche difference. One difference is that before last remembred, that is to say, in the ingrosment thereof, to enter, and set out euery tenaūtes parcelles of Lādes, Meadowes, pastu∣res and Closes (out of the generaltie of the Suruey) with their seuerall names, Buttes and Boundes all together ioy∣ned with their tenement, all in one infra, as it were. Also in the terrour, some vse first to beginne with the declaration, of the circuite, then of whom the Mānour landes &c. is holden,
and by what seruice, as example here ensuyng declareth. Then the entry of the Scyte of the Mannour place with the Demaynes. Then the Parsonage or Vicaredge with the Glebe Landes, then the entries first of free holders, then of Tenauntes at will, if there be any: then of Tenauntes by In∣denture for terme of life or yeres: then the entryng of the te∣nauntes of the Copiholde or Custumary Landes, and last of all, the entrie of the common Mores, Marshes, Woddes and Estouers belonging to the same Mannour, with their boun∣des and butmentes, as example of a briefe terrour shall here∣after declare vnto you. Which I hūblie submit vnto the cor∣rection of the learned. And some vse in entring of their Ter∣rors, to set the names of euery Tenaunte with the fine and Herriotes (if they owe any) in the left margent, and the yere∣ly rent in the right margent. Manerium de Dale in Comitatu praedicto. Comitat Northūb.MAgnum Terrarium Iohīs at Stile mi∣litis, dn̄i Manerij pred de eodem Mane∣rio diligenter renouat, fact, et examinat per Mandat dn̄i predict, vltimo die Au∣gusti. Anno dn̄i M.D.lxij. Annoque Re∣gni Dn̄e Nostre Elizabeth Dei gratia Anglie Frauncie et Hibernie Regine fi∣dei defensor̄, &c. Quarto. ¶Ʋidelicet. CIrcuitur Manerij de Dale pred, incipit apud le crosse Way vocat Shawe crosse apud Orient, ducent ad Burgu de B. et exterdit a reia via per sepem magi cōij, vocat le Hethe Downe, vsque ad locum quen∣dam
Circuitus Manerd Dale, cun metis et boundis e∣iusdem.vocat le grauell pittes, in exteriore parte cōij predict, et abinde extend per magnum foss. vocat the drie diche, versus Austrum, vsque par∣uum riuulum vocat Slades Brooke, et abinde extendens semper a longe per Riuulum pred versus occidental, vsque ad molend pertinen̄ Manerio de H. vocat Huttes mylle, et abinde reextendit per cōem viam sine callem ibm̄, ver∣sus boreal vsque ad Stagnum quoddam cōe vo∣cat Helliers ponde, et abinde circumextendens per corneriū Parci Manerij pred, & per sepem vocat le greate quicksett camporum cōmun̄, cu∣iusdā Manerij voc̄. G. adiacen̄ vsque ad le crosse waie vocat Shawe crosse pred. Qui quidem notabiles siue special loci pred noīat Shawcrosse, Grauell Pittes, Slades Brooke, Hittes mille, et Heliers ponde, sunt et semper de antiquo fuerīt limites, seu le perti∣culer boūdes, markes, et meares totius precint siue circuitus Manerij de Dale pred. Tenura, si∣ue de quo tenet Ma∣nerium de Dale et per que redd et scruit.Manerium de Dale pred cum omnibus et sin∣gulis terris, tenementis, pratis, pascuis, pastu∣ris, et ceteris suis iuribus, membr̄, et pertinen∣tijs tenetur de H. Comite Northumbrie, vt de vnīo siue manerio suo de C. per libm̄ Soccagiū et reddit xxxiiij. s̄ ij. d. ob q. annuatī solut ad fe∣stum sc Michaelis Archangeli tantum. Vel al li tenetur de dn̄a Regina in Ca∣pite per seruicium militare in hac forma. Manerium de Dale pred cum omnibus et sin∣gulis Terris, Tenemētis, Pratis, Pascuis, pa∣stur̄, et ceteris suis iuribus, membris et perti∣nen̄
si dimitterentur xxiiii. li. Rectoria de Dale pred cum terr̄ Glebis. Iacobus Branborne clicus Rec∣tor Recto∣rie de Dale xliiii. li.TEnet Rectoriam de Dale pred, scitus∣que eiusdem existit inter Regiam viam ibm̄ ex parte Occidental, et cemiteriū ex parte Oriental, et Scitum Manerij ex parte Austral, et communem campum ibidē ex parte Boreal, et continet xxxiiii. pertic̄ in latitudine, et lxxxii. pertic̄ in longitudine, su∣perque Scitum pred edificat sunt vna Aula, vnū cenaculū vocat a Parlour, cum quatuor cameris, et coquina, ac vnum stabul et vnum Horreū, cont iii. Baies. Ac vnū claus. terr̄ in Occidētal parte Pomarij, et Gardinum ei∣dem Rectorie pertinen̄, cont vndecem acr̄, ac xxii. acr̄ terr̄ arabil de terr̄ glebis in cōmuni campo ibm̄ voc̄ Milfelde, vnde vi. acr̄ insi∣mul iacent apud Hoggesende Ferrie ibm̄, ac vnam acr̄ et dī iacent apud Branbushe ibidē ac vnū acr̄ apud Wynlease &c. Ac etiam om∣nes decimas, lane, garbar̄, feni et ceter̄ omni∣bus et singulis proficuis, decimis, obuentio∣nibus, et commoditatibus ac aduantagiis dict Rector̄ pertinen̄ siue spectan̄, et habuit rectoriam predict ex donatione dicti domini Manerii predit, qui est indubitatus patro∣nus eiusdem in iure Manerii de Dale pred et valet per annum.
Liberi Tenentes. Willmus at Nooke. lxii. s̄.TEnet libe sibi et hered suis de domino huius Manerii ex donatione progeni∣tor̄ domini per Chartam, vnum Me∣suagium siue tenementum liberum: quod qui dem Messuagium siue tenementum iacet in∣ter Rectoriam de Dale, ex parte Occidental et Tenementum in tenur̄ R. F. ex parte O∣riētal et Regiam viam ibm̄ ex parte Austral, et communem campum ibidem vocat Milne∣marshe felde ex parte Boreal, & continet xxxi perticas in longitudine, et xxii. pertic̄ in la∣titudine. Ac etiam vnam acr̄ prati in comuni prato voc̄ Blithe Meade, apud le Slade ibm̄ et v. acr̄ prat in eodem prato apud Forough Bush ibm̄ &c. Ac vnū claus. pastur̄ voc̄ Crad∣docks cont iiii. acr̄, vnde vnum caput abbutt &c. quod quidem Tenementum vocatur Ho∣lynshedes, quond Iohannis Makereth, et reddit domino annuatim iiii. s̄. viii. d. et tenet per fidelitat et sect ad cur̄ Maner̄ ad duas le∣tas annuatim tenend. Et Tenementum pred est heritabil. &c.— Silis intratio fiat de terr̄ et Tenemen∣tis ceterorum libor̄ tenentium. ¶Tenentes ad voluntatem. TEnet ad voluntatem Domini vnum te∣nementum in Ribstrete, iacen̄ inter te∣nementum, S. T. ex Oriental parte et W. B. ex parte occidental, et Regiā viā pred ex parte Auscr̄ et campū pred ex parte Borial continens xxii. pertit in longitudine et xxi.
Iohēs Doe. xxxxiiii. s̄. viii.d.pertit in latitudine, cum vno Horto et Gar∣din̄ adiacen̄, ac vnū claus. pastur̄ vocat horse crofte, continens octo Acr̄ et dī, abbutt super terr̄ Iohīs P. versus austral & terr̄ I. H. ver∣sus boreal, &c. ac vnam acr̄ et dī prati in cōi prato ibm̄ apud Wrinehille, et quatuor acr̄ dī terr̄ arabil apud mylne Marshe fielde, iuxta locum vocat Hollie acre, &c. et redd per an∣num xxiiij. s̄. viii. d. ad duos anni terminos equal porcoī{bus}. — Silis Intratio fiat de terris et tenemen∣tis ceterorum tenen̄ ad volunt. Tenentes per Indentur̄ pro terīo vite siue Annorum. TEnet per Indentur̄ gerent dat xxii. die Februarij. anno regni dn̄i Regis nu{per} Henrici octaui xxxiiii. vnum mesuagiū siue Tenementum scituat inter regiam viam pred ex parte boreal et Tentum in tenur̄ R. F. ex parte austral, et coēm campū pred ex {per}te occidental, et Sowters lane ex parte orien∣tal, et continet in latitudine xxii. pertic̄, et xx. pertic̄ in latitudine, et mesuagium siue Tene∣mentum pred est sufficienter construct, ac etiā tegulat, cum vno Stabul et vno Horreo, ac le Oxehouse ibm̄ cum Stramine coopert, cum vno Gardino et vno Pomario insimul iacen̄ cont duas acr̄ et vnam Rodam terr̄, ac cum v∣no paruo Clauso Pastur̄ in Oriental, vnde vnum Caput abutt, &c. Ac etiam xxiiii. Acr̄ err̄ arabil, vnde. iiii. acr̄ iacent in Mylne∣marshe fielde, apud windemill hille, &c. ac xi.
Iohēs at Noke. Cxiii. s̄. iiii. d.Acr̄ prat, vnde iii. acr̄ et vna Roda prati iacet in Broademeade, iuxta le milne dāme ibm̄, &c. ac quat claus. pastur̄, cont in tot 32 acr̄ pastur̄, vnde vnū claus. iacet apud Benbowe Crosse cont xiiii. acr̄ et dī abbut su{per} le Bēbow lane, vers. occiden̄ et terr̄. Iohīs M. versus orien∣tal, et vnum caput eiusdem abut super claus. de dn̄icis dn̄i ibm̄ versus Austral et alterum caput eiusdem abuttt super alium croft eius∣dem I. M. versus Boreal (& silī modo de ce∣teris) quod quidem mesuagium siue tenemē∣tum, ac cetera premiss. cum pertin̄ quondam voc̄ Maliardes, modo Tournors nu{per}, ī tenur̄ Willī Turnour defunct. Hēd et tenend pred. mesuagium siue tenementum, ac cetera p̄miss. cum pertinēt prefat Iohn̄i at Noke executor̄ et assign̄ suis a festo seī Michaelis Archange∣li vltimo preterito ante dat eiusdem Inden∣tur̄ ad terminum viginti, et vnius annorum, extunc proximo sequen̄ & complend. Reddend inde annuatim dict I. S. dn̄o Manerij pred hered et assign̄ suis v. l. xiii. s̄. iiii. d. ad duos anni terminos vsual equis porcionibus sol∣uend, duran̄ termino pred. vz. ad Festa &c. Et pred Iohēs at Noke, et executor̄ sui habe∣bunt, (ex conuencōe dn̄i pred sufficient hedge∣boote, ploughboote. &c. Et pred I. at Noke, et excutor̄ sui per Indentur̄ pred tenētur om∣nibus reparationibus premissorum ad sump∣tos suos proprios (grandi Maremio solum∣modo excepto) et ita sufficienter re{per}at in fi∣ne termī pred, in man̄ dn̄i siue hered suorum quiet relinquēt, et sursum reddent, ac etiam in fine termī sui predcī dabit dn̄o pred, seu he∣redibus
suis Quadraginta Solidos noīe He∣riott. Ac etiam tenetur facere sectam ad cu∣riam dn̄i quotiens legaliter summōit fuerit, ac etiam dabit dn̄o annuatim vnum Caponē et vnam Gallinam ad fest natal dn̄i, &c. Et si reddūs p̄dūs areted fuerit insolut in parte vel in tot {per} spaciū sex septimanarū post aliquod festū solucon̄ p̄d, et litime demandat, quod tūc licebit dn̄o pred, et heredibus suis in p̄miss. et quamlibt inde parcell reintrar̄, &c. Silīs intratio fiat de terr̄ & Tenementis cete∣rorum tenentium ad voluntatē, et pro terīo an∣norum, ac pro terīo vite, ac per Copiam Cur̄ secundum consuetudinem Mauerij. Tenentes {per} Copiam Curie secundum consue∣tudinem Manerij. TEnet per copiā Cur̄ gerent dat vndecimo die Maij. anno regni Regis nu{per}. H. viii. xxxiiii. vnum tenementū custumariū abutt, &c. cuius ten̄ti scitus continet in longitudine ab orient vsque ad occident xiiii. pertic̄, et in latitudine ab austro vsque ad bor̄ xi. perticas quod ten̄tum cum vno Stabulo, vno Horreo, ac le Oxestall sunt veter̄ domus et ruinos. cumque Stramine coopert. Ac etiam vnum Gardinum et vnū paruū Poma∣riū adiacent in Austral parte eiusdem ten̄ti, cont tres Rodas, cum vno paruo Crofto ei∣dem Pomario adiacen̄ cont tres acr̄ & dī, ab∣but su{per} Austr̄, &c. Ac etiā xxiiii. acr̄ Pastur̄ in
septem clausis, vnde vnum clm cont ix acr̄ iacen̄ apud Ducwell strete abbut super terr̄ W. H. versus Occiden̄, &c. Ac etiam quatuor acr̄ Prati in cōi Prato ibm̄ voc̄ Myulnemar∣shemeade, apud Sande Hille, &c. ac xxxi. acr̄ terr̄ arabl in tribus coī{bus} Cāpis pertin̄ Ma∣nerio pred, videlicet xix. acr̄ in Rubro Campo. vnde tres acr̄ et ii. furlonḡ iacent insimul apd Shepardes Bush ibm̄, &c. qd quidem ten̄tum custumar̄ quod olim vocabat Coliers, modo Hollandes, et erat quondā in tenur̄ Willm̄i Martyn hēnd et tenend predicto Nicholao at Stile, (si sit sibi et hered) dic, hered & assign̄ suis, si sit pro termino vite dic) et A vxore sue ac I. filij eorumdem et vtriusque eorum diu∣tius viuent (Si sit pro terīo annorum dic) executor̄ et assign̄ suis pro termino xxi. anno∣rum extunc prox. sequend et plenarie cōplen∣dorum, ad voluntat domini secundum consue tudinem Manerii, per redd lxii. s̄. ad felt san∣cti Michaelis archangeli, et Annunciationis beate Marie virgin̄ annuat soluend equal portionibus, et per alia seruicia inde prius debit et de iure consuet: et hēt coīam in am∣nibus communiis domini Manerii pred pro quibulcunque aueriis suis, et tenetur per cō∣suetudinem Manerii pred omnibus repara∣tionibus premissorū {pre}ter grāde Marenniū, et habent Firewoode; ex consuetudine apud boscum domini voc̄ Estouer, super tenemen∣tū suum pred expendend et non alibi, et dabūt annuatim ex consuetudine domino Maner̄ pred duas gallinas ad festum natal Domini. Ac etiam post mortem cuiuslibt tenentium
pred dabunt dn̄o quilibt eorum optimum Animal nomine Herriotte, et dedit domino de fine viii. li. pro tali statu habend, &c. et ad∣miss. sunt &c. et fecer̄ fidelitat &c.— Silis intrato fiat de terr̄ et Tene∣mentis ceterorum tenentium per co∣piam curie. Sed multi solēt breuiori modo agere Intracoēm eorum tenē∣tium custum̄. Communia, More et Bosci, ac Mari∣sce dict Manerio de Dale pertin̄, spe∣ctan̄ siue appenden̄. Communia vocat Wy∣mond cōmōMagna communia ibidem vocat Wymonde∣common, continens duo millia, et trecentas a∣cras terr̄ pertinet cōmuniter cam dn̄o & tenen∣tibus Manerii de Dale pred, quam dn̄is et te∣nentibus Maneriorum de H. et C. dicto Mane∣rio de Dale adiacen̄ siue contingen̄. Communia vocat MarshmoreAlia communia vocat Marshemore, continens quadringentas acras terr̄ pertin̄ proprie Dn̄o et tenētibus huius Manerii de Dale, et extēdit se a le Rosses woode in Orient, vsque Halliers Ponde in Occiden̄, et abbutt ver le Auster̄ su∣per, &c. Boscus cō∣munis voc̄ le Estouer.Boscus communis ibidem vocat le Estouer magna, pertinet proprie domino Manerii de Dale predict, et tenentibus eiusdem tam pro reparatione ceuementorum suorum, quam pro le Fewell eorundem ex consuetud, & extend ab Mores Lake, versus Orient ad Blande marle∣pitte
versus Occiden̄, et a Graies doune Lane, versus Austr̄ vsque Banierdes Shaue, versus Boreal, &c. Silis fiat intratio de horum silibus. And thus muche breefly for the engrossemente of a Sur∣uey and terrour, obseruyng as well the Rules, as formes of entries afore specified, maie well suffice. Note also, diuerse men addicted to their owne fantasies and mindes, do vse diuerse other formes, in makyng of Sur∣ueyes and terrours, whose doynges like as I will not re∣pugne, so I truste thei will not of their gentlenesse muche carpe at this, sette out of good will for enstruction, onely of suche as be ignoraunte in that facultie. But yet before I leaue treatyng hereof, I thinke good to put you in remembraunce, that one speciall pointe bee obser¦ued, in the entryng of all parcelles, that (by searchyng of the aunciente Euidences, Recordes, Bookes of Surueye, and Terrours of any Mannour, he doe as nere as he can, in his newe entrie in the Surueye booke or Terrour, at the en∣grossyng thereof, specifie it, and enter the olde seuerall na∣mes of euery Tenemente, Close, or suche: and also the names of suche olde Tenauntes as helde the same before, aswell as∣of them that holde it at this presente daie, and specially of the landes of freeholders, and this principall obseruation will not onely wonderfully preserue memorie, but also exclude doubtes, and be occasion from tyme to tyme to greate quiet∣nesse. A breef ensample whereof ensueth. Iohannes Doo.Tenet lib̄e de domino huius Manerii per Chartā, sibi et hered suis, (if it bee by Copie, saie) per Copiam cut &c. vnum Mesuagium siue Tenementum cum pertin̄ &c. olim vo∣cat
Shanckes, postea Shangrelles, et modo Tremors, olim in tenur̄ Willmi Shanck et postea Edmundi Tremour, et nuper Briani Tyson &c.— ¶ A bye Rule. Regula Apportionation̄ terrarum secundum reddit eiusdem. SOme Surueiours vse, some time to portionate the rente of euery Tenauntes holdyng, accordyng to the number, quantitie, and qualitie of the lande that he holdeth after the acre. That he maie thereby the better perceiue what euery Tenaunte commonly paieth for an acre, bee it Lande, Meadowe, Pasture, or woode, after the stinte of his rente, and if it be better thā the rente, then there by he vnderstandeth how muche more rente euery Acre is yerely worthe. But this enstruction with other some before specified, should not be made to common emongst those persones, who are ouergredie coueteous, that care not how thei racke their Tenauntes, to their owne dampnation, leaste thei abuse the same, to the oppressyng of their Tenauntes. Yet ye shal haue here a breefe example thereof. SVppose a Tenaunt holdeth a Meese or Tene∣mente, with Garden and Orchard, and twentie Acres of Pasture, thirtie Acres of arable, and fowertine Acres of Meadowe, (as for the wod∣lande, vnlesse it bee in those Mannours where it is lawfull for the Tenaunt to fell it, or after the same being stubbed, is made into Pasture, &c. is seldome vsed to be rated or apportionated.) And he paieth for all the same lx. s̄. yerely.
Now if it be knowen how muche of the saide Rente is yerely pated for the Pasture, howe muche for the errable, and howe muche for the Meadowe distinctly, either by seuerall reserua∣tion in tymes past, or how they were seuerally let heretofore, it were soone doone. (As for the House, Garden or Orcharde where there is aboue thirty or fiue and twenty Acres of land belongyng to it, in this kynde of apportionatyng, is seldome or neuer rated or apportionated) but vpō the Land, Meadow and Pasture onely. Then is the rate of the Lande aforesaide, in this maner apportionated. 2 In Pasture— xx. acr̄.—Rent xx. s̄. The acre xij. d. — Acr̄. liiij. 1 In errable —xxx. acres. Rent xv. s̄. The acre vi. d.—   3 In Meadowe xiiii. acr̄. Rent xxv. s̄. The acre xxj. d. ob. Rent lx. s̄. Carens i. d. in toto. Some write their Rate or Apportionation in this fourme followyng.   Acre reddus quelibet acr̄   2 In Pastur̄ xx. —xx. s̄.— xii. d. Sūma acrar̄—liiii 1 In terr̄ arabil xxx.—xv. s̄.—vi. d.   3 In Prato. xiiii.—xxv. s̄. xxj. d. ob Sūma reddus— lx. s̄     Carens i. d. in toto. Thus where the Rente is seuerally reserued for euery na∣ture or kinde of lande a seuerall certaine rente, it may easely as ye see, be rated or aportionated. And if this bee the case en∣suyng as it most comonly chaunceth, that the seuerall rentes are vncertaine. As a Tenaunt holdeth a tenement and twenty foure acres errable, twelue acres Pasture, and eight acres meadowe, or such like, now to rate or apportionate the same is somewhat difficulte. And before ye can make any substanciall apportio∣nation, Ye must partly knowe the goodnes and fruitfulnes or
fertillity of euery suche lande, Meadowe and Pasture. For in suche a place the same maye lye that the errable is not worth iiii. d. an acre, but lesse, and in suche place it may lye, that an acre errable is worth xii. d. xvi. d. yea xx. d. an acre and more. And in like maner the Pasture may lye in some place, that it is worthe iii. s̄. iiii. d. or iiii. s̄. or more, an acre, and in some place liyng againe it is worthe scante xii. d. an acre or lesse. The Meadow likewise may lye in some suche place, that it is worth yerely vi.s̄. viii. d. x.s̄. yea xiii. s̄. iiii. d. or xx. s̄. an acre, beyng enclosed and lowe grounde. And againe in some place it may so lye, that it may bee to deare of v.s̄. an acre, either for that it is baren, or lieth high, or liyng lowe and fenny, it may be full of Rushes, Flagges, or knotgrasse. And all these good∣nesses of grounde may bee sometyme in one Mannour. Yea sometyme belongyng to one Tenement. Therefore in this, and suche like cases the rent must be apportionated after the goodnes, and badnesse, of the kindes of groūd, accordyng on∣ly to the prudente discretion of the Surueiour, without a ru∣le, or if ye will needes desire, a certaine fourme to apportio∣nate suche vncertainties (as moste men dooe couet to haue a certainty prescribed in euery thing) Then let this following be your waye, or meane, which I haue knowen some men vse, called a supposition pro incerto, as they tearme it. Apportionate the rente in the second case aforesaide, by al∣lottyng first to euery acre of the arrable xii. d. an acre, let this be the roote nowe, or foundation. Then allotte vpon euery a∣cre of Pasture alwaies double asmuche and halfe as muche, as is allotted vpon an acre errable, and then is here euery a∣cre of pasture ii.s̄. vi. d. And thā allot vpō euery acre of Mea∣dowe foure tymes as muche and halfe as muche as is allot∣ted also vpon any acre errable, which as the number of acres of meadowe doe arise here, is fower shillynges sixe pence vp∣pon the acre, as thus.
In terr̄ arabil xxiiii. acr̄ reddit xxiiii.s̄. quelib̄t acr̄ xii. d. sum̄ acr̄ xliiii sūm̄ redd. 4. l x.s̄. In Pastur̄— xii.acr̄ reddit xxx.s̄.—quelib̄t acr̄ ii.s̄. vi. d. sum̄ acr̄ xliiii sūm̄ redd. 4. l x.s̄. In Prat—viii. acr̄. reddit xxxvi.s̄. quelībt acr̄ iiii.s̄. vi. d. sum̄ acr̄ xliiii sūm̄ redd. 4. l. x.s̄. This maner of apportionatyng some doe vse when they would redily see a present apportionaciō (although, nere al∣waies beyng vncertayne, because it is founded vpon a suppo∣sition vncertaine. But the best and surest waie is to make the apportionatiō alwaies by the knowledge and discretion that is to say accordyng to the goodnes and fertilitie of the lande, and seldome otherwise. ¶The sixt Rule. ¶The fourme how a Suite Rolle shoulde be engrossed and kepte. Libi. Tenentes qui debent annual a secta ad Leta et cur̄ Baron̄ Manerij de Dale pred. HEnricus at Noke, pro lib̄o tēnt suo in Halstrete, cum pertim̄ idem. Henricus pro vn̄ crofto vocat Peches woode. Willms Boothe pro vno Horreo et xiiii. acr̄ terr̄ in South∣fielde. Edmundus Brainthorpe pro vno prato iuxta Hobbes mede. Silis fiat intracio de his sili{bus}, sed si sunt ad cōpositio∣nem cum dn̄o Manerij reddere annual finē certum, pro sectis ad Cur̄ pred, tunc intitulatur illa finis in margi∣ne super caput eiusdem in hac forma. Finis {pro} an∣nual sect 12. d Richardus Moreton pro vno Tenemento cum pertin̄ in le Scadesborne fte et sic de eteris.
¶The seuenth Rule. The forme and instruction how to engrosse, and kepe a customarie Rolle of a Mannour. Custionar̄ siue Rotul omnium et singulorum cu∣stumariorum in Manerio de Dale pred, de tem∣pore ex quo non extat memoria hominum ibm̄, vsitat et approbat, fact, renouat ac indentat inter dūm Manerii predex vna parte ac tenentes eius∣dem Maner̄ ex altera {per}te. x. Augusti anno &c. Maneriū de Dale.EST quedam antiqua consuetudo infra Manerium predict, quod nullus Tenen∣tium eiusdem Manerij potest dimittere Tenementum suum cum pertin̄, vel a∣liquam inde parcellam alicui extraneo qui habit extra limites huius Manerii, nisi solummodo alicui tenenti infra Ma∣nerium pred, sine licentia domini, ac etiam non dimittet tali tenenti neque, nisi pro termino vnius anni, et sic de anno in annum, ne licentia domini, sub pena forisfactur̄ status sui in Tenemento pred, vel parcell terr sic dimiss, &c. Ac etiam quod nulls tenentium Manerii pred decidet, nec ender aliquos Boscos super tenementum suum custum̄, vel aliquam parcellam eidem Tenemento pertinen̄, crescen̄, sine licentia domini, sub pena pred &c. Acetiam quod vnumquodque tenementum pertinen̄ huic manerio est herietabil et dominus manerii pred Seisabit in manus suas proprias ad op suum vnumquodque optimum animal quod aliquis tene habuit tempore mortis sue no∣mine heriott &c.
Item vnusquisque tenentium tenetur per consuetud te∣nemēta sua in omnibus ad sumptus suos proprios de tempo∣re in tempus sufficienter reparare et manutenere in omni∣bus reparationibus preter grande maremium sub penaforis∣fact pred &c. Ac etiam vnusquisque tenentium tenetur, per consuetu∣dinem eiusdem maner̄ antiquam, dare domino annuatim in fest natalis domini duos Capones, et in festo Pentecostes tres Anseres &c. Et silis fiat intratio de ceteris custum̄ alicui Mane∣rio quocunque spectan̄. ¶The eight Rule. The forme and maner how to make a true and perfecte ready Rentall of a Mannour, when the same shall bee deliuered to any Bailife, Reue, or Collectour to gather by. REntale Iohannis at Stile militis,Maneriū de Dale. dn̄i Manerij pred ibidem renouat & examinat decimo die Decembr̄, Anno regni domine nostre Elizabeth, Dei gra∣tia Anglie &c. Regine tertio, per A. G. Superuisor̄ terr̄ domini pred, Soluend ad festa Annūciationis beate Marie vir∣ginis, et Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, annuatim equali∣ter. vz. Reddit assil. liberorum Tenentium. De Anthonio Milles pro libo Reddū vnius tenti in Southelake cum cert parcell terr̄ eidem tene∣mento pertinen̄. viii. s̄.
D' Augustino Northall pro libo Redd v∣nius croft ibidem vocat Pastours, continen̄ iiii. acr̄ et dī. x. s̄. D' Hered Iohannis Hutton pro libo reddū vnius messuagij cum pertin̄ et cert percel∣larum terr̄ in Harston, infra manerium pred per annum. xxiii. s̄. i. d. ob. Sum̄ Redd liborum tenentium xli. s̄. i. d. ob. Reddit assis. scitus Manerij cum terr̄ dominicalibus. D'Ambrosio Stouer firmar̄ scitus Mane∣rij predict cum diuersis terr̄, prac̄, et Pastur̄ dominicalibus per annum. xxxviii. l. xix. s̄ D'Richardo Morrisin firmario vnius clau∣si Pastur̄ dominical vocat Cowlease, cont xl acr̄ per annum. vii. li. ii. s̄. Summa Reddit terr̄ dn̄icalium. xlvi. li. xii. d. Reddit assis. Custum̄ tenen̄ ibidem. D' Willmo Bortmocher pro redd tenti sui cum pertin̄ per annum. iiii. li. xii. s̄. D' Iohanne Tirlynger pro redd tenemēti sui custr̄ eum pertin̄ per annum. iii. li. ii. s̄. D' Henrico Marshe pro redd Tenementi sui custum̄ cum pertin̄ voc̄ Tilers. iii. li. D' Briano Barret pro redd vnius Tene∣menti custum̄ voc̄ Martens. xl. s̄.
D' Oswaldo Barton, pro redd Tenementi sui custum̄ cum pertinen̄. xxxiiii. s̄. D' Rogero Marlebrough pro Tenemento suo custum̄ voc̄ Wrangles. xviii. s̄. Sum̄ redd custum̄. xv. li. ii. s̄. Summa total Rental pred. lxiii. l. iiii. s̄. i. d. ob. Memorandū that in like forme, as I haue shewed you by the example of this Rentall, so maie you doe in all other. The ninth Rule. I Haue vnder correction partlye set out, (although maister Fitzhar∣bert hath shewed many good four∣mes already) certaine fourmes of suche estates by copy hold, and spe∣cially the leauiyng of a Fyne and recouerie in a custumarie Court for Barryng of an Entaile of Custumarie Landes, not at any tyme heretofore els published, whiche was of the diligent and ex∣acte penning of the late right worshipfull and wel learned Maister Iustice Staunforde, late one of the Iustices of the common Bench at Westmin∣ster, accordyng to the copie & true report thereof. AD cur̄ Manerij ibm̄ tent die Mercurij proxim̄ post festum Apostolorum Philippi et Iacobi,Sursum redd in ple∣na curia. Anno, &c. ven̄. T. B. et Surs. redd in Man̄ dn̄i in plena cur̄ vnum tenementum scituat in wod∣lane abbutt super Tentm̄ I.B. ex parte Occi∣dental, &c. xxiiii. acr̄ terr̄ Prati et Pastur̄ cum pertin̄ ad o∣pus et vsum I.L. et Hered. suorum, qui presens hic in cur̄ pe∣tit
admitti ad premis. cui Dn̄s per Senescallum suū conces∣sit inde Seiām: habendum et tenēdum sibi, et Heredibus suis de dn̄o per virgam ad voluntatem domini,Finis. secundum consue∣tudinem Manerij per reddit et seruit inde prius debit, et de iure consuet, et dat dn̄o de fine prout pʐ in margine, et fecit fi∣delitatem et admissus est inde tenens. Surs. re∣ūcōis.Ad Cur̄ ibm̄ tent, &c. Homaḡ present quod H.H. qui de Domino tenuit sibi et heredibus suis reuersionē vnius clau∣si, pastur̄, &c. infra istud maneriū, quorum I.H. vidua est teēns ad terminum vite sue, diem clausit extremum, post vltimam Curiam. Et quod R.H. eius Auunculus est illi heres, scilicet frater Thome H. pris̄ pred H.H. et est plene etatis, qui prn̄s hic in Cur̄ petit admitti ad reuersionem terr̄ pred I. H. ma∣ter dit. H.H. vt supradict est, cui dominus per sen̄ suum con∣cessit inde Seiām: habendum et tenendum sibi et heredibus suis secundum consuetudinē Manerij pred per redd et seruit inde prius debit,Finis. &c. et dat domino de fine prout pʐ, &c. et fecit fidelitatem et admissus est inde tenens. Vbi mari∣tus tenet in iure vxoris et vbi eis relaxetur per alterūAd Cur̄ ibm̄ tent, &c. com{per}tum est per Homagium quod W.H. post vltim̄ Cur̄ Surs. redd in manus dn̄ vnum tene∣mentum. &c. infra istud Manerium ad opus et vsum. M. vxis̄ eius et hered suorum. Et super hoc ven̄ in plena Cur̄. I.H. qui iam dict Margaret in vxorem duxit cum predict M. et petunt admitti ad premis. quibus dn̄s per Senescallum suū concessit eis inde Seiām. Habendum et tenēdum eis, et He∣red dicte Margarete de Dn̄o per virgam ad voluntat Domi∣ni, scdm̄ consuetudinem Maner̄ pred per redd et seruicia, &c. Et dat dn̄o de fine. &c. et fecit fidelitatem, &c. Et admis. sunt inde tenent. Et postea ven̄ S. T. Et Surs. redd, relaxauit et quiet clamauit dict I. H. et Margaret vxor̄ eius in plena et pacifica possessione existen̄, de et in tenementis pred totum ius, statum, titulum, clameū, interesse conditiones et demand sua quecunque hūit hēt, seu hītur̄ sit de et in ten̄to, &c. Ita vt Finis.nec prefat S.T. Hered seu assign̄ sui post hac aliquod ius cla∣meū
seu demand de et in premis. aut aliqua inde {per}cella exige∣re, seu vendicare poterint, vel poterit. Sed ab omni accōne iuris, tituli, et interesse inde petend penitus sint exclusi im∣perpetuum per presentes. hend &c. vt supra. Ad Cur̄ maner̄,Vbi Heres redempt e∣rit terr̄ im∣pignorat per prēm. &c. compertum est per Homagium quod R. P. est filius et heres, H.P. qui quidē R.P. ingres. cert terr̄, &c. Que dudum impignorat fuerunt. I P. et iam redempt sunt per I.A. qui mr̄em dicti R. in vxorem duxit. Et sic idem R. in∣gressus est terr̄ prediure hereditar̄, at post decessum. H. pred vt filius et heres dict. H. cui quidem Ricō dn̄s per Senescal∣lum fuū concessit inde seīam̄. Habendum et tenendum sibi et hered suis de dn̄o per virgam ad voluntatem dn̄i, secundum consuetudinem Manerii per redd. &c. Et dat dn̄o de fine, &c. Et fecit, &c. et admis. &c. Ad Cur̄ tent. &c. venit. I. T. nuper relict. I.T. viri sui de∣funct,Relaxacō dotis vidue post mortē viri sui. et pretend her̄e titl in vna domo. &c. vīz. tertiam partē omnium terrarum et tenementorum reddit, & seruit cum {per}∣tin̄ noīe Dotis sue ex Dotatione dict I. T. viri sui, et pro quadam pecuniarum Sum̄a sibi per Willm A. pre manibus solut sursum redd, remisit, et relaxauit totum ius suum, statū, titulum clameū interesse et demand sua quecunque, que hūit, hēt seu hītur̄ sit in premis. Ita videll quod nec ipsa Iohanna nec hered sui, nec aliquis alius noīe suo vel eorū, aliquod ius. flatum, titlm, clameum interesse seu demand de et in premis. vel aliqua inde parcella exigere, vel vendicare poterint. Sed ab omni accōe Iuris, status, tituli, interesse,Licentia dimittendi terr̄ custum̄ sed demand peni∣tus sint exclusi im{per}{per}uū per presentes. Ad Cur̄ ibm̄ tent, &c. conceditur R.H. vidue, potestas, et li∣centia dimittend vnum claus. pastur̄ voc̄. N. vz. cum pertin̄ ia∣cen̄ et existen̄ infra istud Menerium. T.P. et assign̄ suis a se∣sto, &c. vltim̄ preterit, vsque ad finem Termini xxi. annorum,Finis. tunc proxime sequend & complend. Et dat Domino de fine pro licentia inde hēnd vt pʐ in margine.Pro terio vite. Ad hanc Cur̄ ven̄ I.H. et R. vxor eius, ipsa sola exaīata co∣ram
senescallo, et sursum redd in manus dm̄ vnum tenement cum pertin̄ iacen̄ inter tenement F. H. &c. ad opus et vsum G. H. & I vxor̄ eius ad terminum vite eorum, et alterius eo∣rum diutius viuen̄,Finis. secundum consuetudinem Mauerij, et dant domino de fin̄, &c. et fcr̄, &c. et admis. sunt, &c. Surs. redd. su{per} condi∣tionē.Ad Cur̄ ibm̄ tent &c. venit I.H. et Surs. redd in manus domini vnum tenementum, &c. abbutt, &c. ad opus et vsum R. F. &c. hend et tenend sibi et heredibus suis, de domino ad vo∣luntatem domini scdm, &c. sub conditionibus sequentibus, vi∣delt si pred R. F. soluat, aut solui faciat prefato, I.H. xx. li. ad festa infrascripta vīz, &c. et ad fest &c. proxim̄ futur̄ post da∣tum huius curie, quod tunc prius sursum redd, sit in suo ro∣bore et effectu. Et si ipse defecerit in solutione solutionū pred. in parte vel in toto, &c. quod tunc bene licebit I.H. pred et as∣sign̄ suis reincrare in premis. et ea rehēre, ista sursum redd in aliquo nō obstan̄. Et dat domino de fin̄, &c. et fecit fidelitat, &c. Et admissus est. &c. Vbi dn̄s cō cedit pro¦terīo anno∣rum cum claus. repa∣ration̄.AD Cur̄ ibidem tent &c. Dominus per A. B. Senes∣callum suum concessit R. F. vnum messuagium cum domibus edificiis &c. ac ceteris suis pertm̄ vocat. N. hend et tenend sibi et assign̄ suis a festo sancti Michaelis Archangeli, vltimo preterito ante dat huius Curie, vsque ad finem et terminum xxi. annorum, extunc proxime sequen̄ et plenarie cōplend. Reddend inde annuatim dicto domino, et hered suis x. s̄. ad quatuor anni terminos viz, ad festa &c. per equales portiōes. Prouiso semper, quod duran̄ termino pred dominus inueniet grāde maremium, totiens quotiens neces∣sarium fuerit dicto tenemento, ad emendend, reparand, et su∣stinend, et dat domino de fine &c. Et fecit fidelitatem &c. Et admiss. est &c. The forme of a Copie for terme of thrée liues, as it is commonly vsed in the coūties of Deuon̄, Corn̄, Somers. Dorss. &c. where the Tenaun∣tes
take their holdynges of the lettyng of the Surueyour. &c. AD Cur̄ Maner̄ ibm̄ tent &c. venit I.G. et cepit de dn̄o ex traditione R.F. Armiger̄,Maneriū de Sale. {per}ticular̄ superuisor̄ ter∣rarum domini ibm̄. per literas eiusdem domini paten̄ sufficient autorizat, dat &c. vnum tenemētū cum pertin̄, cont xxxvi. acr̄ terr̄ et iiii. acr̄ prat abuttat &c. habend, et tenend oīa & singula premiss. cū suis pertin̄ prefat. I.G. & Elizabeth vxori eius, ac Agnet filie eorumdm ad terminum vite eorum et alterius eorum diutius viuen̄ successiue, ad voluntatem dm̄ secundum consuetudinē Maner̄, per redd et seruic̄ inde prius debit et de iure consuet. Et dat domino de fine xxiiii.Finis 24 l. li. sol∣uend, ad manus Balliui Manerii pred, ad iiii. proxim̄ cōput equaliter &c. Et fecit fidelitat &c. Et admissus̄ est. &c. An exacte forme of a Recouerie of Copieholde lande, for barryng of annuitie, fact et dimiss. per W. Staung. AD hanc Cur̄ tent &c. Ven̄ I.H. filius W.H. de S. in propr̄ persona sua,Querela quedam de recupera∣tione. et quer̄ versus I. A. filium et hered W. A. defunct in plito terr̄ videlt de vno tenemento, et xviii. acr̄ terr̄ custum̄, & heriott cum pertin̄ voc̄ Welles, ac vn̄ acr̄ terr̄ voc̄ B. et T. pred infra iurisdictionem huius Curie, et fecit protestationem prosequi querelam istam, in natura bris̄ domini Regis de ingr̄id super disseīamin le post ad cōem legem, et inuen̄ plegios de prosequend querelam suam, Iohannem Do, et Ricardū Roo, et petit process. inde ei fieri versus pred Iohannem A. secundum consuetud Maner̄ erga proximam Cur̄ hic infra Maner̄ pred tenend. Et ei conceditur: super quo preceptum est W. T. Ballio Maner̄ pred, at ministr̄ huius cur̄ quod Summone at per bonos Sū monitor̄ prefat I. quod. sic hic ad proximam Cur̄ tenend: ad
respondend prefat I.H. de plito pred. Forma re∣cuperatio∣nis ī curia.AD hanc Curiam ven̄ tam I.H. quam Iohannes A. et Willmus T. Balliuus domini Manerii pred, ac minister huius Cur̄ et retorn̄ quod preceptum suum ad vltimam Cur̄ sibi direct in omnibus seruit & execut super quo ven̄ pred Iohannes H. in propria persona sua, et per li∣centiam domini petit versus pred Iohannem A. vnum tene∣mentum et xviii. acr̄ terr̄ custumar̄ et herriott cum pertin̄ in T. pred infra iurisdictionem huius Curie, vt ius et heredi∣tatem suam: et in quam idem I. A. non habet inḡrū nisi per disseīam quam Hugo Hunt, inde iniuste et sine iudicio fecit prefat I.H. infra quinquaginta annos, iam vltime elapsos. Et vnde dicit quod ipse fuit seisitus de pred tenemēto, et xviii acr̄ terr̄ custum̄ cum pertin̄ in T. pred in dn̄ico suo, vt de feod et iure, tempore pacis tēpore dn̄i Regis H. viii. nuper Regis Anglie pris̄ domine Regine nunc, capiend inde exples̄ ad va∣lentiam &c. et in que &c. Et inde produt̄ sectam &c. et pred I. A. in propria persona sua ven̄ et defend ius suum quando &c. Et vocat inde ad Warrātizand W. R. qui presens est hic in Curia in propria persona, et grat tenement et xviii. acr̄ terr̄ pred ei warrantiz. Et super hoc predictus Iohannes, petit versus ipsum W. Rede ten̄ per Warrant suum tenementum et xviii. acr̄ terr̄ cum pertin̄ in forma pred &c. Et vnde di∣cit quod ipsemet fuit seisitus de tenemento pred, et xviii. acr̄ terr̄ cum pertin̄ in dominice suo vt de feod, et iure, tempore pacis, tempore domini Regis H. viii. nuper Regis Anglie pris̄ domine Regine nunc, capiend inde exples ad valentiam &c. et in que &c. inde produc̄ sectam &c. Et predict W. Rede ten̄ per Warrentiam suam defend ius suum quando &c. Et postea idem Iohannes H. reuenit hic in Curia ista in pro∣pria persona sua, & pred Wilmus Rede licet solempnit exac∣tus non reuenit sed in contempt Curie recessit, et defaltum fecit, ideo concessum est per curiam quod predn̄s I. H. recu∣peret
seiam̄ de pred tenemēto, & xviii. acr̄ ter̄ cum pertin̄ ver∣sus prefat Iohannem A. Et quod idem Iohannes A. habeat de terr̄ et tenementis pred Willmi Rede, infra Manerium pred ad valentiam &c. Et idem Willmus Rede sit in mīa. Et super hoc in ista eadem Cur̄ ven̄ pred Iohannes H. et hu∣militer petit quod ipsum Iohannem ad pred tenement, et octodecim acr̄ terr̄ cultum̄ cum pertin̄ secundum formam Re∣cuperationis pred admittere dignaretur. Et super hoc dūs per senescallum suum concessit prefat Iohanni et hered suis seīam premissorum cum pertin̄ tenend sibi et hered suis quiet de prefat Iohanne A. et hered suis im{per}pum̄ secundum for∣mam Recuperationis pred de dn̄o per virgam ad volūtatem domini secundum consuetudinem Maner̄ pred per reddit &c. et dat domino de fine &c. Et postea in eadem Cur̄ ven̄ pred Iohannes, et Dorothea vxor eius, ipsaque Dorothea per se∣nescallum sola examinata et confess. per sursumredd remiser̄ et relaxauer̄ prefat Iohanni H. et hered suis totum ius suum stat, titulum, clameum, interesse, & demand sua quecunque que habent hūerunt, vel in futur̄ hēre poterint in pred tent, et xviii. acr̄ terr̄ cum pertin̄. Ita videlicet quod nec ipsi Iohā∣nes, et Dorothea, nec heredes sui, nec aliquis alius nomine eorum, aliquod ius vel clameum in pred ten̄, ec xviii. acr̄ terr̄ de cetero exigere, vel vendicare poterit, vel poterint, sed ab omni actione Iur̄, vel clamei sint exclus. et quilt eorum sit ex∣clus. per presentes. Et dat domino de fine pro relaxatione pred.—xiii. s̄. iiii. d. And now thus muche maie at this tyme suffice, touchyng the entrie of the estates of Copie holde Landes, if ye will see more, I referre you to master Fitz Harberts woorke.
The tenth Rule. BEcause it is partely appertaining to the Office of a Surueiour, to haue some vnderstandyng in mea∣suryng and meating of Lande and wood grounde, and how to reduce the same into true Contentes and numbers of Acres, as often and when as occasion shal require: Al∣though they that desire the ful and perfecte knowledge thereof, may reade the same out of the aunciente Bookes of Architas and Archimedes, or of worthy Euclides treatyng of the whole sci∣ence of Geometrie, or els for this parte Geometricall, one∣ly for measuryng of Landes, the Booke of Richarde Benese, late Chanon of Marton, and the Tectonicon of maister Leo∣narde Digges our Countreiman, verie well sett out in our daies: Although I might (I say) leaue men to those Bookes for their instruction in this matter, where as they may learne twentie partes more then I can enfourme them: Yet because fewe men are ripe therein, neither the same Bookes are al∣waies at hande at nedefull tymes when occasion requireth, I haue therfore thought good, leauyng and passyng ouer an in∣numerable number of examples, (and also the Geometricall Instrument or Staffe vntouched) onely hereunto to annexe, and set out in briefe maner, for the Surueiours better en∣struction: firste, the partes whereinto an Acre is deuided: Se∣condly, a fewe plaine examples amongeste manye, for measu∣ryng of Land, and Wood, aswell Hilles as Vallies, which di∣ligently considered and perused by any willynge or sensible parson, he may with practise, sufficiētly vnderstande the true measuryng of all maner of parcelles of Landes and Wodds whatsoeuer. And specially thou shalt haue also (Gentle Rea∣der)
in the ende thereof, a ready and fruitfull Table for Con∣tentes of Landes, much more amplified then Digges Table is. Onely desiryng this of thée, Gentle Reader, whatsoeuer thou be, that howe soeuer my simple labour shall like thée, yet, without any detractyng or dispraise, to accept in good parte my willyng industrie. ¶The Partes or Diuisions of one Acre with the Denominations of the same, accordyng to the Statute here mentioned. Thrée Barley cornes faire and rounde, taken out of the myd∣dest of the Eare, maketh an Inche. Twelue Inches make a Foote. Thrée foote make a Yarde. Fiue yards and a halfe maketh a Pearch, whiche in some coun∣tries men call a Pole or Rod. a Pearche. Foure Pearches make a day worke. Tenne daye workes or fourtie Pearches maketh a rode or quart of an Acre. Fourescore Pearches or twoo Roodes maketh halfe an Acre. A hundreth and lx. Perches or twoo Roodes, make an Acre. And fortie Perches in length, and foure in breadth is. ¶A Generall Rule to be learned of the simple, to cast Pearches and dayworkes into Acres. AS a Marke of Englishe money, containeth twoo Nobles, which containe Clx. d. that is euery No∣ble foure scoure pence: & euery halfe Noble xl. d: So an acre cōtaineth Clx. perches, halfe an acre
foure scoure Perches, and the quarter of an acre or roode, xl. Perches. And in euery Marke is xl. grotes, and in euerie Grote. iiii. d. so is there in euery Acre xl. daye woorkes, and in euery day worke foure Perches. Thus by rate of money, perches and daieworkes are ease∣ly reduced into acres: or in this maner also euery x. s̄. is thrée quarters of an Acre, and euery pounde in money is one acre and a halfe. Jnstruction for Introduction. TO aunswere by Rodde or by line, it is at your pleasure, but of them both the lyne is the spedier and most com∣modious, and also of most antiquitie. Your line beyng foure Perches of lengthe, and at euery pearche ende a knot, would be well seared with hoate Waxe and Rosen, to auoide stretching thereof in the wete, and shrin∣king in the drought. Also you must note, there are diuerse fashions of landes, and therefore diuersly to be measured. And some manner of lande lieth in suche sondrie fourmes, that it must needes be measu∣red, not in the whole, but in diuers parcelles, euery parte by it self. Also where a pece of Lande is to be deuided into diuers partes, of whiche eche one muste bee measured by hym selfe, then ye ought vigilauntly to consider, into how many parcel∣ls, and into how many and what maner fashions they must be diuided, that ye may measure euery parte, accordyng to his fourme or fashion.
diagram BVt before I enter into the decla¦ratiō of any exāples, I must first enforme you. That whē any line (which cutteth any side of a Triangle or suche like euen crosse) maketh the thinge it deuideth, like vnto a Car∣penters squire, I do alwaies tearme, suche a line to fall, light, or hit, squier∣wise. And I name that line, the depē∣ding line, and sometime I call it hereafter, the whipped line, because I haue fourmed it, in all the Figures like a littell whipcorde, that by suche difference ye may know it from the other lines, being also the principall worker for the learning of all quantities. And that side or parte of euerie three corne∣red or triangled peece of Lande, whiche the saide dependyng or whipped line cutteth, to bee called the base line. And note also euery peece of Lande is named a Triangle, when it hath or is supposed to haue only three corners or angles, and thrée sides, whether the sides be equall or not: and likewise they be called squares, that haue foure sides or foure corners, whe∣ther they differ in widenes or not. Note also that howsoeuer your péece of lande be fourmed or fashioned, be it square or partly square, rounde or partely rounde, triangled or partly triangled, or a hill mountyng, or a valley descending (of some of al which figures ye shall here∣after see examples) Yet alwaies must suche peeces of Lande whatsoeuer it bee, bee reduced into one certaine breadth and one certaine length, or els it can neuer bee collected or sum∣med into a perfecte contente or number of Acres, and other odde quantities. The findyng out of whiche Lengthes and Breadthes, my examples ensuyng shall throughly shewe you. ¶The firste Rule, called the Rule of Squares. Now because the euen Squares bee the easiest to be mea∣sured,
and therefore beste firste to bee placed, for the instructiō of learners, I thought requisite to beginne first with them. ¶ Example of Squares. SVppose your peece of Lande to be square, that is to say, equall of breadth at both endes and equall of length at both the sides, after this figure ensuing, whereof the sides is, 40. perches a péece of length, and the breadth is 10. per∣ches a peece. diagram Then is there no more to doe, but the same being so mea∣sured and found, multiply the length with the breadth of the Perches whiche is here. 40. by 10. And being so multiplied, it commeth to 400 Perches, whiche if ye seeke in the Table hereafter followyng set out for contentes (or els doe caste it into acres, or otherwise by rate of money, as in the generall rule aforesaide is shewed you, you shal finde that péece to con∣taine 2. Acres. 2. Roodes. But if a peece of lande bee on all diagram sides equall, after this figure ensu∣yng, as if it bee 10. perches on eue∣ry side: then muste you multiply the length with the breadth: That is to saie, 10 by 10 (or els seeke the con∣tente in the Table, and it amoun∣tyng to 100 perches, whiche ma∣keth halfe an Acre, or 2. roodes, and 5. daie workes.
And where some vnskilfull measurers, vse to meate a peece of lande rounde about, of whatsoeuer fashion it bee, ad∣dyng the number of perches of euery side together, and then vse to parte the whole number of Perches, into foure equall portions, of whiche, they will take one parte of the breadth, and the other for the length, thei are not a little deceiued. The seconde Rule, called the rule of Triangles. Moreouer, a man maie not onely caste the squares afore∣saied, and all other square lande if he please (though for such, the rule aforesaied is the spedier) by the rule of Triangles hereafter ensuyng. But also there is almoste no maner of fa∣shioned lande, but it may by diligence be brought, or deuided into Triangles, and so by the Triangle Rule, the iuste con∣tent of Acres founde and measured. Example of peeces of Lande Triangled and first of the euen Triangle. To measure this peece of lande, imagined to bee of the si∣militude of an euen Triangle, and likewise all other Trian∣gled lande, of the diagram Figures here af∣ter sette out: Admitte this Figure ensuyng to be a parcell of Lande, of whiche my desire is to haue the iust and true measure. There aboute is written as ye see
B C D E. I finde by measuryng corde, or suche like, that the dependyng, or whipped line B, C, is 24. perches and the base line D. E, whiche the dependyng line cutteth in forme of a squire, to bee 24. also. Then multiplie 24. Perches by halfe the dependyng line, whiche is 12 Perches, and it amoun∣teth to 288 Perches, whiche summed into Acres, make one Acre, three Roodes, and twoo daie woorkes. But for your more spede of castyng, if you please, when you haue found the iuste length, and breadth of any figure, repaire to the Table hereafter described, and that will shewe you the iuste number of Acres. And in like maner muste you doe of this vneuen Trian∣gle, and of all these seuen Triangles followyng, and suche like: as for an other example. Imagine this presente figure, totted ouer the corners with F. G. H. I. to bee suche a like peece of Lande, whereof ye couette to haue the full and iuste measure: it is founde by meating, that the dependyng line F. H. is 22. Perches, and the netherside line, or base line, which the saied dependyng line, or whipped line cutteth, or deuideth squirewise diagram whiche is G.I. to be 40. Now if ye loke in the Ta∣ble follo∣wyng for the Num∣bers of 40 multiplied by 11, whi∣che is the halfe of the dependyng line: ye shall finde, it containeth twoo
Acres, three Roodes. But if ye had rather trie the truthe by multipliyng the same yourself, ye must multiplie 40. beyng the length, with halfe the breadth, beyng 11. as is aforesaied, and ye shall see, the summe will amounte to 440. Perches, whiche easte into Acres, is 2. Acres, 3. Roodes. And this is the generall rule of all maner of Triangles, as well presently hereafter figured, as of all other whatsoe∣uer thei bee. Also it is the principallest rule for measuryng of lande.
diagram
But and if your Triangle bee a peece of lande, that is a double Triangle, in the forme of this figure followyng the maie you deuide it, either into diagram Triangles, if you liste, and so measure it, or els ye maie doe thus. Suppose the dependyng line to bee 66. Perches, and the middle line, whiche it deui∣deth squirewise, beyng totted at the endes with I. K. to bee 40 Perches, the halfe whereof is 20. now haue you the iuste length and breadth of this Fi∣gure, wherwith ye maie, if you please, repaire to the Table hereafter expressed: or els if ye will trie it your self, then mul∣tiplie the length, whiche is frō H. K. 66. with 20. which is in this foresaied Figure euen halfe the breadth, and then the summe Producte, amounteth to 1320. Perches, whiche being reduced into Acres, maketh, 8. Acres and one roode. The Rules for vnequall parcelles of Lande. NOw when any péece of Lande happeneth to bee of suche fourme, that it hath many pointes & Corners vnequally fourmed: Then because it is yet neither triangle nor square, it is without the compasse of your Rules before specified, vn∣till they be deuided, as the proportion of the Figures follow∣yng do shewe, and suche like. Then ye must by seperation de∣uide them into partes, That is to sainc 2. 3. 4. or me par∣tes, as cause shall require, either into triangles or squares. And note that first. I shewe you Figures, of three imagines péeces of Lande, or euer they bee  by the sepratyng
line, as the examples hereafter doe declare and shew. Ye must cast euery parcel triangled or squared, by the order of the Ru∣les afore specified. diagram ¶ Examples of the saile vnequall figures afore∣saide here as ye see nowe separated. NOWE as concernyng these Figures afore also shewed, ye see howe nowe they be by the lyne of se∣paraion (whiche is the dashed line) separated or seuered, that is to say the first into one square and
twoo triangles, without the dashed line. The seconde figure into 2. trian∣gles, and the thirde into thrée triangles by the dashed line. And for example, the first diagram figure. The Square in the middest is euerye side 10. perches, and so one side be∣yng ten, multiplied by the other side being also tenne, maketh. 100. Perches, which doth amount to two Roodes & fiue day workes. Now the descending wip∣ped line of the 2. triangles at the endes of ye said square suppose to be 6. Perches a péece, & the said side whiche they cut squarewise 10. per∣ches, then multiplie either of the said 2. sides cut squa∣rewise, with half the depen∣ding lines being 3. a peece, and it maketh either of the said triangles 7. day woor∣kes and 3. perches a peece. And so the whole some of the firste figure caste toge∣ther, is 1. Acre & 2. perches. Nowe ye sée the second fi∣gure by the line dashed, cal∣led the line of separation, to be deuided into 2. parcelles of lande triangled. The hā∣gyng line of the vppermost whereof, Imagine to be 8
Perches, and the dashed line whiche it cutteth squarewise to be 12. Perches. And so ye halfe of the depending line beyng 4. multiplied by 12. maketh 1. Roode & 2. day workes. And li∣kewise the dependyng line of the nether parcell of the saide fi∣gure is 6. and the base line which it deuideth squarewise. 12. Perches and so the halfe of 6. whiche is 3. multiplied by. 12. maketh. 36. Perches, whiche is 9. dai workes. And so the whole péece of lande or figure containeth. 3. Roodes and 1. day worke. And ye sée the thirde figure is nowe deuided by the twoo dashed lines of separation into thrée triangles, whiche con∣taineth as in the figure I haue set out, without any further rehearsall, for auoyding of tediousnes. Also some péeces of Lande as these twoo figures ensuyng, and suche like, albeit they may be deuided into triangles, and so by the Rule of triangles measured, yet haue they a proper Rule for the more celeritie in measuryng of theim. ¶The Rule of triangled Squares. ANd for exāple, the firste of these figures being A.B.C.D. and also the other figures beyng E.F.G.H, And all ma∣ner diagram
of others suche fourmed péeces of lands, when thou woul∣dest measure them, doe no more but ioygne the endes both in one summe, and then take the halfe of that number, and mul∣tiplie him with the whole number of the middle lyne or whip∣ped line, and the content appeare, as ye shall see the firste figure, at the like  and C. is 4. Perches: and betwene B. and D. is sixe Perches. Nowe 4. and 6. make 10. The halfe whereof is. 5. whiche beyng multiplied by 10. which is the middle depēding or whipped line, cometh to 50. Perches, whiche maketh one Roode, and two daie woorkes and thre Perches. And so call the other figure also and suche lie. ¶The most excellent Rule for measuryng of Wood Lande, and other peeces of Lande, that are deformed or on all si∣des vnequall. AS touchyng the measuring of , and suche like: And also for any maner of euill auoured fashio∣ned péece of Lande, which requireth to be brought in∣to many Squares or Triangles, To saue labour, ye may do as followeth: also it is  (this le following) where a man cannot vewe euerie waie from side to side, for standing of Wood, Fur or suche like. As, suppose youre peece diagram of, Lande or wood were fashioned after this for∣me, and were to be mea∣sured. For ye measuring wher∣of it were good nowe yt ye did adde vnto the saide peece of lande afore figured, suche and so many portions by enlargement, as ll make the same
an euen Square, as the saide vneuen Figure is now here fol∣lowyng squared. So I haue added in A. 2. Perches, in B. 1. Perche, in D. one Perche,  C. 2. Perches. All whiche grounde added, summed together is. 4. Perches. Nowe sup∣pose euery side of the Square  be 80. Perches  multiplie diagram side with the other that is to ye.Memoran∣dum, this fi∣gure should haue beene made square for so it is supposed. 0 by 80. And I finde the  Thereout I  that whiche I added which  foure Perches and so rei∣eth.  Roodes and 9. Daies worke, the iuste content of the said first euill fashioned péece of Lande. And againe briefly for your in∣struction, this is the said last Rule. Firste by enlargemente measure it Square. Then multiplie the one side with the other, and cut of the totall or producte, ll awaie that ye added and the true measure is contained in the remainder. ❧The Rule of Roundes or Circles. AND nowe for measuryng of a Peece of Lande all rounde, whiche is without any Angle or Square: or euer ye can eate suche a peece of Lande, I muste aduertise you of certaine proper names, belongyng to a Circle, or Rounde peece of Lande, how euery parte is called properly.
A circle doeth containe these partes, which are also called by these pro∣per names en∣suyng. The Roundell is called the Circumfe∣rence. The iuste middle pointe or pricke therein is called the Center. The line goyng through the pricke or cen∣ter, and iustly deuidyng the circle, is called the Diameter. The halfe of that is called the semidiame∣ter. The part deuided aboue in the circle, from A to B is called an Arke. diagram And then if ye would knowe, what this rounde peece of Lande followyng containeth: Take this for a generall rule, in euery Diameter multiplie halfe the circumference, and it sheweth the content of any circle. Nowe for example, imagine this presents figure to be a rounde péece of Land whose circumference is 80. Perches▪ and the diameter,  fe the Breadthe thereof
bée 40. multiplie the diagram Semidiameter, yt is halfe the number of the breadth, which is 20. in halfe the num∣ber of the perches of the whole Circumfe∣rence, or Compasse, whiche is 40. it ma∣keth iust 800. perches, whiche is iuste fiue A∣cres: So is halfe that circled peece of Land 2. acres ½ and euery quarter thereof one acre, and one roode. diagram An example of partes and portions of a Circle. IMagine that P. Q. R. here ensuyng, were a parte of a Circle, or peece of Lande, whose con∣tence ye would haue. And the whole compasse of the Circle, whiche this portion representeth, as is said before, were 80. Perches, his breadth
or Diameter is 40. Perches: The compasse whipped arke, vnto the middle line, whiche deuideth the Center, and is cal∣led the Diameter, is diagram 40. Perches: now the semidiameter, or halfe breadth of the Circle 20. multiplie halfe the Compasse of the Cir∣cumference whipped, and it maketh twoo a∣cres and a halfe, and that is the contente of the whipped compasse to the sides of the tri∣angles whipped. Now to vnderstande the o∣ther portion, or arke that is aboue the whipped Triangles, seuered by the line P. R. ye shall adde the contente of the Triangles, whiche is one Acre and three roodes to be found by the rule of Triangles: so haue you in the whole fower A∣cres and one roode. This summe subtracted from the num∣ber contained in the whole Circle: the remain is the summe of those Perches contained in the Arke, or small péece aboue the Triangles, that is to say, three roodes, and that added to the reste, maketh the whole Circle fiue Acres againe, as is aforesaide. The rule of Reguler squared lande. BVT and if your compasse bée a peece of Reguler, or right squared lande of many sides, as are these two figures ensuing: Then measure and laie al the sides together, taking the halfe number of perches there contained. Then drawe a right depēdyng line from the mid∣des of one of the sides to the Center, and with that breadth
multiplie the other halfe number aforesaied, and the content will appeare. Example. Admitte this Fi∣gure diagram A. D. B. C. to be a parcell of Land sixe squared, and eue¦ry of the sides to bee 20. Perches a pece, the whiche summed together make 120 Perches, the halfe whereof is 60. and the depēdyng whip∣ped line, commyng from the middest of the vpper square to the Center to be 30. whiche twoo summes multiplied one by the other, as afore is she∣wed, make fiue Acres, twoo roodes, and fiue daies woorke, and in like maner the other Figure is to be caste, or els if ye liste not to multiplie the sommes your selfe, you maie with the lengthe and breadth, enter my Ta∣ble ensuyng. And note this also principally, that triangles of all sides alike, and also the qua∣drate
figure, maie be also measured by this Rule. ¶The Rule for measuryng of Mountaynes or Mountaine Lande, and also valeys or valley grounde. NOw for the mountaine or hille, ye must doe this. Mea∣sure the Circuite of the Base or foote of the Hill or Mountaine, and that done, measure the vpper parte, toppe, or Summitie therof. Then ioyne theim or adde theim together. So must you likewise doe of the Assenses, that is to say, of the going vp from the foote to the toppe, alwaies ioynyng the measures of the shorter and lōger in one summe. Then take the one halfe of the Ascences ioyned, and there∣with multiplie the halfe of the circuites added, and the con∣tent will appeare: as for example. diagram Suppose E. F. G. to be the Mountaine or Hille, The com∣passe of the foote or base whereof, I finde by measure to bee 400. Perches. G. the Toppe to be. 20. Perches, F. and G. be∣ing one of the Assenses to be 60. perches, & the other Assents from E to G. to be. 38. Perches. Now when I haue added to∣gether
the Circuite of the base or foote, and the Circuite of the Summitie or toppe, I finde, they make. 420. The halfe whereof is. 210. And the halfe of both the Assenses to be. 49. Perches, whiche twoo Summes of the saide halfes, multi∣plied the one into ye other, or if ye enter for spéede, the Table with those Summes, ye shall finde they make iust. 64. Acres. 1. roode. 2. daye workes, 2 Perches. AND moreouer, now for the Valley or Dale, looke as in the Mountaine ye measured the circuite of the foote or base: So now here the cōpasse of the height of the Valley must be measured, and also as ye sought to haue the measure there of the Sumity or toppe: So must ye here also measure the Circuite of the Bottome, or Déepth. And al∣so as in the Mountaine, ye measured the Assense or goyng vp to the toppe: So muste here, the Descense or going downe of the hill be measured. And then for woorkyng the residue, doe like as I haue in measuryng the Mountaine enfourmed you. ¶An example of measuryng the Ʋalley. AND because I will shewe you but one example for all: I haue here figured a péece of Lande of an vnequall Valley, that it maye bee the Rule of measuryng of all manner of Valleis, in what fourme soeuer they lye or be fashioned. Laie the circuite of the heighte whiche I suppose here to be 30. in the compasse aboute of the toppe of the Valley. And the déepth of the Valley beeyng 16. Perches, and take these for the breadth. Then measure the Descences of both sides to the bottome, the one side whereof here is. 18. and the other. 34. perches, whiche added together make 52. And that is for the length. And then multiply halfe the saied number whiche is. 26. by 46. Perches, beeyng halfe the other number afore∣saide,
diagram and it cometh to 1196. Perches, whiche make the contente of the Valley aforesaide. 7. Acres. 1. Roode and. 9. daye workes. Now if ye list not your selfe to cast this summe, and all suche like summes, euer when ye haue the length and breadth of any of all the figures aforesaied or any other like. Enter the Table following for your expedition, and the con∣tentes will appeare. And thus muche as is afore for the Introduction of measuryng Lande, with the practise, shall suf∣fice for the Surueiour, or his diligent Lande∣meater. Finis.
