17192 S121881 99857040 22708
¶ Here is a necessarye Treatyse for all maner persons to reade, and hath to name, the Maydens Crosse rewe. IAnus Byfrons, amyddes Ianuary With his frosty berde, & thycke loches rore Begen the colde calenda of February Right than I thought, how lōge me before My mayster Lydgate, dyd applye hym sore Fables to fayne vnto moralyte To shewe the euyll theyr iniquyte. ¶ All this consyderyd to my bedde I went Fallynge a slepe than full ryght shortly And in this slumbre me thought incontynent By an olyue tre I was full sodaynely Where sat a Mayde complaynynge rufully Beatynge her handes, and vnder bowes dyd shrowde In the maner folowynge bewaylynge all alowde.
¶ Alas she sayde I may nowe sorowe euer My good frende is gone whiche wolde haue remayne The tyme so past se nowe shall I neuer Therfore no wonder thoughe that I complayne With syghes depe nd with mortall payne My flowrynge age I spent in vanyte With all wretched foly and fragalyte. ¶ I toke no hede vnto dame reason Whiche these prouerbes folowynge dyd me tell Vpon all the letters to haue conclusyon So was I ruled by thre enemyes so fell As the worlde, the flesshe, and the fende of hell But as I may, I wyll them specify Eche after other as I harde them truely. A. ALas ryot ledeth the brydyll rayne Alas that I loued so concupyscence Alas tyme past may not turne agayne Alas that I lost it by neclygence Alas to lernynge I had no dylygence Alas that euer I loued vnhappynes Alas I haue banyshed reason and sadnes. B. Beware thou youth euermore of ydlenes Beware of pryde, and also enuy Beware of wrthe, be ruled by mekenes Beware of couetuousnes and of glotony Beware also of the synne of Lechery Beware ryght well also of presumpcyon Beware and wyse also of false rebellyon.
C. Coueyte heauen with dedes of Charyte Coueyte connynge with all thy busynes Coueyte the company of dame fydelyte Coueyte wysdome and all stablenes Coueyte repentaunce for the wretchednes Coueyte measure for thy bodely wealthe Coueyte the waye also of thy soules healthe. D. Drede god also aboue euery kynge. Drede for synne euermore the vengeaunce Drede for the tyme, the tyme of rekenynge Drede for to do thy neyghboure anoyaunce Drede aboue other thy selfe for to auaunce Drede for to do euyll alwaye certayne Drede euermore also thy souerayne. E. Exyle from the falshode and flatery Exyle from the euermore the vycyous Exyle also vyle speche and rebaudry Exyle all thynges nowe superstycyous Exyle dysdayne whiche is presumptuous Exyle foly and dyssymulacion Exyle alwaye also detraccion. F. Folowe the trace of truth and ryghtuousnes Folowe example of vertuous gouernaunce Folowe bounte and also lowlynes Folowe measure in all thy purueaunce Folowe wysdome by good remembraunce Folowe Iustyce without corrupcion Folowe conscyence at euery season.
G. Gladly be ruled by counceyll prudent Gladly enclyne alwayes to reason Gladly to lerne be thou moche dylygent Gladly take truth to thy companyon Gladly forsake the yll operacyon Gladly serue God and thy prynce also Gladly be pacyent in trouble and wo. H. Haue good respect vnto thynges all Haue thou no doubte of holy scrypture Haue God in thy mynde most memoryall Haue gentyll chere and countenaunce demure Haue good remorse to euery creature Haue most thy trust in Goddes goodnes Haue not thy trust in worldely ryches. I. I knewe nothynge in youth what I was I wolde not knowe the steppes of vertue I thought full lytell howe my youth sholde pas I wolde nothynge the carnall vyce exchewe I thought good fortune wolde me well renewe I was ed or that I was ware I lytell thought of myne after care. K. Knowe fyrst God and thy selfe secondly Knowe well thy prynce by dewe obedyence Knowe thy neyghboure well and certaynely Knowe well connynge by dewe expetyence Knowe well in whom thou mayst haue confydence Knowe well the pore and not hym forsake Knowe hym well that thou of counsayle make.
L. Loue God also aboue euery thynge Loue thy neyghboure and cherysshe thy wyfe Loue not ryot nor backe reakenynge Loue alwaye peace and auoyde the stryfe Loue in honeste to lede thy lyfe Loue euer myrth and vertuous dysporte Loue to the wofull to gyue ayde and comforte. M. Moche myschyfe cōmeth of great debate Moche drynke doth wysdome aswage Moche sorowe doth the courage abate Moche euyll greueth a great outrage Moche medlynge letteth great auantage Moche Ioye grounded vpon vnyte Moche harme doth growe of instabylyte. N. Nothynge is sweter than the dewe of grace No man may taste it, but by Sapyence No man without charyte may heauen purchace No man without laboure may haue a scyence Nothynge to man is better than pacyence No earthly ryches, but it is transmutable No man without maners can be conuenable. O. O mortall man ryse out of deedly synne O foolysshe love of worldly vanyte O vnkynde man to amende the bygynne O man remembre Goddes benygnyte O man Goddes goodnes consydre and se O man remembre howe he graunteth space O man in tyme nowe take the gyfte of grace.
P. Please God thy maker, and kepe his cōmaundement Please not thy flesshe, by carnall affeccyon Please well thy prynce and be to hym obedyenc Please not the worlde with hole occasyon Please the causer of thy fyrst creacyon Please not the Deuyll, by Pryde, Enuy, and Ire Please hym aboue, that is the heauenly Empyre. Q. Quare deo fui sic contrarius Quare heu non ipsum amaui Quare noloissem cum habuerim tempus Quare ve sic semper peccaui Quare mundum ego frequentaui Quare me sequetis o tu vir in vanis Quare laboras sic mundi inanis. R. Ryght greuously I haue God offended Ryght nought I thought vpon his Iustyce Ryght lytell I thought for to be a mended Ryght oft I dyd my neyghboure preiudyce Ryght well I thought fortune shulde suffyce Ryght lytell I thought on my soules healthe Ryght so my mynde was all on worldly wealthe. S. Supporte not wronge vnto ryght contrary Supporte Iustyce with all thy dylygence Supporte not thy seruaunt to do vylany Supporte no man whan he doth offence Supporte alwaye the grounde of Capyence Supporte pouerte in the tyme of nede Supporte alwaye the ryghtfull man to spede.
T. Truth may be bolde in euery maner of place Truth is good and must nedes endure Truth doth his seruaunt call vnto great grace Truth is ryght fayre and a precyous treasure Truth is worshyped of euery creature Truth is good both in worde and dede Truth of God shall haue rewarde and mede. W. Wo worth falshode nowe euery where aryued Wo worth also false ymagynacyon Wo worth pryde whiche hath mekenes depryued Wo worth nowe flatery and dissymulacyon Wo worth doublenes and detraceyon Wo worth debate without extynguysshement Wo worth also a corrupt Iudgement. X. Xp̄i time semper potentiam Xp̄i vide ac quin{que} vulnera Xp̄i tūc pete misericordiam Xp̄i decem serua mandata Xp̄i sit nomen in memoria Xp̄i mors liberet nos a morte Xp̄i nos saluet omni ip̄e. Y. Ye that lyst heauen nowe for to attayne Ye must apply to vertuous gouernaunce Ye in this worlde must yet take a payne Ye must not folowe your sensuall pleasaunce Ye sholde your ende haue in remembraunce Ye must forgyue as you wolde haue forgyuenes Ye than shall come to the glory that is endles. Amen.
¶ Alas these prouerbes, whiche I haue you tolde I lytell regarded in the tyme so past But nowe by reason I do them beholde Full well is hym that may haue grace  lost Beware ryght well, spende not your youth in wast Lese no tyme, but spende it vertuously Than shall ye come to heaen merely. ¶ I wretched mayde plouged all in care The tyme so past may ryght sore bewayle That the flesshe with slouth had me in a snare Alas the Deuyll dyd me ryght sore assayle The worlde also dyd gyue me a battayle These thre me fettered in a deadly place Tyll I was helpt out by good dame grace. ¶ Whiche me hath set in his garden grene Vnder this olyue tree to synge ryght swetely Amyddes this arber so ryght fayre and shene Gyuynge great lawdes vnto God almyghty Whiche me hath brought out of vayneglory And there with all she beganne to synge Lawdes to her maker in the fayre mornynge. ¶ The cocke crowed and I dyd awake Greatly musynge vpon my vysyon And vnto me I brefly began to take Penne and ynke for to wryte that season All that I had harde without abusyon Preyenge you all that it doth here or se To Pardon me of your benygnyte. ¶ Finis. {quod} Robert Wyer.
