17644 99847684 12738
THE VIRGIN MARTIR, A TRAGEDIE, AS IT HATH BIN DIVERS times publickely Acted with great Applause, By the Seruants of his Maiesties Reuels. Written by Phillip Messenger and Thomas Deker. LONDON, Printed by B, A. for Thomas Iones. 1622.
The Actors names. Dioclesian Emperours of Rome. Maximinus, A King of Pontus. A King of Epire. A King of Macedon. Sapritius, Gouernour of Caesaria. Theophilus, a zealous persecutor of the Christians. Sempronius, Captaine of Sapritius Guards. Antoninus, sonne to Sapritius. Macrinus, friend to Antoninus. Harpax an euill spirit, following Theophilus in the shape of a Secretary. Artemia, daughter to Dioclesian. Caliste Daughters to Theophilus. Christeta. Dorothea, The Virgin Martyr. Angelo, a good spirit, seruing Darothea in the habite of a Page. A Brittish Slaue. Hercius, a Whoremaster. Seruants to Darothea. Spungius, a Drunkard. A Priest to Iupiter. Officers and Executioners.
THE VIRGIN MARTIR. Actus primus. Scene I. Enter Theophilus, Harpax. Theoph. COme to Casarea to night? Harpax. Most true Sir, Theoph. The Emperour in person? Harpax. Do I hue. Theo. Tis wondrous strange, the marches of great Princes Like to the motions of prodigious Meteors. Are step, by step obseru'd, and lowd tong'd Fame The hat binger to prepare their entertainment: And were it possible, so great an armie, Though couer'd with the night, could be so neere: The Gouernour cannot be so vnfriended Among the many that attend his person, But by some secret meanes he should haue notice Of Casars purpose in this, then excuse me If I appeare indredulous. Harpax. At your pleasure. Theop. Yet when I call to mind you neuer faild me In things more difficult, but haue discouered Deeds that were done thousand leagues distant from me, When neither woods, nor caues, not secret vaults, No nor the power they serue, could keep these Christians, Or from my reach or punishment, but thy magicke Still layd them open: I begin againe To be as confident as heretofore. It is not possible thy powerfull art Should meete a checke, or fayle.
Enter a Priest with the image of Iupiter; Caliste, Christata. Harp. Looke on these vestals, The holy pledges that the gods haue giu'n you, Your chast faire daughters. Wer't not to vpbraid A seruice to a maister not vnthankfull, I could say this in spite of your preuention, Seduc'd by an imagin'd faith, not reason, (Which is the strength of Nature) quite for saking The Gentile gods, had yeelded vp themselues To this new found religion. This I crosd, Discouerd their intentions, taught you to vse With gentle words and milde perswasions, The power, and the authority of a father Set of with cruell threats and so reclaimd em, And whereas they with torments should haue dy'd, (Hels furies to me had they vndergone it) aside They are now votaries in great Iupiters temple, And by his Priest instructed, growne familiar With all the Mysteries, nay the most abstruse ones Belonging to his Dietie. Theoph. T was a benefit For which I euer owe you, Haile Ioues Flamen, Haue these my daughters reconcilde themselues (Abandoning for euer the Christian way) To your opinion. Priest. And are constant in it, They teach their teachers with their depth of iudgement, And are with arguments able to conuert The enemies to our gods and answer all They can obiect against vs. Theoph. My deere daughters. Caliste. We dare dispute against this new sprung sect In priuate or publicke. Harpax. My best Lady. Perseuer in it. Christeta. And what we maintaine We will seale with our bloods. Harpax. Braue resolution.
I eu'n grow fat to see my labors prosper. Theoph. I yong againe to your deuotions. Harpax. Doe. My prayers be present with you. exeunt Priest and daughters Theoph. Oh my Harpax. Thou engine of my wishes, thou that steeldst My bloody resolutions, thou that armst My eyes gainst womanish teares and soft compassion. Instructing me without a sigh to looke on Babes torne by violence from their mothers brests To feed the fire, and with them make one flame: Old men as beasts, in beasts skins torne by dogs: Virgins and matrons tire the executioners, Yet I vnsatisfied thinke their torments easie. Harpax. And in that iust, not cruell. Theoph. Weare all scepters That grace the hands of kings made into one, And offerd me, all crownes layd at my feete, I would contemne them all, thus spit at them. So I to all posterities might be cald The strongest champion of the Pagan gods And rooter out of Christians. Harpax. Oh mine owne, Mine owne deere Lord, to further this great worke I euer liue thy slaue. Enter Saprinus and Sempronius. Theoph. No more the Gouernour. Sapr. Keepe the ports close, and let the guards be doubl'd Disarme the Christians, call it death in any To weare a sword, or in his house to haue one. Semp. I shall be carefull Sir, Sap. It will well become you. Such as refuse to offer sacrifice To any of our gods, put to the torture. Grub vp this growing mischiefe by the roots, And know when we are mercifull to them, We to our selues are cruell. Semp. You poure oyle
On fire that burnes already at the height, I know the Emperours Edict and my charge, And they shall find no fauour. Theoph. My good Lord, This care is timely, for the entertainment Of our great maister, who this night in person Comes here to thanke you. Sapritius. Who the Emperour? Har. To cleere your doubts, he does return in triumph, Kings lackying by his triumphant Chariot, And in this glorious victory my Lord, You haue an ample share: for know your sonne, The nere enough commended Antoninus, So well hath fleshd his maiden sword, and died His snowy plumes so deepe in enemies blood, That besides publicke grace, beyond his hopes There are rewards propounded. Sap. I would know No meane in thine could this be true. Harpax. My head answer the forfeit. Sapritius. Of his victory There was some rumor, but it was assurd The army passd a full dayes iourney higher Into the countrey. Harpax. It was so determin'd, But for the further honor of your sonne, And to obserue the gouernment of the citty, And with what rigor, or remisse indulgence The Christians are pursude he makes his stay here. For proofe his trumpets speake his neere arriuall. Trumpets afarre of. Sap. Haste good Sempronius, draw vp our guards, And with all ceremonious pompe receiue The conquering army. Let our garrison speake Their welcome in lowd shouts, the citie shew Her state and wealth. Sempr. I am gone. exit Sempronius Sapr. O I am rauish'd
With this great honour, cherish good Theophilus This knowing scholler, send your faire daughters I will present them to the Emperour, And in their sweet conuersion, as a mirror Expresse your zeale and duty. a lesson of Cornets. Theoph. Fetch them good Harpax. A guard brought in by Sempronius, souldiers leading in three kings bound, Antoninus and Macrinus carrying the Empe∣rors Egles, Dioelesian with a guilt laurell on his head, loa∣ding in Artemia, Sapritius kisses the Emperors hand, then embraces his sonne, Harpax brings in Caliste and Christeta, lowd showts. Diocle. So at all parts I finde Caesarea Compleatly gouernd, the licentious souldier Confin'd in modest limits, and the people Taught to obey, and not compeld with rigor; The ancient Roman discipline reuin'd, (Which raysde Roome to her greatnes, and proclaimd her The glorious mistresse of the conquerd world) But aboue all the seruice of the gods So zealously obseru'd, that (good Sapritius) In words to thanke you for your care and duty Were much vnworthy Dioclesians honor Or his magnificence to his loyall seruants. But I shall find a time with noble titles To recompence your merits. Sapr. Mightiest Caesar Whose power vpon this globe of earth, is equall To loues in heauen, whose victorious triumphs On prowd rebellious Kings that stir against it Are perfit figures of his immortall trophees Wonne in the gyants war, whose conquering sword Guided by his strong arme, as deadly kils As did his thunder, all that I haue done, Or if my strength were centupld could do, Comes short of what my loyalty must challenge. But if in any thing I haue deseru'd
Great Casars smile, tis in my humble care Still to preserue the honour of those gods, That make him what he is: my zealc to them I euer haue expressd in my fell hate Against the Christian sect, that with one blow Ascribing all things to an vnknowne power, Would strike downe all their temples, and allowes them Nor sacrifice nor altars. Diocle. Thou in this Walkest hend in hand with mee, my will and power Shall not alone confirme, but honor all That are in this most forward. Sap. Sacred Casar; If your imperiall Maiestie stand pleasd To showre your fauours vpon such as are The boldest champions of our religion, Looke on this reuerend man, to whom the power Of serching out, and punishing such delinquents, Was by your choyce committed, and for proofe He hath deseru'd the grace imposd vpon him, And with a fayre and euen hand proceeded Partiall to none, not to himselfe, or those Of equall neerenesse to himselfe, behold This paire of Virgins. Diocle What are these? Sapr. His daughters. Arte. Now by your sacred fortune they are faire ones, Exceeding faire ones, would 'twere in my power To make them mine. Theo. They are the gods, great Lady, They were most happy in your seruice else, On these when they fell from their fathers faith I vsde a iudges power, entreaties failing (They being seduc'd) to win them to adore The holy powers we worship, I put on The scarlet robe of bold authority, And as they had bin strangers to my blood, Presented them in the most horrid forms
All kind of tortures, part of which they sufferd With Roman constancy. Arte. And could you endure Being a father, to behold their limbs Extended on the racke? Theo. I did, but must Confesse there was a strange contention in me, Betweene the impartiall office of a Iudge, And pitty of a father, to helpe Iustice Religion stept in, vnder which ods Compassion fell: yet still I was a father, For euen then, when the flinty hangmans whips Were worne with stripes spent on their tender limbs, I kneeld, and wept, and begd them though they would Be cruell to themselues, they would take pittie On my gray haires. Now note a sodaine change, Which I with ioy remember, those whom torture Nor feare of death could terrifie, were orecome By seeing of my suffrings, and so wonne, Returning to the faith that they were borne in, I gaue them to the gods, and be assurde I that vsde iustice with a rigorons hand Vpon such beauteous virgins, and mine owne, Will vseno fauour where the cause commands me To any other, but as rocks be deafe To all intreatics. Diocle. Thou deseru'st thy place, Still hold it and with honor, things thus orderd Touching the gods tis lawfull to descend To human cares, and exercise that power Heauen has conferd vpon me, which that you Rebels and traytors to the power of Rome Should not with all extremities vndergoe, What can you vrge to qualifie your crimes Or mitigate my anger? Epire. We are now Slaues to thy power, that yesterday were kings, And had command ore others, we confesse Our grandsires payd yours tribute, yet left vs
As their forefathers had desire of freedome. And if you Romans hold it glorious honor Not onely to defend what is your owne, But to enlarge your Empire, (though our fortune Denies that happinesse) who can accuse The famishd mouth if it attempt to feed, Or such whose fetters eate into their freedomes, If they desire to shake them off. Pontus. We stand The last examples to proue how vncertaine All humane happinesse is, and are prepard To endure the worst. Macedon. That spoake which now is highest In Fortunes wheele, must when she turns it next Decline as low as we are. This consider'd Taught the Egyptian Hercules Sesostris (That had his chariot drawne by captiue kings) To free them from that slauery, but to hope Such mercy from a Roman, were meere madnesse. We are familiar with what cruelty Roome since her infant greatnesse, euer vsde Such as she triumphd ouer, age nor sexe Exempted from her tyranny: scepterd Princes Kept in your common dungeons, and their children! In scorne traind vp in base Mechanicke arts For publicke bondmen; in the catologue Of those vnfortunate men, we exspect to haue Our names remembred. Diocle. In all growing Empires Eu'n cruelty is vsefull, some must suffer And be set vp examples to strike terror In others though far of but when a State Is raysde to her perfection, and her Bases Too firme, to shrinke, or yeeld, we may vse mercy And do't with safety, but to whom? not cowards? Or such whose basenesse shames the conqueror, And robs him of his victorie, as weake Perseus Did great AEmilius. Know therefore kings
Of Epire, Pontus, and of Macedon, That I with courtesie can vse my prisoners As well as make them mine by force, prouided That they are noble enemies: such I found you Before I made you mine, and since you were so, You haue not lost the courages of Princes, Although the Fortune: had you borne your selues Deiectedly, and base, no slauery Had beene too easie for you, but such is The power of noble valour, that we loue it Eu'n in our enemies, and taken with it, Desire to make them friends, as I will you. Epire. Mocke vs not Caesar. Diocle. By the Gods I do not. Vnloosse their bonds, I now as friends embrace you, Giue them their Crownes againe. Pon. We are twice ouercome, By courage and by courtesie. Mace. But this latter, Shall teach vs to liue euer faithfull Vassals, To Dioclesian and the power of Rome. Epire. All Kingdomes fall before her. Pon. And all Kings Contend to honour Cesar. Diocle. I beleeue Your tongues are the true Trumpets of your hearts, And in it I most happy Queene of fate, Imperious Fortune mixe some light disaster With my so many ioyes to season em, And giue them sweeter rellish, I am girt round With true felicity, faithfull subiects here, Here bold Commanders, heere with new made friends. But what's the crowne of all in thee Artemia, My only child whose loue to me and duty Striue to exceede each other, Ar. I make payment But of a debt which I stand bound to tender As a daugher, and a subiect. Diocle. Which requires yet
A retribution from me Artemia Tyde by a fathers care how to bestow Aie well of all things to me most pretious. Nor will I therefore longer keepe thee from The chiefe ioyes of creation, mariage rites, Which that thou mayst with greater pleasure tast of, Thou shalt not like with mine eyes but thine owne Amongst these kings forgetting they were captiues, Or these remembring not they are my subiects, Make choyce of any, by Ioues dreadfull thunder, My will shall ranke with thine. Arte. It is a bounty The daughters of great Princes seldome meete with. For they, to make vp breaches in the state, Or for some other politicke ends are forc'd To match where they affect not, may my life Deserue this fauour. Diocle. Speake, I long to know The man thou wilt make happy. Artem. If that titles Or the adored name of Queene could take me, Here would I fixe mine eyes and looke no farther. But these are baites to take a meane borne Lady, Nother that boldly may call Caesar father. In that I can bring honor vnto any But from no king that liues receiues addition To raise desert and vertue by my fortune, Though in a low estate were greater glory, Then to mixe greatnesse with a Prince that owes No worth but that name onely. Diocle I commend thee, Tis like thy selfe. Artem. If then of men beneath me My choyce is to be made, where shall I seeke But among those that best deserue from you, That haue seru'd you most faithfully, that in dangers Haue stood next to you, that haue interposd Their brests as shields of proofe to dull the swords
Aimd at your bosome, that haue spent their blood To crowne your browes with Lawrell. Macrinus. Citherea Great Queene of loue be now propitious to me. Harpax. Now marke what I foretold. Anton. Her eyes on me, Faire Venus sonne draw forth a leaden dart, And that she may hate me, transfixe her with it, Or if thou needs wilt vse a golden one, Shoote in the behalfe of any other, Thou knowst I am thy votary else where. Artem. Sir. Theoph. How he blushes! Sap. Welcome, foole, thy fortune, Stand like a blocke when such an Angell courts thee. Artem. I am no obiect to diuert your eye From the beholding. Anton. Rather a bright Sun Too glorious for him to gaze vpon That tooke not first flight from the Egles aciry. As I looke on the temples, or the gods, And with that reuerence Lady I behold you, And shall do euer. Arte. And it will become you, While thus we stand at distance, but if loue (Loue borne out of th'assurance of your vertues) Teach me to stoope so low. Anton. O rather take A higher flight. Artem. Why feare you to be raisd? Say I put off the dreadfull a we that waits On Maiestie, or with you share my beames, Nay make you to outshine me change the name Of subiect into Lord, rob you of seruice Thats due from you to me, and in me make it Duty to honor you, would you refuse me? Anton. Refuse you Madam, such a worme as I am, Refuse, what kings vpon their knees would sue for?
Call it, great Lady, by another name, An humble modesty that would not match A Molehill with Olimpus. Artem. He that's famous For honourable actions in the warre; As you are Antoninus, a prou'd souldier Is fellow to a king. Anton. If you loue valour, As 'tis a kingly vertue, seeke it out, And cherish it in a king, there it shines brightest, And yeelds the brauest lustre. Looke on Epire, A Prince, in whom it is incorporate, And let it not disgrace him, that he was Orecome by Casar, (it was a victory To stand so long against him,) had you seene him, How in one bloody seene he did discharge The parts of a Commander, and a souldier, Wise in direction, bold in execution; You would haue sayd, great Caesars selfe excepted, The world yeelds not his equall. Artem. Yet I haue heard, Encountring him alone in the head of his troope, You tooke him prisoner. Epire. Tis a truth great Princesse. Ile not detract from valour. Anton. Twas meere fortune, Courage had no hand in it. Theoph. Did euer man Striue so against his owne good. Sap. Spiritlesse villaine, How I am tortur'd, by the immortall gods I now could kill him. Diocl. Hold Sapritius hold, On our displeasure hold. Harpax. Why, this would make A father mad, tis not to be endur'd, Your honours tainted in it. Sapr. By heauen it is,
I shall thinke of't. Harpax. Tis not to be forgotten. Art. Nay kneele not Sir, I am no rauisher, Nor so farre gone in fond affection to you, But that I can retire my honour safe. Yet say hereafter that thou hast neglected What but seene in possession of another Will runne thee mad with enuy. Anton. In her lookes Reuenge is written. Mac. As you loue your life study t'appease her. An. Gratious madame heare me. Artem. And be againe refusd? Anton. The tender of My life, my seruice, not since you vouchsafe it, My loue, my heart, my all, and pardon me: Pardon dread Princesse that I made some scruple To leaue a valley of securitie To mount vp to the hill of Maiestie, On which the neerer Ioue the neerer lightning. What knew I but your grace made triall of me? Durst I presume to embrace, where but to touch With an vnmannerd hand was death? the Foxe When he saw first the forrests king, the Lyon Was almost drad with feare, the second view Onely a little danted him, the third He durst salute him boldly: pray you apply this, And you shall find a little time will teach me To looke with more familiar eyes vpon you Then duty yet allowes me. Sap. Well exscusde. Artem. You may redeeme all yet. Diocl. And that he may Haue meanes and opportunity to do so, Artemia I leaue you my substitute In faire Casarea. Sap. And here as your selfe We will obey and serue her.
Diocl. Antoninus So you proue hers I wish no other heire, Thinke on't, be carefull of your charge Theophilus, Sapritius be you my daughters guardian. Your company I wish confederate Princes In our Dismatian wars, which finished With victorie I hope, and Maximinus Our brother and copartner in the Empire At my request wonne to confirme as much, The kingdomes I tooke from you weele restore, And make you greater then you were before. Exeunt omnes, manent Antoninus & Macrinus. Antoninus, Macrinus. Anton. Oh I am lost for euer, lost Macrinus, The anchor of the wretched, hope for sakes me, And with one blast of fortune all my light Of happinesse is put out. Macr. You are like to those That are ill onely, cause they are too well, That surfetting in the excesse of blessings Call their abundance want: what could you wish, That is not falne vpon you? honour, greatnesse, Respect, wealth, fauour, the whole world for a dowre, And with a Princesse, whose excelling forme Exccedes her fortune. Anton. Yet poyson still is poyson Though drunke in gold, and all these flattring glories To me, ready to starue, a painted banquet And no essentiall foode: when I am scorchd With fire, can flames in any other quench me? What is her loue to me, greatnes, or Empire, That am slaue to another, who alone Can giue me ease or freedome? Macr. Sir you point at Your dotage on the scornfull Dorothea, Is she though faire the same day to be nam'd
With best Artemia? in all their courses Wisemen propose their ends: with sweete Artemia There comes along pleasure, security, Vsher'd by all that in this life is precious: With Dorothea, though her birth be noble, The Daughter to a Senator of Rome, By him lest rich (yet with a priuate wealth And farre inferiour to yours) arriues The Emperours frowne (which like a mortall plague Speakes death is neere) the Princesse heauy scorne, Vnder which you will shrinke, your fathers fury, Which to resist euen piety forbids, And but remember that she stands suspected A fauourer of the Christian Sect, she brings Not danger but assured destruction with her: This truely wai'd, one smile of great Artemia Is to be cherish't and prefer'd before All ioyes in Dorothea, therefore leaue her. An. In what thou think'st thou art most wise, thou art Grosely abus'd Macrinus, and most foolish. For any man to match aboue his ranke, Is but to sell his libetty; with Artemia I still must liue a seruant, but enioying Diuinest Dorothea, I shall rule, Rule as becomes a husbands for the dangers, Or call it if you will assur'd destruction, I sleight it thus. If then thou art my friend, As I dares weare thou art, and wilt not take A Gouernors place vpon thee, be my helper. Macri. You know I dare and will doe any thing. Put me vnto the test. Anton. Goe then Macrinus To Dorothea, tell her I haue worne, In all the battailes I haue fought her figure, Her figure in my heart, which like a diety Hath still protected me, thou canst speake well, And of thy choyself language, spare a little To make her vnderstand how much I loue her,
And how I languish for her, beare her these iewels Sent in the way of sacrifice, not seruice, As to my goddesse. All lets throwne behind me, Or feares that may deter me: say this morning I meane to visite her by the name of friendship, No words to contradict this. Macrinus. I am yours, And if my trauell this way be ill spent, Iudge not, my reader will, by the euent. exeunt Finis actus primus. Actus 2. Scenus 1. Enter Spungins and Hercius. Spun. Turne Christian, wud he that first tempted mee to haue my shooes walke vpon Christian soles, had turn'd me into a Capon, for I am sure now the stones of all my pleasure in this fleshly life are cut off. Hir. So then, if any Coxecombe has a galloping de∣sire to ride, heres a Gelding, if he can but sit him. Spun. I kicke for all that like a horse, looke else. Hir. But thats a kickish Iade, fellow Spungins, haue not I as much cause to complaine as thou hast? When I was a Pagan, there was an Infidell Punke of mine, would haue let me come vpon trust for my coruetting, a pox of your christian Coxatrices, they cry like Poulterers wiues, no mo∣ney, no Cony. Spun. Bacchus, the God of brew'd Wine and Sugar, grand Patron of rob pots, vpsie-freesie-tiplers, and super-naculam takers; this Bacchus, who is head warden of Vintners Hall, Ale-cunner, Maior of all Victualing houses, the sole liquid Benefactor to bawdy-houses, Lanze prezado to red Noses, and inuin cible Adelantado ouer the Armado of pimpled, deepe scarletted, rubified, and carbuncled faces. Her. What of all this?
Spun. This boone Bacchanalion stinker, did I make legges to. Hirc. Scuruy ones, when thou wert drunke. Spung. There is no danger of loosing a man yeares by making these Indures, he that will not now and then bee Calabingo, is worse then a Calamosthe: when I was a Pagan and kneeld to this Bachhus, I durst out-drinke a Lord, but your Christian Lords out-boule me: I was in hope to leade a sober life, when I was conuerted, but now amongst the Christians, I can no sooner stagger out of one Alhouse but I reele into another: they haue whole streets of nothing but drinking roomes, and drabbing chambers, iumbled to∣gether. Hirc. Bawdy Priapus, the first schoolemaister that taught Butchers how to sticke pricks in flesh, and make it swell, thou knowest was the onely Ningle that I cared for vnder the Moone, but since I left him, to follow a scur∣uy Lady, what with her praying and our fasting, if now I come to a wench & offer to vse her any thing hardly (cel∣ling her being a Christian she must endure) she presently handles me as if I were a cloue, & cleaues me with disdaine as if I were a Calues head. Spung. I see uo remedy fellow Hircius, but that thou and I must be halfe Pagans and halfe Christians, for we know very fooles that are Christians. Hirc. Right, the quarters of Christians are good for not thing but to feed Crowes. Spung. True, Christian Brokers, thou knowest, are made vpof the quarters of Christians, parboyle one of these rogues and he is not meate for a dog: no, no, I am re∣solued to haue an Infidels heart, though in shew I carry a Christians face. Hir. Thy Last shall serue my foote, so will I. Spun. Our whimpring Lady and Mistresse sent mee with two great baskets full of Beefe, Mutton, Veale and Goose fellow Hircius. Hir. And Woodcocke fellow Spungins. Spung. Vpon the poore leane Asse fellow, on which I
ride, to all the Almswomen: what thinkst thou I hue done with all this good cheere. Hir. Eate it, and be choakt else. Spun. Wud my Asse, basket and all were in thy maw if I did: no, as I am a demy Pagan, I sold the victuals, and coynd the mony into pottle pots of wine. Hir. Therein thou shewdst thy selfe a perfect demy-Christian too, to let the poore beg, starue and hang, or dye a the pip: our puling snotty-nose Lady sent me out like∣wise with a purse of mony, to releeue and release prisoners: did I so thinke you? Spun. Wud thy ribs were turnd into grates of iron then. Hir. As I am a totall Pagan, I swore they should be hangd first: for sirra Spungius, I lay at my old ward of lechery, and cryed a poxe in your two-penny wards, and so I tooke scuruy common flesh for the mony. Spun. And wisely done, for our Lady sending it to pri∣soners, had bestowed it out vpon lowsie knaues, and thou to saue that labour casts it away vpon rotten whores. Hir. All my feare is of that pinke-an-eye Iacke-an Apes boy, her page. Spnn. As I am a Pagan, from my cod-peece downward that white-fac'd Monkie, frights me to, I stole but a durty pudding last day out of an almsebasket, to giue my dogge when he was hungry, and the peaking chitface page hit me ith' teeth with it. Hir. With the durty pudding; so he did me once with a cowturd, which in knauery I would haue crumd into ones porridge, who was halfe a Pagan to: the smug dandiprat smels vs out whatsoeuer we are doing. Spun. Does he! let him take heede I proue not his backe friend; He make him curse his smelling what I doe. Hir. Tis my Lady spoyles the boy, for he is euer at her tayle: and she's neuer well but in his company. Enter Angelo with a Booke and Taper lighted, they seeing him, counterfeit deuotion.
Ange. O! now your hearts make ladders of your eyes In shew to climbe to heauen, when your deuotion Walkes vpon crutches: where did you waste your time When the religious man was on his knees, Speaking the heauenly languague. Spun. Why fellow Angelo, we were speaking in pedlars French I hope. Hir. We ha not bene idle, take it vpon my word. Ange. Haue you the baskets emptied which your Lady Sent from the charitable hands, to women That dwell vpon her pitty? Spun. Emptled em! yes, Ide be loth to haue my belly so emptie, yet I'm sure, I munched not one bit of them nei∣ther. Ange. And went your money to the prisoners. Hir. Went no, I carryed it; and with these fingers paid it away. Ang. What way? the diuels way, the way of sinne, The way of hot damnation, way of lust: And you to, wash away the poore mans bread In bowles of drunkennesse. Spun. Drunkennesse! yes, yes, I vse to bee drunke: our next neighbours man called Christopher has often seene me drunke, has he not? Hir. Or me giuen so to the flesh, my cheekes speake my doings. Ange. Auant you theeues, and hollow hypocrites. Your hearts to me lie open like blacke bookes, And there I reade your doings. Spun. And what do you read in my heart? Hir. Or in mine? come amiable. Angelo, beate the flint of your braines. Spun. And lets see what sparkes of wit fly out, to kindle your Carebruns. Ang. Your names euen brand you, you are Spurgius cald And like a Spunge you sucke vp liquorous wines Till your soule reeles to hell. Spun. To hell! can any drunkards legs carry him so far.
Ang. For blood of grapes you sold the widowes food. And staruing them, tis murder, whats this but hell. Hircius your name, and Goatish is your nature: You snatch the meate out of the prisoners mouth, To fatten harlots, is not this hell to, No Angell, but the diuell waites on you. Spun Shall I cut his throate. Hir. No, better burne him, for I thinke he is a witch, but sooth, soth him. Spun. Fellow Angelo, true it is, that falling into the com∣pany of wicked he-Christians for my part. Hir. And she-ones for mine, we haue 'em swim in sholes hard by. Spun. We must confesse, I tooke too much of the pot, and he of tother hollow commodity. Hir. Yes indeed, we layd lill on both of vs, we cousen'd the poore, but 'tis a comon thing, many a one that counts himselfe a better Christian then we two, has done it, by this light. Spun. But pray sweet Angelo, play not the tell-tale to my Lady, and if you take vs creeping into any of these mouse∣holes of sin any more, let Cats flea off our skins. Hir. And put nothing but the poy sond tailes of Rats into those skins. An. Will you dishonor her sweet charity. Who sau'd you from the tree of death and shame. Hir. Wud I were haugd rather then thus betold of my faults. Spun. She tooke vs, tis true, from the gallowes, yet I hope she will not barre yeomen sprats to haue their swinge. An. She comes, beware and mend. enter Doro. Hir. Lets breake his necke, and bid him mend. Dor. Haue you my messages (sent to the poore) Deliuer'd with good hands, not robbing them Of any iot was theirs. Spun. Rob 'em Lady, I hope, neither my fellow nor I am theeues Hir. Deliuerd with good hands madam, else let me neuer
licke my fingers more when I eate butterd fish. Dor. Who cheate the poore, and from them plucke their almes. Pilfer from Heauen, and there are thunderbolts From thence to beate them euer, do not lye, Were you both faithfull true distributers? Spun. Lye Madame, what griefe is it to see you turne Swaggerer, and giue your poore minded rascally seruants the lye. Dor. I'm glad you doe not, if those wretched people Tell you they pine for want of any thing. Whisper but to mine eare, and you shall furnish them. Hir. Whisper, nay Lady, for my part Ile cry whoope. Ang. Play no more Villaines with so good a Lady, For if you doe — — —. Spun. Are we Christians? Hir. The fowle Feind snap all Pagans for me. Ang. Away, and once more mend. Spun. Takes vs for Botchers. Hir. A patch, a patch. Dor. My booke and Taper. Ang. Heere most holy Mistresse. Dor. Thy voyce sends forth such musicke, that I neuer Was raisht with a more celestiall sound, Were euery seruant in the world like thee, So full of goodnesse, Angels would come downe To dwell with vs, thy name is Angelo, And like that name thou art, get thee to rest, Thy youth with too much watching is opprest. Ang. No my deare Lady, I could weary slarres, And force the wakefull Moone to lose her eyes By my late watching, but to waite on you, When at your prayers you kneele before the Altar, Me thinkes I'm singing with some Quire in Heauen, So blest I hold me in your company: Therefore my most-lou'd mistresse do not bid Your boy so seruiceable to get heuce, For then you breake his heart.
Dor. Bee nye me still then, In golden letters downe ile set that day Which gaue thee to me, little did I hope To meete such worlds of comfort in thy selfe, This little pretty body, when I comming Forth of the temple, heard my begger-boy, My sweete fac'd godly begger-boy, craue an almes, Which with glad hand I gaue, with lucky hand, And when I tooke thee home, my most chast bo some Me thought was fil'd with no hot wanton fire, But with a holy flame, mounting since higher On wings of Cherubines then did before. Ang. Proud am I that my Ladies modest eye, So likes so poore a seruant. Doro. I haue offerd Handfuls of gold but to behold thy Parents, I would leaue Kingdomes, were I Queene of some, To dwell with thy good father, for the sonne Betwitching me so deepely with his presence, He that begot him must doo't ten times more, I pray thee, my sweete boy, shew me thy parents, Be not asham'd. Ang. I am not, I did neuer Know who any mother was, but by yon Pallace Fill'd with bright heauenly Courtiers, I dare assure you, And pawne these eyes vpon it, and this hand, My father is in Heauen, and pretty Mistresse, If your illustrious houre Glasse spend his sand No worse then yet it does, vpon my life You and I both shall meete my father there, And he shall bid you welcome. Doro. A blessed day, We all long to be there, but lose the way. exeunt. Macrinus friend to Antoninus enters, being met by Theophslus and Harpax. Theo. Sunne-god of the day guide thee Macrinus.
Mac. And thee Theophilus. Theo. Gladst thou in such scorne, I call my wish backe. Mac. I'm in hast. Theo. One word, Take the least hand of time vp: stay. Mac. Be briefe. Theo. As thought: I pritheo tell me good Macrinus How health and our faire Princesse lay together This night, for you can tell, Courtiers haue flyes That buzze all newes vnto them. Mac. She slept but ill. Theo. Double thy courtesie, how does Antoninus? Mac. Ill, well, straight, crooked, I know not how. Theo. Once more, Thy head is full of Winde-mils: when does the Princesse Fill a bed full of beauty, and bestow it On Antoninus on the wedding night. Mac. I know not. Theo. No, thou art the Manunscript Where Antoninus writes downe all his secrets, Honest Macrinus tell me. Mac. Fare you well Sir. exit Har. Honesty is some Fiend, and frights him hence, A many Courtiers loue it not. Theo. What peece Of this State-wheele (which winds vp Antoninus) Is broke, it runnes so iarringly? the Man is from himselfe deuided: Oh thou the eye By which I wonders see, tell me my Harpax, What gad flye tickles so this Macrinus, That vp. flinging thy tayle, he breakes thus from me, Har. Oh Sir, his braine-panne is a bed of Snakes, Whosestings shoote through his eye-balls, whose poyso∣nous spawne Ingenders such a fry of speckled villanies, That valesse charmes more strong then Adamant Bee vs'd, the Romane Angels wings shall melt,
And Caesars Diadem be from his head Spurn'd by base fecte, the Lawrell which he weares (Returning victor) be inforc't to kisse That which it hates (the fire.) And can this Ram, This Antoninus-Engine, being made ready To so much mischiefe, keepe a steady motion, His eyes and feete you see giue strange assaults. The. I'm turnd a marble Statue at thy language, Which printed is in such crab'd Charracters, It puzzles all my reading, what (ith name Of Pluto) now is hatching. Har. This Macrinus The time is, vpon which loue errands runne Twixt Antoninus and that ghost of women, The bloudlesse Dorothaea, who in prayer And meditation (mocking all your gods) Drinkes vp her ruby colour, yet Antoninus Playes the Endymion to this pale fac'd Moone, Courts her, seekes to catch her eyes. Theo. And what of this? Har. These are but creeping Billowes Not got to shore yet, but if Dorothaea Fall on his bosome, and be fir'd with loue, (Your coldest women do so) had you ynck Brew'd from the infernall Stix, and not all that blacknesse Can make a thing so foule, as the Dishonours, Disgraces, Buffettings, and most base affronts Vpon the bright Artemia, Starre of Court, Great Caesars Daughter. Theo. I now conster thee. Har. Nay more, a Firmament of Clouds being fild With Iouet Artillery, shot downe at once To pash your Godsin peeces, cannot giue With all those Thunderbots so deepe a blow To the Religion there, and Pagan lore As this; for Dorothea hates your gods, And if she once blast Antoninus soule, Making it foule like hers: Oh the example—
Theo. Eates through Cesareas heart, like liquid poison Haue I inuented tortures to tente Christians, To see but which, could all that sceles Hels torments Haue leaue to stand aloofe heere on earths stage, They would be mad till they againe descended, Holding the paines most horrid, of such soules, May-games to those of mine, has this my hand Set downe a Christians execution In such dire postures, that the very hangman Fell at my foote dead hearing but their figures, And shall Macrinus and his fellow Masquer Strangle me in a dance. Har. No, on, I do hug thee, For drilling thy quick braines in this rich plot Of tortures gainst these Christians: on, I hug thee. Theo. Both hug and holy me, to this Dorotheae Flye thou and I in thunder. Har. Not for Kingdomes Pil'd vpon Kingdomes, theres a villaine Page Waites on her, whom I would not for the world Hold trafficke with, I do so hate his sight, That should I looke on him I must sinke downe. Theo. I will not loose thee then, her to confound, None but this head with glories shall be crown'd. Har. Oh, mine owne as I would wish thee. exeunt. Enter Dorothea, Macrinus, Angelo. Dor. My trusty Angelo, with that curious eye Of thine, which euer waites vpon my businesse, I prithee watch those my still-negligent seruants That they performe my willin whats enioyn'd them To'th good of others, else will you find them flyes Not lying still, yet in them no good lyes: Be carefull deare Boy. Ang. Yes, my sweetest Mistresse. exit. Dor. Now Sir, you may goe on. Mac. I then must study,
A new Arithmatike, to summe vp the vertues Which Antoninus gracefully become, There is in him so much man, so much goodnesse, So much of honour, and of all things else Which makes our being excellent, that from his store He can enough lend others, yet much taken from him, The want shall be as little as when Seas Lend from their bounty to fill vp the poorenesse Of needy Riuers. Dor. Sir, he is more indebted, to you for praise, then you to him that owes it. Ma If Queens viewing his presents, paid to the whitenes Of your chast hand alone, should be ambitious, But to be parted in their numerous shares, This he counts nothing: could you see maine Armies Make battalles in the quarrell of his vallour, That tis best, the truest, this were nothing, The greatnesse of his State, his fathers voyce And arme, owing Cesarea, he neuer boasts of The Sun-beames, which the Emperor throwes vpon him, Shine there but as in water, and guild him Not with one spot of pride, no dearest beauty, All these heap'd vp together in one scale, Cannot weigh downe the loue he beares to you Being put into the other. Dor. Could gold buy you To speake thus for your friend, you Sir are worthy Of more then I will number, and this your language Hath power to win vpon another woman, Top of whose heart, the feathers of this World Are gaily stuck, but all which first you named, And now this last, his loue to me are nothing, Mac. You make me a sad Messenger. enter Antoninus. But him selfe Being come in person, shall I hope heare from you Musicke more pleasing. Ant. Has your eare Macrinus Heard none then?
Mac. None I like. Ant. But can there be In such a noble Casker, wherein lies Beauty and chastity in their full perfections, A rocky heart killing with cruelty A life thats prostrated beneath your feete? Dor. I am guilty of a shame I yet neuer knew, Thus to hold parley with you, pray Sir pardon. Ant. Good sweetenesse, you now haue it, and shall goe, Be but so mercifull, before your wounding me With such a mortall weapon, as Farewell, To let me murmure to your Virgin care, What I was loath to lay on any tongue But this mine owne. Dor. If one immodest accent Flye out, I hate you euerlastingly. Ant. My true loue dares not doe it. Mac. Hermes inspire thee. They whispering below, enter aboue Sapritius, father to Anto∣ninus, & Governor of Cesaria, with him Artemia the Princesse, Theophilies, Spungius and Hercins. Spun. See you, doe you see, our worke is done, the fish you angle for is nibling at the hooke, and therefore vn∣trusse the Codpeece point of our reward, no matter if the breeches of conscience fall about our heeles. The. The gold you earne is heere, dam vp your mouthes, and no words of it. Her. No, nor no words from you of too much dam∣ming neither; I know women sell themselues dayly, and are knied out for siluer, why may not we then betray a scuruy mistresse for gold. Spun. She sau'd vs from the Gallowes, and only to keepe one Prouerbe from breaking his necke, weele hang her. The. Tis well done, go go, yeare my fine white boyes. Spun. If your red boyes, tis well knowne, more lifa∣uour'd
faces then ours are painted. Sap. Those fellowes trouble vs. Theo. Away, away. Her. I to my sweete placket. Spun. And I to my full pot. exeunt. Ant. Come, let me tune you, glaze not thus your eyes With selfe-loue of a vowed Virginity, Make euery man your glasse, you see our Sex Doe neuer murder propagation, We all desire your sweete society, And if you barre me from it, you doe kill me, And of my bloud are guilty. Art. O base Villaine. Sap. Bridle your rage sweete Princesse. Ant. Could not my fortunes (Rear'd higher farre then yours) be worthy of you, Me thinkes my deare affection makes you mine. Dor. Sir, for your fortunes were they mines of gold, He that I loue is richer; and for worth, You are to him lower then any slaue Is to a Monarch. Sap. So insolent, base Christian. Dor. Can I, with wearing out my knees before him Get you but be his seruant, you shall boast y'are equall to a King. Sap. Confusion on thee, For playing thus the lying Sorcereste. Ant. Your mockes are great ones, none beneath the Sun Will I be seruant too: on my knees I beg it, Pitty me wondrous maid. Sap. I curse thy basenesse. Theo. Listen to more. Dor. Oh kneele not Sir to me. Ant. This Knee is Embleme of an humbled heart, That heart which tortur'd is with your disdaine, Iustly for scorning others; euen this heart, To which for pitty such a Princesse sues, As in her hand offers me all the World,
Great Caesars daughter. Artem. Slaue thou lyest. Anton. Yet this Is adamant to her, that melts to you In drops of blood. Theoph. A Very dogge. Anton. Perhaps Tis my religion makes you knit the brow, Yet be you mine, and euer be your owne, I nere will screw your conscience from that power On which you Christians leane. Sap. I can no longer, Fret out my life with weeping at thee villaine; sirra, Would when I got thee, the high thunder hand Had strucke thee in the wombe. Mac. We are betrayde. Arte. Is that your I doll, traitor, which thou kneelst to, Trampling vpon my beauty? Theoph. Sirra, bandog, Wilt thou in peeces teare, our Iupiter, For her? our Mars, for her? our Sol, for her? A whore, a hel-hound, in this globe of braines Where a whole world of tortures for such furies Haue fought as in a Chaos) which should exceed, These nailes shall grubbing lye, from scull to scull, To finde one horrider, then all, for you, You three. Artem. Threaten not, but strike, quicke vengeance flies Into thy bosome, caitife: here all loues dies. exeunt. An. O I am thunder-struckel Wee are both ore whelm'd. Mac. With one high raging billow. Doro. You a souldier, And sinke beneath the violence of a woman? An. A woman! a wrongd Princesse: from such a starre Blazing with fires of hate, what can be look'd for But tragicall euents? my life is now The subiect of her tyranny.
Doro. That feare, is base, Of death, when that death doth but life displace Out of her house of earth; you onely dread The stroke, and not what followes when you are dead, There's the great feare indeed: come, let your eye, Dwell where mine doe, youle scorne their tyrannies. Enter below, Artemia, Sapritius, Theophilus a guard. Angelo comes and is close by Dorothea. Artem. My fathers nerues put vigour in mine arme, And I his strength must vse; because I once Shed beames of fauour on thee, and with the Lyon Playd with thee gently when thou strokst my heart, He not insult on a base humbled prey, By lingring out thy terrors, but with one frowne Kill thee: hence with 'hem to execution. Seize him, but let euen death it selfe be weary In torturing her: He change those smiles to shreekes, Giue the foole what she is proud of (martyrdome) In peeces racke that Bawd to: Sap. Albeit the reuerence Iowe our gods and you, are in my bosome Torrents so strong, that pitty quite lies drownd From sauing this yong man, yet when I see What face death giues him, and that a thing within me, Sayes 'tis my sonne, I'am forc'd to be a man, And grow fond of his life, which thus I beg. Artem. And I deny. Anton. Sir you dishonour me, To sue for that which I disclay me to haue, I shall more glory in my sufferings gaine, Then you in giuing iudgement, since I offer My blood vp to your anger: nor do I kneele To keepe a wretched life of mine from ruine: Preserue this temple (builded faire as your is) And Caesar neuer went in greater triumph Then I shall to the scaffold.
Artem. Are you so braue Sir, Set forward to his triumph, and let those two Go cursing along with him. Doro. No, but pittying, (For my part, I) that you loose ten times more By torturing me, than I that dare your tortures, Through all the army of my sinnes, I haue euen Lobord to breake, and cope with death to th'face; The visage of a hangman frights not me; The sight of whips, rackes, gibbets, axes, fires Are scaffoldings, by which my soule climbes vp To an Eternall habitation. Theo. Caesars imperiall daughter, heare me speake, Let not this Christian Thing, in this her pagentry Of prowd deriding, both our gods and Caesar, Build to her selfe a kingdome in her death Going laughing from vs. No, her bitterest torment Shall be to seele her constancy beaten downe, The brauery of her resolution lie Battered by the argument, into such peeces, That she agen shall (on her belly) creepe To kisse the pauements of our Panim gode. Arte. How to be done. Theo. He send my daughers to her, And they shall turne her rocky faith to waxe, Else spit at me, let me be made your slaue, And meete no Romans but a villains graue. Arte. Thy prisoner let her be then: and Sapritius Your sonne, and that be yours: death shall be sent To him that suffers them by voyce or letters To greet each other. Rifle her estate, Christians to beggery brought grow desperate. Dor. Still on the Bread of pouerty let me feed. exeunt. Ang. O my admired mistresse; quench not out The holy fires within you, though temptations Showre downe vpon you: claspe thine armour on, Fight well and thou shalt see, after these warres Thy head weare Sun beames, and thy feet touch starres.
Enter Hircius and Spungius. Hir. How now Angelo how ist? how ist? what thred spins That whore Fortune vpon her wheele now. Spun. Comesta, comesta poore knaue. Hir. Com a porte von, com a porte von, my petite garsoone Spun. Me partha wee Comrade, my halfe inch of mans Flesh, how run the dice of this cheating world, ha? Ange. Too well on your sides, you are hid in gold Ore head and eares. Hir. We thanke our fates, the signe of the gingle-boyes hangs at the doores of our pockets. Spun. Who wud thinke that we comming forth of the arse, as it were, or fag end of the world, should yet see the golden age, when so little siluer is stirring. Hir. Nay who can say any citizen is an Asse, for lading his owne backe, with money, till his soule crackes agen, onely to leaue his sonne like a gilded coxccombe behinde him? will not any foole take me for a wiseman now, seeing me draw out of the pit of my treasury, this little god with his belly full of gold. Spun. And this full of the same meate out of my ambrey An. That gold will melt to poyson. Spun. Poyson, wudit wud, whole pintes for healths shall downe my throate. Hir. Gold poyson! there's neuer a she-thrasher in Ca∣sarea that liues on the flaile of money will call it so. Ang. Like slaues you sold your soules for golden drosse, Bewitching her to death, who stept betweene You, and the gallowes. Spun. T was an easie matter to saue vs, she being so well backt. Hir. The gallowes and we fell out, so she did but part vs Ang. The misery of that mistresse is mine owne, She beggerd, I left wretched. Hir. I can but let my Nose drop in sorrow with wet eyes for her.
Spun. The petticote of her estate is vnlac'd I confesse. Hir. Yes, & the smocke of her charity is now all to peeces An. For loue you beare to her, for some good turnes Done you by me, giue me one peece of siluer. Hir. How la peece of siluer! if thou wert an Angell of gold I would not put thee into white money, vnlesse I weigh'd thee, and I weigh thee not a rush. Spun. A peece of siluer! I neuer had but two calues in my life, and those my mother left me; Ile rather part from the fat of them, then from a mustard-tokens worth of Argent. Hir. And so sweet Nit we crawle from thee. Spun. Adieu, demi-dandiprat, adieu An. Stay one word yet, you now are full of gold. Hir. Ide be sorry my dog were so full of the poxc. Spun. Or any Sow of mine of the meazles either. Ang. Go, go, y'are beggers both, you are not worth That leather on your feete. Hir. Away, away boy. Spun. Page you do nothing but set patches on the soles of your iests. Ang. I'am glad I tryde your loue, which see I want not, So long as this is full. Both. And so long as this.—so long as this. Hir. Spungius y'are a picke-pocket. Spun. Horcius thou hastnimb'd -. so long as, not so much money is left as will buy a louse. Hir. Th'art a thiese, and thou lyest in that gut through which thy wine runs, if thou denyest it. Spun. Thou lyest deeper then the bottome of mine en∣raged pocket, if thou affrontst it. Ang. No blowes, no bitter language, all your gold gone. Spun. Can the diuell creepe into ones breeches? Hir Yes, if his hornes once get into the codpeece, Ang. Come, sigh not, I so little am in loue With that whose losse kils you, that see tis yours, All yours, deuide the heape in equall share, So you will goe along with me to prison, And in our mistresse sorrowes beare a part: Say, will you? Both. Will we?
Spun. If she were going to hanging, no gallowes should part vs. Hir. Lets both be turnd into a rope of Onyons if we do Ang. follow me then, repaire your bad deeds past, Happy are men when their best dayes are last, Spun. True master Angele, pray sir leade the way. exit Au Hir. Let him leade that way, but follow thou me this way. Spun. I liue in a Iayle. Hir. A way and shift for our selues, sheele do wel enough there, for prisoners are more hungry after mutton, then Catchpoles after prisoners. Spun. Let her starue then if a whole Iayle will not fill her belly. Exeunt Finis Actus secundi. Actus 3. Scenus 1. Enter Sapritius, Theophilus, Priest, Caliste, Christeta. Sapritius. SIcke to the death I feare. Theophilus. I meete your sorrow, With my true feeling of it. Sap. She's a Witch, A sorceresse Theophilus, my sonne Is charm'd by her enticing eyes, and like An image made of waxe, her beames of beauty Melt him to nothing; all my hopes in him. And all his gotten honours finde their graue In his strange dotage on her. Would when first He saw and lou'd her, that the earth had opend And swallowd both aliue. Theo. There's hope left yet. Sap. Not any, though the Princesse were appeasd, All title in her loue surrenderd vp, Yet this coy Christian, is so transported With her religion, that vnlesse my sonne (But let him perish first) drinke the same potion
And be of her beleefe, sheele not vouchsafe To be his lawfull wife. Priest but once remou'd From her opinion, as I rest assur'd, The reason of these holy maydes will win her, Youle finde her tractable, to any thing For your content or his. Theo. If she refuse it, The Stygian dampes breeding infectious ayres, The Mandrakes shreekes, or Basiliks killing eye, The dreadfull lightning that does crush the bones And neuer singe the skin, shall not appeare Lesse fatall to her, then my zeale made hot With loue vnto my gods; I haue deferd it In hope to draw backe this Apostata, Which will be greater honour then her death Vnto her fathers faith, and to that end Haue brought my daughters hither. Caliste. And we doubt not To do what you desire. Sap. Let her be sent for, Prosper in your good worke, and were I not To attend the Princesse, I would see and heare How you succeede. Theo. I am commanded to, Ile beare you company. Sap. Giue them your Ring To leade her as in triumph if they win her Before her highnesse. exit Sap. Theo. Spare no promises, Perswasions, or threats I do coniure you, If you preuayle, 'tis the most glorious worke You euer vndertooke. Enter Dorothea and Angelo. Priest. She comes. Theoph. We leaue you. Be constant and be carefull. exeunt Theo. Priest.
Calaste. We are sony To meete you vnder guard. Dorothea. But I more greeu'd You are at libertie, so well I loue you, That I could wish, for such a cause as mine You were my fellow prisoners: prethee Angels Reach vs some chaires, please you sit? Caliste. We thanke you, Our visite is for loue, loue to your safetie. Christ. Our conference must be priuate, pray you therefore Command your boy to leaue vs. Dorothea. You may trust him With any secret that concernes my life, Falshood and he are strangers, had you Ladies Bene blest with such a seruant, you had neuer Forsooke that way (your iourney euen halfe ended) That leade to ioyes eternall. In the place Of loose lasciuious mirth, he would haue stird you To holy meditations, and so farre He is from flattery, that he would haue told you, Your pride being at the height, how miserable And wretched things you were, that for an howre Of pleasure here, haue made a desperate sale Of all your right in happinesse hereafter. He must not leaue me, without him I fall, In this life he is my seruant, in the other A wished companion An. Tis not in the diuell, Nor all his wicked arts to shake such goodnesse. Doro. But you were speaking Lady. Caliste. As a friend And louer of your safety, and I pray you So to receiue it; and if you remember How neere in loue our parents were, that we En'n from the cradle were brought vp together. Our amitie encreasing with our yeeres, We cannot stand suspected. Doro. To the purpose.
Cal. We come then as good Angels Dorothea, To make you happy, and the meanes so easie, That be not you an enemy to your selfe, Already you enioy it. Christeta. Looke on vs Ruin'd as you are once, and brought vnto it By your perswasion. Cal. But what follow'd Lady, Leauing those blessings which our gods giues freely, And showr'd vpon vs with a prodigall hand, As to be noble borne, youth, beauty, wealth, And the free vse of these without controule, Checke, curbe, or stop, (such is our Lawes indulgence) All happinesse forsooke vs, bonds and fetters For amorous Twins, the Racke and Hangmans whips In place of choise delights, our Parents curses Instead of blessings, scorne neglect, contempt Fell thick vpon vs. Chris. This consider'd wisely, We made a faire retreate, and reconcil'd To our forsaken gods, we liue againe In all prosperity. Caliste. By our example Bequeathing misery to such as loue it, Learne to be happy, the Christian yokes too heauy For such a dainty necke, it was fram'd rather To be the shrine of Venus, or a Pillar More precious then Christall to support Our Cupids Image, our Religion Lady Is but a varied pleasure, yours a toyle Slaues would shrinke vnder. Doro. Haue you not clouen feetel are you not diuels? Dare any say so much, or dare I heare it Without a vertuous and religious anger? Now to put on a Virgin modesty, Or maiden silence, when his power is question'd That is omnipotent, were a greater crime, Then in a bad cause to be impudent.
Your Gods, your temples, brothell houses rather, Or wicked actions of the worst of men Pursu'd and practis'd, your religious rites, O call them rather iugling mysteries, The baytes and nets of hell, your soules the prey For which the Diuell angles, your false pleasures A steepe descent by which you headlong fall Into eternall torments. Cal. Doe not tempt Our powerfull gods. Dor. Which of your powerfull gods, Your gold, your siluer, brasse, or woodden ones? That can, nor do me hurt, nor protect you, Most pittied women, will you sacrifice To such, or call them gods or goddesses, Your Parents would disdaine to be the same, Or you your selues? O blinded ignorance, Tell me Caliste by the truth I charge you, Or any thing you hold more deere, would you To haue him deifide to posterity, Desire your father an Adulterer, A Rauisher, almost a Paracide, A vile incestuous wretch? Cal. That pitty And duty answere for me. Dor. Or you Christeta, To be heereafter registred a goddesse, Giue your chast body vp to the embraces Of Goatish lust, haue it writ on your forehead, This is the common Whoore, the prostitute, The Mistresse in the art of wantonnesse, Knowes euery tricke and labyrinth of desires That are immodest. Criste. You iudge better of me, Or my affection is ill plac'd on you, Shall I turne Strumpet? Dor, No, I thinke you would not, Yet Venus whom you worship was a whore,
Flora the Foundresse of the publike Stewes, And has for that her sacrifice: your great god, Your Iupiter, a loose adulterer, Incestuous with his sister, reade but those That haue canoniz'd them, youle find them worse Then in chast language I can speakes them to you, Are they immortall then that did partake Of humane weakenesse, and had ample share In mens most base affections? subiect to Vnchast loues, anger, bondage, wounds, as men are. Her Iupiter to serue his lust turn'd Bull. The ship indeede in which he stole Europa. Neptune for gaine builds vp the walls of Troy As a day-labourer, Apollo keepes Admetus sheepe for bread; the Le Smith Sweats at the Forge, for hire; Lyometheus heere With his still growing Liuer feedes the Vulture; Saturne bound fast in hell with adamant chaines; And thousands more, on whom abused error Bestowes a diety, will you then deere Sisters, For I would haue you such, pay your Deuotions To things of lesse power then your selues? Cal. We worship Their good deedes in their Images. Dor. By whom fashion'd, By sinfull men? Ile tell you a short tale, Nor can you but confesse it was a true one. A King of AEgypt being to errect The Image of Osiris, whom they honour, Tooke from the Matrons necks the richest Iewels And purest gold, as the materialls To finish vp his worke; which perfected, With all solemnity he set it vp To be ador'd, and seru'd himselfe his Idoll; Desiring it to giue him victory Against his enemies, but being ouerthrowne, Enrag'd against his god (these are fine gods Subiect to humane fury) he tooke downe
The sencelesse thing, and melting it againe, He made a Basing, in which Eunuches wash'd His Concubines feete, and for this sor did vse Some moneths it seru'd: his mistresse proouing false, As most indeede do so, and grace concluded, Betweene him and the Priests, of the same Basing He made his god againe, thinke, thinke of this, And then consider, if all worldly honors Or pleasures that do leaue sharpe stings behind them, Haue power to win such as haue reasonable soules, To put their trust in drosse. Cal. Oh that I had beene borne Without a father. Chri. Piety to him Hath ruin'd vs for euer. Dor. Thinke not so, You may repaire all yet, the Attribute That speakes his Godhead most, is mercifull, Reuenge is proper to the Fiends you worship, Yet cannot strike without his leaue, you weepe, Oh tis a heauenly showre, celestiall balme To cure your wounded conscience, let it fall, Fall thick vpon it, and when that is spent, Ile helpe it with another of my teares. And may your true repentance proue the child Of my true sorrow, neuer mother had A birth so happy. Cal. We are caught our selues That came to take you, and assur'd of conquest We are your Captiues. Dor. And in that you triumph, Your victory had beene eternall losse, And this your losse immortall gaine, fixe heere, And you shall feele your selues inwardly arm'd Gainst tortures, death, and hell, but take heede sisters, That or through weakenesse, threats, or mild perswasions Though of a father, you fall not into A second and a worse Apostacie.
Cal. Neuer, oh neuer, steel'd by your example, We dare the worst of tyrranny. Chri. Heer's our warrant, You shall along and witnesse it. Dor. Be confirm'd then And rest assur'd, the more you suffer heere, The more your glory, you to heauen more deere. excunt. Enter Artemia, Sapritius, Theophilus, Harpax. Art. Sapritius though your sonne deserue no pitty, We grieue his sicknesse, his contempt of vs We cast behinde vs, aud looke backe vpon His seruice done to Caesar, that weighs downe Our iust displeasure, if his malady Haue growth from his restraint, or that you thinke His liberty can cure him, let him haue it, Say we forgiue him freely. Sap. Your grace hindeys Euer your humblest Vassals. Art. Vse all meanes For his recouery, though yet I loue him, I will not force affection, if the Christian Whose beauty hath out-riuald mine, be wonne To be of our beliefe, let him enioy her, That all may know when the cause wills, I can Command my owne desires. The. Be happy then, My Lord Sapritius, I am confident Such eloquence and sweete perswasion dwels Vpon my Daughters tongues, that they will worke her To any thing they please. Sap. I wish they may, Yet tis no easie taske to vndertake, To altar a peruerse and obstinate woman. a shout within, loud Musicke. Art. What meanes this shout. Sap. Tis seconded with Musicke, Triumphint musicke, ha. Enter Sempromus. Semp. My Lord your Daughters
The pillars of our faith hauing conuerted, For so report giues out: the Christian Lady, The Image of great Iupiter borne before them Sue for accesse. Theo. My soule diuin'd as much, Blest be the time when first they saw this light, Their Mother when she bore them to support My feeble age, fild not my longing heart With so much ioy, as they in this good worke Haue throwne vpon me. Enter Priest with the Image of Iupiter, Iucense and Consors, followed by Caliste, and Christeta, leading Dorothea, Welcome, oh thrice welcome Daughters, both of my body and my mind, Let me embrace in you my blisse, my comfort, And Dorothea now more welcome too, Then if you neuer had falne off, I am rauish't With the excesse of ioy, speake happy daughters The blest euent. Cal. We neuer gain'd so much By any vndertaking. The. Oh my deare Girle, Our gods reward thee. Dor. Nor was euer time On my part better spent. Chri. We are all now Of one opinion. The. My best Christeta, Madame if euer you did grace to worth, Vouchsafe your Princely hands. Art. Most willingly: Doe you refuse it? Let vs first deserue it: The. My owne child still, heere set our god, prepare The Incense quickly, come faire Dorothea, I will my selfe support you, now kneele downe
And pay your vowes to Iupiter, Dor. I shall doe it Better by their example. The. They shall guide you, They are familiar with the sacrifice, Forward my Twinnes of comfort, and to teach her Make a ioynt ossring. Chri. Thus. Cal. And thus. They both spit at the Image, throw it downe, and spurne it. Har. Profane And impious, stand you now like a Statue? Are you the Champion of the Gods? where is Your holy zeale, your anger? The. I am blasted, And as my feete were rooted heere, I finde I haue no motion, I would I had no sight too, Or if my eyes can serue to any vse, Giue me thou iniut'd power a sea of teares, To expiate this madnesse in my Daughters: For being themselues, they would haue trembled at So blasphemous a deede in any other, For my sake hold a while thy dreadfull thunder, And giue me patience to demand a reason For this accursed act. Dor. T was brauely done. The. Peace damn'd Enchantres peace, I should looke on you With eyes made red with fury, and my hand That shakes with rage should much outstrip my tongue, And seale my vengeance on your hearts, but nature To you that haue falne once, bids meagaine To be a father, O how durst you tempt The anger of great Ioue? Dor. A lacke poore Ioue, He is no Swaggerer, how smug he stands, Heele take a kick, or any thing. Sap. Stop her mouth. Dor. It is the ancientst godling do not feare him, He would not hurt the thiese that stole away Two of his golden locks, indeede he could not,
And still tis the same quiet thing. Theo. Blasphemer. Ingenious cruelty shall punish this, Thou art past hope, but for you yet deare daughters, Againe be witcht, the dew of mild forgiuenesse May gently fall, prouided you deserue it With true contrition, be your selues againe, Sue to the offended diety. Chi. Not to be The Mistresse of the earth. Cal. I will not offer A graine of Incense to it, much lesse kneele, Not looke on it but with contempt and scorne, To haue a thousand yeeres confer'd vpon me Of worldly blessings, we professe our selues To be like Dorothea, Christians, And owe hee for that happinesse. The. My eares Receiue in hearing this, all deadly charmes Powerfull to make man wretched. Art. Are these they You brag'd could conuert others? Sap. That want strength To stand themselues? Har. Your Honour is ingag'd, The credit of our cause depends vpon it, Something you must doe suddenly, The. And I will. Har. They merit death, but falling by your hand, It will be recorded for a iust reuenge And holy fury in you. The. Doe not blow, The Furnace of a wrath thrice hot already, AEtna is in my brest, wild fire burnes heere, Which onely bloud must quench: incensed power, Which from my infancy I haue ador'd, Looke downe with fauourable beames vpon The Sacrifice (though not allow'd thy Priest)
Which I will offer to thee, and be pleasde (My fierie zeale incidng me to act it) To call that iustice, others may stile murther. Come you accursd, thus by the haire I drag you Before this holy altar; thus looke on you Lesse pittifull then Tigres to their prey. And thus with mine owne hand I take that life Which I gaue to you. kils them. Doro. O most cruell Butcher. Theo. My anger ends not here, hels dreadfull porter Receiue into thy euer open gates Their damned soules, and let the futies whips On them alone be wasted: and when death Closes these eyes, twill be Elizium to me, To heare their shreekes and howlings, make me Pluto Thy instruments to furnish thee with soules Of this accursed fect, nor let me fall Till my fell vengeance hath consum'd them all. exit with Harpax hugging him. Enter Artemia laughing. Arte. Tis a braue zeale. Doro. O call him backe againe, Call backe your hangman, here's on prisoner left To be the subiect of his knife. Arte. Not so. We are not so neere reconcilde vnto thee, Thou shalt not perish such an easie way. Be she your charge Sapritius now, and suffer None to come neere her till we haue found out Some torments worthy of her. Ano. Courage Mistresse, These Martyrs but prepare your glorious fate, You shall exceed them and not imitate. exeunt. Enter Spungius and Hircius ragged at seuerall doores. Hir. Spunoius. Spun. My fine rogue, how ist? how goes this totterd world
Hir. Hast any money? Spun. Money! no, the Tauerne. Iuy clings about my mony and kils it. Hast thou any mony? Hir. No, my mony is a mad Bull, and finding any gap opend, away it runs. Spun. I see then a Tauerne and a Bawdy-house haue fa∣ces much like, the one has red grates next dore, the tother has peeping holes within doores; the Tauerne hath euer∣more a bush, the bawdy close sometimes neither hedge nor bush. From a Tauerne a man comes reeling, from a bawdy house not able to stand. In the Tauerne you are cousend with paltry Wine, in a bawdy-house by a painted Where, Money may haue Wine, and a Whore will haue Mony, but neither can you cry, Drawer you Rogue, or keepe doore rotten Bawde, without a siluer 'Whistle, wee are iustly plagued therefore for running from our Mi∣stresse. Hir. Thou didst, I did not; yet I had run to, but that one gaue me turpentine pilles, & that stayde my running. Spun. Well: the thred of my life is drawne through the needle of necessity, whose eye looking vpon my lowsie breeches, cryes out it cannot mend'em: which so prickes the linings of my body, and those are Heart, Lights, Lungs, Guts, and Midriffe, that I beg on my knees to haue Atro∣pos (the Tailer to the destinies) to take her sheares and cut my thred in two, or to heate the Iron goose of Mortalitie, and so presse me to death. Hir. Sure thy father was some botcher, and thy hungry tongue bit off these shreds of complaints, to patch vp the elbowes of thy nittie cloquence. Spun. And what was thy father? Hir. A low minded Cobler, a Cobler whose zeale set many a woman vpright, the remembrance of whose Awle I now hauing nothing, thrusts such scuruy stitches into my soule, that the heele of my happines has gone awry. Spun. Pitty that ere thou trodst thy shooe awry. Hir. Long I cannot last, for all sowterly waxe of comfort melting away, and misery taking the length of my foote, it
bootes not me to sue for life when all my hopes are seame. rent, and go wetshod. Spun. This shews th'at ta Coblers son by going through stirch: O Hircius wud thou & I were so happy to be coblers Hir. So would I, for both of vs being now wearie of our liues, should then be sure of shoomakers ends. Spun. I see the beginning of my ende for I am almost staru'd. Hir. So am not I, but I am more then famishd. Spun. All the members of my bodie are in rebellion one against another. Hir. So are mine, and nothing but a cooke being a constable can appease them, presenting to my nose, instead of his painted staffe, a spitfull of rost-meate. Spun. But in this rebellion, what vprores do they make, my belly cries to my mouth, why dost not gape & feed me Hir. And my mouth sets out a throate to my hand why dost not thou lift vp meate and cramme my choppes with it. Spun. Then my hand hath a fling at mine eyes, be∣cause they looke not out and sharke for victuals. Hir. Which mine eyes seeing, full of teares, crie alowd, and curse my feet for not ambling vp and downe to feede Colon, sithence if good meate be in any place, tis knowne my feet can smell. Spu. But then my feet like lazie rogues lie still, and had ra∣ther do nothing, then run to and fro, to purchase anything Hir. Why mong so many millions of people, should thou and I onely bee miserable totterdemalions, rag-a∣muffins, and lowsie desperates. Spun. Thou art a meere I am-an-o, I am-an-as, consider the whole world, and tis as we are. Hir. Lowsie, beggerly, thou whorson Assa Faetida. Spun. Worse, al tottrings, al out of frame, thou Fooliamini Hir. As how arsnicke: come make the world smart. Sp. Old Honor goes on crutches, beggry rides caroched, honest men make feastes, knaues sit at tables, cowards are laptin veluet, souldiers (as wee) in ragges: Beautie turnes
Whore; Whore Bawd; and both dye of the poxe: why then when all the world stumbles, should thou and I walke vp∣right? Enter Angelo. Hir. Stop, looke who's yonder. Spun. Fellow Angelo! how does my little man? well. Ang. Yes, and would you did so, where are your clothes? Hir. Clothes! you see euery woman almost goe in her loose gowne, and why should not wee haue our clothes loose? Spun. Wud they were loose. Ang. Why where are they? Spun. Where many a veluet cloke I warrant at this houre keepes them company, they are pawnd to a Broker. Ang. Why pawnd, where's all the gold I left with you? Hir. The gold! we put that into a Scriueners hands, and he has cousend vs. Spun. And therefore I prethee Angelo, if thou hast ano∣ther purse, let it be confiscate, and brought to deuastation. Ang. Are you made all of lyes? I know which way Your gilt-wing'd peeces flew; I will no more Be mock'd by you: be sorry for your ryots, Tame your wilde flesh by labor, eate the bread Got with hard hands: let sorrow be your whip To draw drops of repentance from your heart, When I reade this amendment in your eyes, You shall not want, till then my pitty dies. exit. Spun. Ist not a shame that this scuruy Puerilis should giue vs lessons? Hir. I haue dwelt thou knowst along time in the Sub∣vrbs of the conscience, and they are euer bawdy, but now my heart shall take a house within the walls of honesty. Enter Harpax aloose. Spun. O you drawers of wine, draw me no more to the bar of Beggery; the sound of Score a pottle of sack, is worse then the noyse of a scolding oyster wench, or two Cats in∣corporating. Harp. This must not be, I doe not like when conscience
Thawes, keepe her frozen still: how now my masters? Deiected, drooping, drownd in teares, clothes torne, Leane, and ill colour'd, sighing! whats the whitlewinde Which raiseth all these mischiefes? I haue seene you Drawne better on't. O! but a spirit told me You both would come to this, when in you thrust Your selues into the seruice of that Lady, Who shortly now must die; where's now her praying What good get you by wearing your our feete, To run on scurny errands to the poore, And to beare money to a sort of rogues, And lowsie prisoners. Hir. A pox on'em, I neuer prosperd since I did it. Spun. Had I bin a Pagan stil, I could not haue spit white for want of drinke, but come to any Vintner now and bid him trust me, because I turnd Christian, and he cries puh, Har. Y'are righly seru'd; before that peeuish Lady Had to doe with you, weomen, wine, and money Flow'd in aboundance with you, did it not? Hir. Oh! those dayes, those dayes. Har. Beat not your breasts, teare not your haire in madnes Those dayes shall come agen be rulde by me, And better (marke me) better. Spun. I haue seen you sir as I take it, an attendant on the Lord Theophilus. Har. Yes, yes, in shew his seruant, but harke hither. Take heed no body listens. Spun. Not a Mouse stirres. Har. I am a Prince disguisde. Hir. Disguisde! how! drunke, Har. Yes my fine boye, Ile drinke to, and be drunke, I am a Prince, and anyaman by me (Let him but keepe my rules) shall soone grow rich, Exceeding rich, most infinitely rich, He that shall serue me, is not staru'd from pleasures As other poore knaues are; no, take their fill, Spun. But that sir, we are so ragged... Har. Youle say, you'd serue me. Hir. Before any master vnder the Zodiake.
Harp. For clothes no matter; I haue a mind to both. And one thing I like in you, now that you see The bonefire of your Ladyes state burnt out, You giue it ouer, do you not? Hir. Let her be hangd. Spun. And poxd. Harp Why now y'are mine. Come let my hosome touch you. Spun. We haue bugges Sir. Hir. Ther's mony, fetch your cloths home, theres for you Hir. Auoid Vermine: giue ouer our mistresse! a man can∣not prosper worse if he serue the diuell. Har. How? the diuell! Ile tell you what now of the diuell, He's no such horrid creature, clouen footed, Blacke, saucer-eyde, his nostrils breathing fire, As these lying Christians make him. Both No! Har. He's more louing, To man, then man to man is. Hir. Is hee so! wud wee two might come acquainted with him. Har. You shall: he's a wondrous good fellow, loues a cup of wine, a whore, any thing, you haue mony, its ten to one but Ile bring him to some Tauerne to you or other. Spun. Ile be speake the best roome ith; house for him. Har. Some people he cannot ondure. Hir. Weele giue him no such cause. Har. He hates a ciuill Lawyer, as a souldier does peace? Spun. How a commoner? Har. Loues him from the teeth outward. Spun. Pray my Lord and Prince, let me encounter you with one foolish question: does the diuell eate any Mace in's broth? Har. Exceeding much, when his burning feauer takes him, and then hee has the knuckles of a Bailiffe boyld to his breakefast. Hir. Then my Lord, he loues a Gatchpole does he not? Har. As a Bearward does a dog, a Gatchpole! he has sworn if euer he dies, to make a Serieant his heire, and a Yoeman his euerseer.
Spun. How if he come to any great mans gate, will the Porter let him come in sit? Har. Oh, hee loues Porters of great mens gates, because they are euer so neere the wicket. Hir. Doe not they whom he makes much on, for all his stroking their cheekes, leade hellish liues vnder him. Har. No, no, no, no, he will be damn before he hurts a∣ny man. Doe but you (when y'are throughly acquainted with him) aske for any thing, see if it does not come. Spun. Anything! Har. Call for a delicate race whore; she's brought you. Hir. Oh my elbow itches: will the diuel keepe the dore? Har. Be drunke as a begger, he helps you home. Spun. O my fine diuell! some watchman I warrant, I wonder who's his constable. Har. Will you sweare, roare, swagger? he claps you. Hir. How! ath' chops. Har. No, ath' shoulder, and cries O my braue boy. Will any of you kill a man? Spun. Yes, yes, I, I. Har. Whats his word, hang, hang, tis nothing. Or stab a woman. Hir. Yes, yes, I, I. Har. Here's the worst word he giues you, a pox on't goe on. Hir. O inueaglingrascall, I am rauishd. Har. Go get your clothes, turne vp your glasse of youth, And let the sands run merily, nor do I care From what a lauish hand your money flies, So you giue none away, feed beggers. Hir. Hang 'em. Har. And to the scrubbing poore. Hir. Ile see 'em hangd first. Har. One seruice you must do me. Both. Anything. Har. Your Mistresse Dorothea, ere she suffers, Is to be put to tortures, haue you hearts To teare her into shreekes, to fetch her soule
Vp in the Pangs of death, yet not to die. Hir. Suppose this shee, and that I had no hands, heere's my teeth. Spun. Suppose this she, and that I had no teeth, heere's my nailes. Hir. But will not you be there sir. Har. No, not for hils of diamonds, the grand Master Who schooles her in the Christian discipline, Abhorres my company; should I be there, You'd thinke all hell broke loose, we shall so quarrell. Plie you this businesse; he, her flesh who spares Is lost, and in my loue neuer more shares. exit. Spun. Here's a Master you rogue. Hir. Sure lie cannot chuse but haue a horrible number of seruants. exeunt Finis Actus tertis. Actus 4. Scena 1. A bed thrust out, Antioninus vpon it sicks, with Physitions about him, Sapritius and Macrinus. Sap. O You that are halfe gods, lengthen that life Their dieties lend vs, turne ore all the volumes Of your mysterious AEsculapian science T'encrease the number of this yong mans dayes, And for each minute of his time prolong'd, Your fee shall be a peece of Romane gold With Caesars stampe, such as he sends his Captaines When in the warres they earne well: do but saue him, And as he is halfe my selfe, be you all mine. Doct. What art can do, we promise: phisickes hand As apt is to destroy, as to preserue, If heauen make not the medicine; all this while Our skill hath combat held with his disease, But tis so armd, and a deepe melancholy To be such in part with death, we are in feare
The graue must mocke our labours. Mac. I haue beene His keeper in this sicknesse, with such eyes As I haue seene my mother watch ore me, And from that obseruation sure I finde, It is a Mid wife must deliuer him. Sap. Is he with child, a Mid wife: Mac. Yes, With child, And will I feare lose life if by a woman He is not brought to bed: stand by his Pillow Some little while and in his broken slumbers Him shall you heare cry out on Dorothea, And when his armes flye open to catch her, Closing together, he falls fast asleepe, Pleas'd with embracings of her airy forme; Physicians but torment him, his disease Laughs at their gibrish language, let him heare The voyce of Dorothea, nay but the name, He starts vp with high colour in his face, Shee or none cures him, and how that can be, (The Princesse strick't command, barring that happines) To me impossible seemes. Sap. To me it shall not. Ile be no subiect to the greatest Caesar Was euer crown'd with Lawrell, rather then cease To be a father. exit. Mac. Silence sit, he wakes. Ant. Thou kilst me Dorothea, oh Dorothea. Mac. Shees heere; I enioy her. Ant. Where, Why doe you mooke me, Age on my head hath stuck no white haires yet, Yet I'me an old man, a fond doting foole Vpon a woman, I to buy her beauty, (Truth I am bewitched) offer my life, And she for my acquaintance hazirds hers, Yet for our equall suffrings, none holds out A hand of pitty. Doct. Let him haue some Musicke.
Ant. Hell on your fidling. Doct. Take againe your bed Sir, Sleepe is a soueraigne Physicke. Ant. Take an Asses head Sir, Confusion on your fooleries, your charmes, Thou stinking Glister-pipe, where's the god of rest, Thy Pills, and base Apothecary drugges Threatned to bring vnto me, out you Impostors, Quacksaluing, cheating Mountbankes, your skill Is to make sound men sicke, and sicke men kill. Mac. O be your selfe deare friend. An. My selfe Macrunis How can I be my selfe, when I am mangled Into a thousand peeces, heere moues my head, But wheres my heart? where euer, that lies dead. Enter Sapritius dragging in Dorothea by the Haire, Angelo attending. Sap. Follow me thou damn'd Sorcores, call vp thy spirits, 'And if they can, now let 'em from my hand Vntwine these witching haires. Ant. I am that spirit, Or if I be not (were you not my father) One made of Iron should how that hand in peeces That so defaees this sweete Monument Of my loues beauty? Sap. Art thou sioke? Ant. To death. Sap. Wouldst thou recouer? Ant. Would I liue in blisse? Sap. And doe thine eyes shoote daggers at that man That brings thee health? Aut. It is not in the world? Sap. Ist heere? Ant. Oh Treasure, by enchantment lock'd In Caues as deepe as hell, am I as neere. Sap. Breake that enchanted Caut, enter, and rifle
The spoyles thy lust hunts after, I deseend To a base office, and become thy Pandar In bringing thee this proud Thing, make her thy Whore, Thy health lies heere if she deny to giue it, Force it, imagine thou assaultst a towne, Weake wall, too't, tis thine owne, beat but this downe, Come, and vn seene, be witnesse to this battry, How the coy strumpet yeelds. Doct. Shall the boy stay sir. Sap. No matter for the boy, Pages are vs'd to these odde bawdy Shufflings, and indeede are those Little yong snakes in a Furies head Will sting worse then the great ones, Let the Pimpe stay. exeunt aside. Dor. Oh guard me Angels, What Tragedy must begin now? Ant. When a Tyger Leapes into a tymerous heard, with rauenous Iawes Being hunger-staru'd, what Tragedy then begins? Dor. Death I am happy so, you hitherto Haue still had goodnes spard within your eyes, Let not that Orbe be broken. Ang. Feare not Mistresse, If he dare offer violence, we two Are strong enough for such a sickly man. Dor. What is your horrid purpose sir, your eye Beares danger in it? Ant. I must. Dor. What. Sap. Speake it out. Ant. Climbe that sweete Virgin tree. Sap. Plague a your trees. Ant. And pluck that fruit which none I think euer tasted: Sap. A souldier, and stand sumbling so. Dor. O Kill me, Kneeles. And heauen will take it as a sacrifice, But it you play the Rauisher, there is
A Hell to swallow you. Sap. Let her swallow thee. Ant. Rise for the Romane Empire (Dorothea) I would not wound thine honour, pleasure forc'd Are vnripe Apples, sowre, not worth the plucking, Yet let me tell you, tis my fathers will, That I should seize vpon you as my prey. Which I abhorre as much as the blackest sinne The villany of man did euer act. Sapritius breakes in and Macrinus. Ang. Dye happy for this language. Sap. Dye a slaue, A blockish Ideot. Mac. Deare sir, vexe him not. Sap. Yes, and vexe thee too, both I thinke are geldings, Cold, Phlegmatike Bastard, th'art no brat of mine, One sparke of me, when I had heate like thine By this had made a Bonefire: a tempting whore (For whom th'art mad) thrust euen into thine armes, And standst thou puling? had a Taylor seene her Her at this aduantage, he with his crosse-capers Had rufled her by this, but thou shalt curse Thy dalliance, and heere before her eyes Teare thy flesh in peeces, when a slaue In hot lust bathes himselfe, and gluts those pleasures Thy nicenesse durst not touch, call out a slaue, You Captaine of our guard, fetch a slaue hither. exit. Ant. What will you do deere Sir. Sap. Teach her a trade, which many would learne In lesse then halfe an houre, to play the Whore. Enter a Slaue. Mac. A Slaue is to me, what now. Sap. Thou hast bones and flesh Enough to ply thy labour, from what country Wert thou tane Prisoner, heere to be our slaue. Slaue. From Brittaine. Sap. In the west Ocean.
Sla. Yes. Sap. An Iland. Sla. Yes. Sap. I am fitted, of all Nations Our Romane swords euer conquer'd, none comes neere The Brittaine for true whooring: sirrah fellow, What wouldst thou doe to gaine thy liberty? Sla. Doe! liberty! fight naked with a Lyon, Venture to plucke a Standard from the heart Of an arm'd Legion: liberty! Ide thus Bestride a Rampire, and defiance spit I'th face of death; then, when the battring Ram Were fetching his careere backward to pash Me with his hornes in peeces: to shake my chaines off, And that I could not doo't but by thy death, Stoodst thou on this dry shore, I on a rock Ten Piramids high, downe would I leape to kill thee, Or dye my selfe: what is for man to doe Ile venture on, to be no more a slaue. Sap. Thou shalt then be no slaue, for I wil set thee Vpon a peece of worke is fit for man, Braue for a Brittaine, drag that Thing aside And rauish her. Sla. And rauish her! is this your manly seruice, A Diuell scornes to doo't, tis for a beast, A villaine, not a man, I am as yet But halfe a slaue, but when that worke is past, A damned whole one, a blacke vgly slaue, The slaue of all base slaues, doo't thy selfe Roman, Tis drudgery fit for thee. Sap. Hees bewitch'd too, Binde him, and with a Bastinado giue him Vpon his naked belly 200. blowes. Sla. Thou art more slaue then I. exit carried in. Dor. That power supernall on whom waites my soule, Is Captaine ore my chastity. Ant. Good sir giue ore, The more you wrong her, your selfes vex'd the more, Sap. Plagues light on her and thee; thus downe I throw
Thy Harlot thus bi'th haire, naile her to earth, Call in ten slaues, let euery one discouer What lust desires, and surfet heere his fill, Call in ten flaues. Ang. They are come sir at your call. Sap. O oh. Falls downe. Enter Theophilus. The. Where is the Gouernour? Ant. There's my wretched father. The. My Lord, Sapritius, hee's not dead, my Lord, That Witch there. Aut. T is no Romane gods can strike These fearefull terrors, O thou happy maid, Forgiue this wicked purpose of my father. Dor. I doe. The. Gone, gone, he's peppered: tis thou Hast done this act internall. Dor. Heauen pardon you, And if my wrongs from thence pull vengeance downe (I can no myracles worke) yet from my soule Pray to those powers I serue, he may recouer. The. He slirres, helpe, raise him vp, my Lord. Sap. Where am I? The One cheeke is blasted. Sap. Blasted! Wheres the Lamia That teares my entrailes? I'me be witch'd, seize on her? Dor. I'me heere, do what you please. The. Spurne her too'th barre. Dor. Come boy, being there, more neere to heauen we are Sap Kicke harder, goe out witch. exeunt. Ant. O bloudy hangmen, thine own gods giue thee breth, Each of thy tortors is my seuerall death. exit. Enter Harpax Hircius, and Spungius. Har. Doe you like my seruice now, say am not I A Master worth attendance. Spun. Attendance, I had rather licke cleane the soles of
your durty bootes, then weare the richest sute of any infec∣ted Lord, whose rotten life hangs betweene the 2 Poles. Hir. A Lords sute! I wud not giue vp the cloake of your seruice to meet the splay-foot estate of any leftey'd knight aboue the Antipodes, because they are vnlucky to meete. Har. This day ile try your loues to me, tis onely But well to vse the agility of your armes, Spun. Or legs, I am losty at them. Hir. Orany other member that has no legges. Spun. Thou't runne into some hole. Hir. If I meet one that's more thē my match, & that I can∣not stand in their hands, I must & will creep on my knees. Har. Heere me my little teeme of villaines, heare me, I cannot teach you Fencing with these Cudgels, Yet you must vse them, lay them on but soundly, Thats all. Hir. Nay if we come to malling once, puh, Spun. But what Wall-nut tree is it we must beate. Har. Your Mistresse. Hir. How! my Mistresse! I begin to haue a Christians heart, made of sweet butter, I melt, I cannot strike a womā. Hir. Not I, vnlesse she scratch, bum my mistresse! Har. Y'are Coxecombes, silly Animals, Hir. Whats that? Har. Drones, Asses, blinded Moles, that dare not thrust Your armes out to catch Fortune, say you fall off, It must be done you are conuetted Rascalls, And that once spred abroad, why euery slaue Will kicke you, call you motley Christians, And halfe fac'd Christians. Spun. The guts of my conscience beginne to be of whit-leather, Hir. I doubt me I shall haue no sweet buttet in me. Har. Deny this, and each Pagan whom you meete Shall forked fingers thrust into your eyes. Hir. If we be Cuckolds. Har. Doe this, and euery god the Gentiles bow to, Shall adde a fadome to your line of yeeres. Spun. A hundred fadome, I desire no more.
Hir. I desire but one inch longer, Har. The Senators will as you passe along Clap you vpon your shoulders with this hand, And with this hand glue you gold when you are dead, Happy that man shall be can get a nayle, The paring —, they the dort vnder the nayle Of any of you both, to say this durt Belong'd to Spungius or Hercius. Spun. They shall not want durt vnder my nayles, ile keepe'em long of purpose, for now my singers itch to bee at her. Hir. The first thing I doe Ile take her Ore the lips. Spun. And I the hips, we may strike any where. Har. Yes, any where. Hir. Then I know where ile hit her. Har. Prosper and be mine owne; stand by, I must not To see this done, great businesse calls me hence, Hee's made can make her eurse his violence. exit. Spun. Feare it not sir, her ribs shall be basted. Hir. He come vpon her with rounce, robble-hobble, and thwicke thwacke thirlety bouncing. Enter Dorothea lead Prisoner, a Guard attending, a Hangman with Cords in some vgly shape, sets vp a Pillar in the middle of the stage, Sapritius and Theophilus sit, Angelo by her. Sap. According to our Romane customes, binde That Christian to a Pillar. Theo. Insernall Furies, Could they into my hand thrust all their whips To teare thy flesh thy soule, tis not a torture Fit to the Vengeance, I should heape on thee, For wrongs done me: me! for flagitious facts By thee done to our gods, yet (so it stand To great Cesaraes Gouernors high pleasure) Bow but thy Knee to Iupiter and offer Any slight sacrifice, or doe but sweare
By Caesars fortune, and be free. Sap. Thou shalt. Dor. Not for all Casar fortune, were it chaind To more worlds, then are kingdomes in the world, And all those worlds drawne after him: I defie Your hangmen; you now shew me whither to flie. Sap. Are hentormentors ready? Ang. Shrinke not deere mistresse. Both. My Lord, we are ready for the businesse. Dor. You two! whom I like fosterd children fed, And lengthen'd out your starued life with bread: You be my hangman! whom when vp the ladder Death hald you to be strangled, I fetcht downe Clothd you, and warmd you, you two my tormentors. Both. Yes, use. Dor. Diuine powers pardon you. Sap. Strike. strike at her: Angelo knee∣ling holds her fast. Theo. Beate out her braines—, Dor. Receive me you bright Angels. Sap. Faster slaues. Spun. Faster: I am out of breath I'am sure: if I were to beate a bucke, I can strike no harder. Hir. O mine armes, I cannot list'em to my head. Dor. Ioy aboue ioys, are my tormentors wearie In torturing me, and in my suffrings I fainting in no linbe: anto strike home And feast your fury full. Theo. These dogs are ours. come from his seate. Which snarle, yet bite not: see my Lord, her face Has more bewitching beauty then before, Prowd whore: it smiles, cannot an eye shart out With these. Hir. No sir, not the bridge of her nose fall, tis full of Iron worke. Sap. Lets view the oudgols, are they not counterfeit. Ang. There fixe thine eye still, thy glorious crown must come Not from soft pleasure, but by martyrdome, There fixe thine eye still, when we next do meet,
Not thornes, but roses shall beare vp thy feet: There fixe thine eye still. exit. Enter Harpax sneaking. Dor. Euer, euer, euer. Theo. Wee are mock'd, these bats haue power downe to fell gyants, yether skin is not fear'd. Sap. What rogues are these. Theo. Cannot these force a shreeke. beats them. Spun. Oh! a woman has one of my ribs, and now fiue more are broken. Theo. Cannot this make her roare. beates tother he roares Sa. Who hir'd these slaues? what are they? Spun. We serue that noble Gentleman there, he entisde vs to this dry-beating, oh for one halfe pot. Har. My seruants! two base rogues, & sometimes seruants To her and for that cause forbeare to hurt her. Sap. Vnbinde her, hang vp these. Theo. Hang the two hounds on the next tree. Hir. Hang vs! master Harpax, what a diuell shall we be thus vsde. Har. What bandogs but you two wud worry a woman! Your mistessell but clapt you, you flew on: Say I should get your liues, each rascall begger Would when he met you, cry, out helhounds, traitors Spit at you, fling durt at you, and no woman Euer endure your fight: tis your best course (Now had you secret kniues) to stab your selues, But since you haue not, goe and be hang'd. Hir. I thanke you. Har. I is your best course. Theo. Why stay they trifling here? To gallowes drag'em by the heeles: away. Spun. By the heeles! no sir, wee haue legges to doe vs that seruice. Hir. I, I, if no woman can endure my sight, away with me. exeunt. Har. Dispatch'em. Spun. The diuell dispatch thee. exit.
Sap. Death this day ride in triumph, Theophilus. See this witch made away to. Theo. My soule thirst for it, Come, I my selfe, thy hangmans part could play. Dor. Ohhasten me to my coronation day. exeunt Enter Antoninus, Macrinus, seruants. Anton. Is this the place where vertue is to suffer, And heauenly beauty leauing this base earth, To make a glad returne from whence it came, Is it Macrinus? a scaffold thrust forth Mac. By this preparation You well may rest assurd that Dorethea This houre is to die here. Anton. Then with her dies The abstract of all sweetnesse that's in woman, Set me downe friend, that ere the iron hand Of death close vp mine eyes, they may at once Take my last leaue both of this light, and her: For she being gone, the glorious Sun himselfe To me's Cymerian darkenesse. Macr. Stange affection! Cupid once more hath chang'd his shafts with death, And kills in stead of giuing life. Anton. Nay weepe not, Though teares of friendship be a soueraigne balme, On me they are cast a way: it is decreed That I must die with her, our clew of life Was spun together. Macr. Yet sir tis my wonder That you who hearing onely what she suffers, Pertake of all her tortures, yet will be To adde to vour calamitie, an eye witnesse Of her last Ttagicke scene, which must pierce deeper And make the wound more desperate. Anton. O Macrinus, T would linger out my tormentselfe, not kill me,
Which is the end I aime at, being to die to. What instrument more glorious can I wish for, Then what is made sharpe by my constant loue And true affection. It may be the duty And loyall seruice with which I pursude her, And seald it with my death, will be remembred Among her blessed actions, and what honor Can I desire beyond it? Enter a guard bringing in Dorothea, a headsman before her, followed by Theophitus, Sapritius, Harpax. See she comes, How sweet her innocence appeares, more like To heauen it selfe then any sacrifice That can be offerd to it. By my hopes Of ioyes hereafter, the sight makes me doubtfull In my beleefe, nor can I thinke our gods Are good, or to be seru'd, that take delight In offrings of this kinde, that to maintaine Their power, do face the master peece of nature, Which they themselues come short of she ascends, An euery step raises her neerer heauen. What god so erethou art that most enioy her, Receiue in her a boundlesse happinesse Sap. You are too blame To let him come abrode. Macr. It was his will, And we were left to serue him, not command him, Anton. Good sir be not offended, nor deny My last of pleasures in this happy obiect That I shall ere be blest with. Theo. Now prowd contemner Of vs and of our gods, tremble to thinke It is not in the power thou seru'st, to saue thee. Not all the riches of the sea increasd By violent shipwrackes, nor the vnsearched mines Mammons vnknowne exchequer shall redeeme thee.
And therefore hauing first with horror weigh'd What tis to die, and to die yong, to part with All pleasures, and delights: lastly, to goe Where all Antipathies to comfort dwell Furies behind, about thee, and before thee, And to adde to affliction the remembrance Of the Elizian ioyes thou might'st haue tasted, Hadst thou not turnd Apostata to those gods That so reward their seruants, let despayre Preuent the hangmans sword, and on this scaffold Make thy first entrance into hell. Anton. She smiles, Vnmou'd by Mars, as if she were assur'd Death looking on her constancy would forget The vse of his ineuitable hand. Theo. Derided to? dispatch I say. Dor. Thou foole That gloriest in hauing power to rauish A trifle from me I am weary of: What is this life? to me not worth a thought Or if to bee esteemd, 'tis that I loose it To win a better, eu'n thy realice serues To me but as a ladder to mount vp To such a height of happinesse where I shall Looke downe with scorne on thee, and on the world, Where circl'd with true pleasures, plac'd aboue The reach of death or time, twill be my glory To thinke at what an, easie price I bought it. There's a perpetuall spring, perpetuall youth, No ioynt benumming cold, nor scorehing heate, Famine nor age haue any being there: Forget for shame your Tempe, burie in Obliuion, your fainde your Hesperian Orchards The Golden fruite kept by the watchfull Dragon Which did require Hercules to get it Compar'd with what growes in all plenty there, Deserues not to be nam'd. The power I serue Laughs at your happy Arabie, or the
Elizian shades, for he hath made his bowers Better indeed then you can fancy yours. Anton. O take me thither with you. Doro. Trace my steps And be assurd you shall. Sap. With mine owne hands He rather stop that little breath is left thee, And rob thy killing feauer. Theo. By no means, Let him go with her, do seduc'd yong man, And waite vpon thy saint in death, do, do, And when you come to that imagind place, That place of all delights, pray you obserue me, And meete those cursed things I once call'd daughters, Whom I haue sent as harbingers before you, If there be any truth in your religion, In thankfulnesse to me that with care hasten Your iourney thither, pray send me some Small pittance of that curious fruit you bost of. Ant. Grant that I may goe with her, and I will. Sap. Wilt thou in thy last minute dam thy selfe? Theo. The gates to hell are open. Dor. Know thou tyrant Thou agent for the diuell thy great master Though thou art most vnworthy to tast of it, I can and will. Enter Angelo in the Angels habit. Har. Oh! mountaines fall vpon me, Or hide me in the bottome of the deepe, Where light may neuer find me. Theo. Whats the matter? Sap. This is prodigious, and confirms her witch craft. Theo. Harpax my Harpax speake. Har. I dare not stay, Should I but heare her once more I were lost, Some whirle winde snatch me from this cursed place, To which compar'd (and with what now I suffer) Hels totments are sweet slumbers. exit Harpax Sap.
Sap. Follow him. Theo. He is distracted, and I must not loose him, Thy charms vpon my seruant cursed witch, Giues thee a short repricue, lethernot die Till my returne. exeunt Sap. and Theo Anton. She minds him not, what obiect Is her eye fixd on? Macr. I see nothing. Anton. Marke her. Doro. Thou glorious minister of the power I serue, For thou art more then mortall, ist for me Poore sinner, thou art pleasd a while to leaue Thy heauenly habitation? and vouchsafest Though glorified, to take my seruants habit, For put off thy diuinitie, so lookd My louely Angelo. Ange. Know I am the same, And still the seruant to your pictie, Your zealous prayers and pious deeds first wonne me (But 'twas by his command to whom you sent 'em) To guide your steps. I tride your charitie, When in a beggers shape you tooke me vp And clothd my naked limbes, and after fed (As you beleeu'd) my famishd mouth. Learne all By your example to looke on the poore With gentle eyes, for in such habits often Angels desire an Almes. I neuer left you, Nor will I now, for I am sent to carry Your pure and innocent soule to ioyes eternall, Your martyrdome once sufferd, and before it Aske any thing from me, and rest assur'd You shall obtaine it Doro. I am largely payd For all my torments, since I find such grace Grant that the loue of this yong man to me, In which he languisheth to death, may be Chang'd to the loue of heauen, Ange. I will performe it.
And in that instant when the sword seta free Your happy soule his shall haue libertie. Is there ought else? Doro. For proofe that I foregiue My , who in scornd desir'd To tast of that most  fruite I go to After my death as sent from me, be pleasd To giue him of it. Ange. Willingly deere Mistresse. Mac. I am amaz'd Anton. I feels a holy fire That yeelds a comfortable heate within me. I am quite alterd from the thing I was. See I can stand, and goe alone, thus kneels To heauenly Dorothea, touch her hand With a religious kisse. Enter Sapritius and Theophilus. Sapr. He is well now, But will not be drawne . Theoph. It matters not, We can discharge this works without his helpe: But see your sonne. Sapr, Villaine Anton. Sir I be seech you, Being so neere our ends diuoroe vs not. Theo. He quickly make a soparation of' om. Hast thou ought else to say? Dorothea. Nothing but blame Thy tardinesse in sending me torest, My peace is made with heauen, to which my soule Begins to take her flight, strike, O. strike quickly, And though you are vn mou'd to be my death Hereafter when my story shall be read, As they were present now, the hearers shall Say this of Dorothea with wet eyes She liu'd a virgin, and a virgin dies. her head strucke off Anton. O take my soule along to waite on mine. Macr. Your sonne sinks to. Antonius sinkes Sap. Already dead. The. Die all. That are or fauour this accursed Sect,
I triumph in their ends, and will raise vp A hill of their dead Karkatses, to or clooke The Pyrenean Hils, but ile roote out. These superstitious fooles, and leaue the World No name of Christian. Loud Musicke, exit Angelo leauing first laid his hand vp. on their mouthes. Sap. Ha, hauenly Musicke. Mac. Tis in the ayre. The. Illusions of the Diuell Wrought by some one of her Religion. That faine would make her death a miracle, It frights not me: because he is your sonne Let him haue buriall, but let her body Be cast forth with contempt in some high way, And be to Vultures and to Dogea prey. Exeunt. The end of the fourth Act. Actus 5. Scena I. Enter Theophilus in his study, Bookes about him. The. Is't Holliday (Oh Casar) that thy seruant, (Thy Prouost, to see execution done On these base Christians in Casarea) Should now want worke: sheepe these Idolaters That none are stirring, As a curious Painter Rises. When he has made some admirable peece, Stands off, and with a searching eye examines Each colours how tis sweetned, and then hugs Himselfe for his rare workemanship.— So heere Sits. Will I my Drolleries and bloudy Lantskips Long past wrap'd vp vnfold to make me merry With shadowes, now I want the substances. Books. My Muster-booke of Hel-hounds, were the Christians Whose names stand heere (aliue) and arm'd, not Rome Could mooue vpon her Hindges. What I haue done, Or shall heereafter, is not out of hate To poore tormented wretches, no I am carried
With violence of zeale, and streames of seruice I owe our Romane gods. Great Britaine, what. A thousand wiues with brats sucking their brests, Had hot Irons pinch 'em off and throwne to swine; And then their fleshy backparts he wed with hatchets, Were mine'd and bak'd in Pies to feede staru'd Christians. Ha, ha. Agen, agen, —East. Anglas—, oh, East-Angles, Bandogs (kept three dayes hungry) worried 1000. Brittish Rascals, styed vp, fat Of purpose, strip'd naked, and disarm'd. I could outstare a yeere of Sunnes and Moones, To sit at these sweete Bul-baitings, so I could Thereby but one Christian win to fall In adoration to my Iupiter. Twelue hundred Eyes boar'd with Augurs out: oh! eleuen thousand Torne by wild beasts: two hundred ram'd i'th earth To'th armepits, and full Platters round about'em, But farre enough for reaching, eate dogs, ha, ha, ha. Tush, all these tortures are but phillipings, Flea-bitings; I before the destinies My bottome did winde vp, would flesh my selfe Once more, vpon some one remarkeable Aboue all these, this Christian Slut was well, A pretty one, but let such horror follow The next I feede with torments, that when Rome Shall heare it, her foundation at the sound May feele an Earth-quake. How now? Musicke. Rise Consort, enter Angelo with a Basket fild with fruit and flowers. Ang. Are you amazd'd Sir—so great a Roman spirit and does it tremble. The. How cam'st thou in? to whom thy businesse? Ang. To you: I had a mistresse late senthence by you Vpon a bloudy errand, you intreated That when she came into that blessed Garden Whither she knew she went, and where (now happy) Shee feedes vpon all ioy, she would send to you Some of that Garden fruit and flowers, which heere
To haue her promise sau'd, are brought by me. The. Cannot I see this Garden? Ang. Yes, if the Master Will giue you entrance. Angelo vanisheth. The. Tis atempting fruit, and the most bright check'd child I euer view'd, Sweete smelling goodly fruit, what flowers are these? In Dioclesians Gardens, the most beautious Compard with these are weedes: is it not February? The second day she dyed: Frost, Ice and snowe Hang on the beard of Winter, wheres the sunne That guilds this summer, pretty sweete boy, say in what Country Shall a man find this Garden —, my delicate boy, gonel Vanished! Within there, Iuliarues and Gota. — enter two seruants. Both. My Lord. The. Are my gates shut? 1. And guarded. The. Saw you not — a boy. 2. Where? The. Heere hee entred, a young Lad, 1000. blessings danc'd vpon his eyes, a smooth fac'd glorious Thing, that brought this Basket. 1. No sir? exeunt. The. Away, but be in reach if my voyce calls you, No! vanish'd! and not seene, be thou a spirit Sent from that Witch to mock me, I am sure This is essentiall, and how ere it growes, Will taste it. Enter. Har. Ha, ha, ha, ha. Harpax within. The. So good, ile haue some now sure. Har. Ha, ha, ha, ha, great lickorish foole. The. What art thou? Har. A Fisherman, The. What doest thou catch; Har. Soules, soules, a fish cal'd soules.
Enter a seruent. The. Geta. 1. My Lord. Har. Ha, ha, ha, ha. Within. The. What insolent slaue is this dares laugh at me? Or what ist the dog grinnes at so? 1. I neither know my Lord at what, nor whom, for there is none without but my fellow Iulianus, and hee's making a Garland for Iupiter. The. Iupiter! all within me is not well, And yet not sicke. Har. Ha, ha, ha, ha. lowder. The. What's thy name slaue? Har. Goe looke. At one end. 1. Tis Harpax voyce. The. Harpax, goe drag the Caitiffe to my foote, That I may stampe vpon him. Har. Foole, thou lyest. At tother end. 1. Hee's yonder now my Lord. The. Watch thou that end Whilst I make good this. Har. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha. At the middle. The. Hee's at Barli-breake, and the last coulple are now in hell, exit seruent. Search for him, all this ground me thinke is bloudy, And pau'd with thousands of those Christians eyes Whom I haue tortu'd, and they stare vpon me; What was this apparition? sure it had A shape Angelicall; mine eyes (though dazled And danted at first sight) tell me, it wore A paire of glorious wings, yea they were wings, And hence he flew; tis vanished, Iupiter For all my sacrifices done to him Neuer once gaue me smile: how can stone smile, musicke. Or woodden Image laugh? ha! I remember Such Musicke gaue a welcome to my eare, When the faire youth came to me: tis in the Ayre, Or from some better place, a power diuine,
Through my darke ignorance on my soule does shine, And makes me see a conscience all stai'nd ore, Nay drown'd and damn'd for euer in Christian gore. Har. Ha, ha, ha. Within. The. Agen, what dainty rellish on my tongue This fruit hath left, some Angell hath me fed, If so toothfull, I will be banqueted. eates another. Har. Hold. Enter Harpax in a feare∣full shape, fire flashing out of the study. The. Not for Caesar. Har. But for me thou shalt. The. Thou art no Twin to him that Last was heere. You powers whom my soule bids me reuerence Guard me: What art thou? Har. I'me thy Master. The. Mine. Har. And thou my euerlasting slaue; that Harpax, Who hand in hand hath led thee to thy Hell Am I. The. Auant. Har. I will not, cast thou downe That Basket with the things in't, and fetch vp What thou hast swallowed, and then take a drinke Which I shall giue thee, and i'me gon. The. My Fruit! Does this offend thee? see Har. Spet it to'th earth, And tread vpon it, or ile peece-meale teare thee. The. Art thou with this affrighted? see, heares more. Flow∣ers. Har. Fling them away, ile take thee else & hang thee In a contorted Chaine of Isicles I'th frigid Zone: downe with them. The. At the botome, One thing I found not yet, see. A crosse of Flowers. Har. Oh, I'me tortur'd. The. Can this doo't? hence thou Fiend infernall hence. Har. Claspe Iupiters Image, and away with that. The. At thee ile fling that Iupiter, for me thinkes
I serue a better Master, he now checkes me For murthering my two daughters, put on by thee, By thy damn'd Rhetoricke did I hunt the life Of Dorothea, the holy Virgin Martyr, She is not angry with the Axe nor me, But sends these presents to me, and its Ore worlde to finde her, and from her white hand To beg a forgiuenesse. Har. No, ile bind thee heere. The. I set up a strength aboue thine: this small wea∣pon me thinkes is Armour hard enough. Har. Keepe from me. Sinkes a little. The. Art poasting to thy center? down hel-hound, down, Me hast thou lost; that arme which hurlesthee hence Saue me, and set me vp the strong defence In the faire Christians quarrel. Enter Angele. Ang. Exit thy foote there, Nor be thou shaken with a Caesars voyce, Though thousand deaths were in it: and I then Will bring thee to a Riuer that shall wash Thy bloudy hands cleane, and more white then Snow, And to that Garden where these blest things grow, And to that martyr'd Virgin, who hath sent That heauenly token to thee; Spred this braue wing And serue then Caesar, a farre greater King. exit. The. It is, it is some Angell, vanish'd againe! Oh come back rauishing Boy, bright Messenger, Thou hast (by these mine eyes fixt on thy beauty) Illumined all my soule, now looke I backe On my blacke Tyranies, which as they did. Out dare the bloudiest, thou blest spirit that leades me, Teach me what I must do, and to doe well, That my last act, the best may Paralell. exit. Enter Dioclesian, Maximinus, Epire, Pontus, Macedon, mee∣ting Artemia, attendants. Art. Glory and Conquest still attend vpon
Triumphant Caesar. Dio. Let thy wish faire Daughter Be equally deuided, and hereafter Learne thou to know and reuerence Maximinus, Whose power with mine vnited makes one Caesar. Max. But that I feare't would be held flattery, The bonds consider'd in which we stand tide As loue, and Empire, I should say till now I nere had seene a Lady I thought worthy To be my Mistresse. Art. Sir, you shew yourselfe Both Courtier and Souldier, but take heede, Take heede my Lord, though my dull pointed beauty Stain'd by a harsh refusall in my seruant Cannot dart forth such beames as may inflame you, You may encounter such a powerfull one, That with a pleasing heate will thaw your heart Though bound in ribs of Ice, loue still is loue, His Bow and Arrowes are the same, great Iulius That to his successors left the name of Caesar Whom warre could neuer tame, that with dry eyes Beheld the large plaines of Pharsalia, couer'd With the dead Karkasses of Senators And Citizens of Rome, when the world knew No other Lord but him, strucke deepe in yeeres to, And men gray haird forget the lusts of youth: After all this, meeting faire Cleapatra, A suppliant to the magicke of her eye, Euen in his pride of conquest tooke him captiue, Nor are you more secure. Max. Were you deform'd (But by the gods you are most excellent) Your grauity and diseretion would o'recome me, And I should be more proud in being a Prisoner To your faire vertues, then of all the Honours, VVealth, Title, Empire, that my sword hath purchac'd Dio. This meetes my wishes, welcome it Artemia VVith out-stretch'd armes, and study to forget
That Antoninus euer was thy fate Reseru'd thee for this better choise, embrace it. Ep. This happy match brings new nerues to giue strength To our continued league. Mace. Hymen himselfe Will blesse this marriage which we will solemnize In the presence of these Kings. Pon. Who rest most happy To be eye-witnesses of a Match that brings Peace to the Empire. Diocles. We much thanke your loues, But wher's Sapritius our Gouernour, And our most zealous prouost good Theophilus? If euer Prince were blest in a true seruant, Or could the gods be debtors to a man, Both they and we stand far ingag'd to cherish His pietic and seruice. Artem. Sir the Gouernour Brookes sadly his sonnes losse although he turnd Apostata in death, but bold Theophilus Who for the same cause in my presence seald His holy anger on his daughters hearts. Hauing with tortutes first tride to conuert her, Drag'd the bewitching Christian to the scaffold, And saw her loose her head. Dio. He is all worthy, And from his owne mouth I would gladly heare The manner how she sufferd. Arte. 'Twill be deliuerd With such contempt and scorne, I know his nature That rather twill beget your highnesse laughter Then the least pittie. Enter Theophilus, Sapritius, Macrinus. Dio. To that end I would heare it. Arte. He comes, with him the Gouernour. Dio. O Sapritius, I am to chide you for your tendernesse, But yet remembring that you are a father, I will forget it, good Theophilus He speake with you anone: neerer your care, to Sapritius.
Theo. By Antoninus soule I do coniure you, And though not for religion, for his friendship, Without demanding whats the cause that moues me, Receiue my signet, by the power of this Go to my prisons, and release all Christian That are in fetters there by my command. Mac. But what shall follow? Theo. Haste then to the port, You there shall finde two tall ships ready rig'd, In which embarke the poore distressed soules And beare them from the reach of tyranny, Enquire not whither you are bound, the dietic That they adore will giue you prosperous winds, And make your voyage such, and largely pay for Your hazard, and your trauaile: leaue me here There is a scene that I must act alone. Haste good Macrinus, and the great God guide you. Mac. Ile vndertake't, theres some thing prompts me to it Tis to saue innocent blood, a Saintlike act, And to be mercifull has neuer beene By mortall men themselues esteemd a sin. exit Mac. Dioc. You know your charge. Sap. And will with care obserue it. Dio. For I professe he is not Casars friend That sheds a teare for any torture that A Christians suffers. Welcome my best seruant My carefull, zealous Prouost, thou hast toyld To satisfie my will though in extreames, I loue thee for't, thou art firme rocke, no changeling: Prethee deliuer, and for my sake do it Without excesse of bitternesse or seosses Before my brother and these kings, how tooke The Christian her death. Theo. And such a presence Though euery priuate head in this large roome Were circl'd round with an imperiall crowne, Her story will deserue, it is so full Of excellency and wonder.
Diocle. Ha! how's this? Theo. O marke it therefore, and with that attention, As you would here an Embassie from heauen By a wing'd Legate, for the truth deliuerd, Both how and what this blessed virgin sufferd: And Dorothea but hereafter nam'd, You will rise vp with reuerence, and no more As things vn worthy of your thoughts, remember What the canoniz'd Spartan Ladies were Which lying Greece so bosts of, your owne matrons Your Romane dames whose figures you yet keepe As holy relickes in her historic Will find a second vrne. Gracohus, Cornelia, Paulina that in death desirde to follow Her husband Seneca, nor Brutus Portia That swallowd burning coles to ouertake him, Though all their seuerall worths were giuen to one With this is to be mention'd. Maximinus. Is he mad? Diocl. Why they did die Theophilus, and boldly. This did no more. Theo. They out of desperation Are for vaine glory of an aftername Parted with life. This had not mutinous sonnes As the rash Gracchi were, nor was this Saint A doting mother as Cornelia was: This lost no husband in whose ouerthrow Her wealth and hononr suncke, no feare of want Did make her being redious, but aiming At an immortall crowne, and in his cause Who onely can bestow it; who sent downe Legions of ministring Angels to beare vp Her spotlesse soule to heauen; who entertaind it With choyce celestiall musicke, equall to To the motion of the spheres, she vncompeld Chang'd this life for a better. My Lord Sapritius You were present at her death, did you ere here Such rauishing sounds?
Sap. Yet you sayd then it was witchcraft, And diuellish illusions. Theo. I then hard it With sinfull cares, and belch'd out blasphemous words Against his dietie, which then I knew not, Nor did beleeue in him. Diocl. Why dost thou now? or dar'st thou in our hearing? Theoph. Were my voyce As lowd as is his thunder, to be heard Through al the world, all potentates on earth Ready to burst with rage should they but heare it, Though hell to ayde their mallice lent her furies Yet I would speake, and speake againe, and boldly, I am a Christian, and the powers you worship But dreames of fooles and madmen. Maximums. Lay hands on him. Dio. Thou twice a child (for doting age so makes thee) Thou could it not else thy pilgrimage of life, Being almost past through in the last moment, Destroy what ere thou hast done good or great, Thy youth did promise much, and growne a man Thou madest it good, and with encrease of yeares Thy actions still betterd as the Sunne Thou did rise gloriously, kepst a constant course In all thy iourney, and now in the cuening When thou shouldst passe with honour to thy rest, Wilt thou fall like a Metcor? Sapritius. Yet confesse That thou art mad, and that thy tong and heart Had no agreement. Max. Doe, no way is left else To saue thy life Theophilus. Diocl. But refule it Destruction as horrid and as sodaine Shall fall vpon thee, as if hell stood open And thou wert sinking thither. Theoph. Here me yet Here for my seruice past.
Artem. What will he say? Theo. At cuer I deseru'd your fauour here me, And grant one boone, tis not for life I sue for, Nor is it fit that I that nere knew pitty To any Christian, being one my selfe Should looke for any: no, I rather beg The vtmost of your cruelty; I stand Accomptable for thousand Christians deaths, And were it possible that I could die A day for euery one, then liue againe To be againe tormented, t were to me An cafie pennance, and I should passe through A gentle clensing fire, but that denyde me, It being beyond the strength of feeble nature, My sute is you would haue no pitty on me. In mine owne house there are a thousand engine Of studied crueltie, which I did prepare For miserable Christians, let me seele As the Sicilian did his brazen bull, The horridst you can find, and I will say In death that you are mercifull. Dtoc. Despaire not In this thou shalt preuaile, go fetch 'em hither, some go for the racks. Death shall put on a thousand shapes at once And so appeare before thee, racks, and whips, Thy flesh with burning pinsorstorne, shall feed The fire that heates them, and whats wanting to The torture of thy body, Ile supply In punishing thy mind: fetch all the Christians That are in hold, and here before his face Cut'cm in peeces. Theo. Tis not in thy power, It was the first good deed I euer did, They are remou'd out of thy raceh, how ere I was determin'd for my sinnes to die, I first tooke order for their liberty, And still I dare thy worst. Diocle. Dind him I say,
Make euery artery and sinew crack, The slaue that makes him giue the lowdest shrike Shall haue ten thousand Drachmes, wretch ile force thee To curse the power thou worship'st. The. Neuer, neuer, No breath of mine shall euer be spent on him, They tor∣ment him. But what shall speake his Maiesty or mercy: I am honour'd in my suffrings, weake tormentors More tortures, more: alas you are vnskilfull, For Heauens sake more; my brest is yet vntorne: Heere purchase the reward that was propounded, The Irons coole, heere are armes yet and thighes, Spare no part of me. Max. He endures beyond The suffrance of a man. Sap. No sigh nor grone To witnesse he has feeling. Dio. Harder Villaines. Enter Harpax. Har. Vnlesse that he blaspheme hee's lost for euer, Iftorments cuer could bring forth despaire, Let these compell him to it. oh me My ancient enemies againe, falls downe. Enter Dcrothea in a white robe, crownes vpon her robe, a Crowne vpon her head, lead in by the Angell. Antoninus, Caliste and Christeta following all in white, but lesse glorious, the Angell with a Crowne for him. The. Most glorious vision, Did ere so hard a bed yeeld man a dreame So heauenly as this? I am confirm'd, Confirm'd you blessed spirits, and make hast To take that crowne of immortality You offer to me; death till this blest minute I neuer thought thee slow pac'd, nor could I Hasten thee now for any paine I suffer, But that thou kepst me from a glorious wreath Which through this stormy way I would creepe to,
And humbly kneeling with humility weare it. Oh now I feele thee, blessed spirits I come And witnesse for me, all these wounds and scarres, I die a souldier in the Christian warres. dies. Sap. I haue seene thousands tortur'd, but nere yet A constancy like this. Harpax. I am twise damn'd. Aug. Haste to thy place appointed cursed fiend, In spite of hell this souldier's not thy prey, Tis I haue wonne, thou that hast lost the day. exit Angele the diuell sinkes with lightning. Die. I thinke the centre of the earth be cracks, Yet I still stand vnmou'd, and will go on, The persecution that is here begun, Through all the world with violence shall run. flourish exeunt: FINIS.
