18507.312 99841459 6044
Num. 84. The NORIMBERG Curranto of this week. The confirmation of the defeat of the remainds of Marazini's Army, and taking him prisoner. The people of Tabor make away apace to Vienna, and to Gratz, and so to the Mountains, by reason of the Swedes approach. Generall Bannier is drawing his forces from all parts to Brandeis, 3 leagues from Prague, where Hatzfeld is now joyned with Gallas; whereupon another battell is like to follow. Prague the 2: 12 of May. WHat I have certified you, is not onely confirmed, but we have likewise received here further intelligence, that the Swedes are already in the midst of our King∣dom, and have anew totally routed and defeated the rest of Gen: Marazini's forces, and about 1000 of them slain, obtained 28 Standards, and taken prisoner Gen: Marazini himself, together with his wife and children, the yong Count of Shlick, and other Officers, which causeth great fear, not onely in this City, but even at Vienna: Gen: Hatzfeld is comming with his troops, to succour Gen: Gallas, but the Swedish Gen: Major King followeth him upon the foot; if this conjunction be hindred, our Kingdom will be in the highest danger; and it is to be feared, that we shall not be rid again so soon of these guests: Gen: Gallas, Fieldmarshall Baron of Hoffkirck, the old Count of Shlick, Count of Furstenburg, and Count of Colleredo, are here in this City very much perplex'd, and their forces intrench themselves upon the White-Hill: Norimberg the 7. 17 of May. The Hatzfeldish troops, which are arrived hereabouts, and lye at Furt, are to break up again to morrow, or next day after, with whom certain Bavarian troops are to joyn, and go together into Bohemia, they have very bad weather to march, and are likely to come too late: At this in∣stant we receive the Letters from Prague, it seemeth the poor people dare not write what they know, yet this they certifie, that the Swedes at their own pleasure straggle all the Country over, and play the master in the field; the Imperialists, except the Hatzfeldish succour, which con∣sists of brave horsmen, but the foot are not 1500 strong, and in all, both horse and foot, not above 5000; the Imperialists themselves begin al∣ready to pillage in the Cities of Prague; the passage towards Dresden and Silesia is stopp'd, and it seemeth that the War will be very hot this yeer in Bohemia and Silesia; if so be that Gen: Bannier gives one blow more to the Imperialists, he will go a great way: the Swedes go about to salute the Hatzfeldish troops, afore they come into Bohemia; many
of the said Hatzfeldish troops run away, insomuch that not above 4000 men will come into Bohemia. Lintz the 7. 17 of May. Within this hour, I am to go by Post from Prague, but with small courage, because the danger is too great; Gen: Bannier with his Army, is marching directly thitherwards; he hath now in his possession Leutma∣ritz, and hath surrounded Tabor, where is such flying towards Vienna, and from thence towards Gratz into Stiria, that it is not to be expressed; whole Bohemia will be lost within few daies: upon the White-Hill lye 10000 Imperialists to oppose the Swedes. The Imperial Court, together with the yong Prince, is going towards Gratz. At Vienna, all the names of the Townsmen are taken, he that doth not furnish his house with pro∣vision for 6 moneths must depart out of the City, insomuch that many are already going towards Hungaria. Strasburg the 12. 22 of May. It is certain, that the 8. 18 of this Moneth, the Bavarian Army hath kept its generall Randevouze about Guntzburg, betwixt Donawerth and Vlm; the Duke of Bavaria himself hath propounded and assigned Gen: Gleen his Fieldmarshall, and Baron Mercy, Generall of the Artillery, the Army consists of 3000 horse and 4000 foot, which way they will take, is not yet known: At Augspurg 300 Vats with Meal are loaden upon Carts, which are to be carried to the Army. Dresden the 10. 20 of May. As for News, none other, but that the Swedes have left the siege be∣fore the Castle at Pirna, but the City they have guarded with about 100 men, they took their way towards Leutmaritz, and so forwards into Bo∣hemia; on th'other side of the river of Elve they straggle as far as Baut∣zen, at Bishopswerda they used great cruelty, and committed all manner of insolences. Altenburg the 9. 19 of May. The Witzlebish and Ebersteinish Regiments have layn for 2 daies to∣gether in the little city of Schnallen, one league from hence, where they took away all the horses from the Inhabitants, and drove together in the Country great store of Cattell, and yesterday went with them towards Gera, Jehna, and Erford, they conduct the Ambassadours of the Duke of Luneburg, and from Erfurd they are to bring back to the Army certain Waggons loaden with Ammunition. Rome the 4. 14 of May. The Spaniards have taken, not far from Marsellies, a French ship with Cloth, amounting to the value of 20000 Crowns: the Neapolitan Gal∣leys have likewise mastered 2 Turky ships, and made many Turks to be slaves. And a Florentine Galley hath mastered a Gallion of Algiers,
slew all the Corsars upon it, obtained 32 peeces of Ordnance, and about 300 Christian slaves. Vienna the 8. 18 of May. Certain daies ago, one Regiment of the new levied Hungarians went with 50 Waggons loaden with provision, a great sum of mony, and a∣bout 100 Musquetiers towards Prague; in all the Austrian Countries, great forces are levied for His Imperiall Majesty. Peinitz the 10. 20 of May. This night lay here before this City, and in the next neighbouring Villages, about 3000 heads of Cattels, which the Swedes have brought out of Bohemia, they have 300 horse for a Convoy with them, they in∣tend to drive them from hence to Altenburg, and so forwards into lower Saxony. At Shnallen lye likewise Swedish horsmen with a great num∣ber of Horses and Cows. From the River of Suar the 10. 20 of May. The Duke of Lorrain, with certain troops, is arrived again at Syrck and Reussel, where he kept his Randevouze, and is now marching a∣long the River of Suar towards Suarbruck, which way he will take, time will shew. Prague the 18. 28 of May. Three daies ago, the Swedish Gener: Bannier commanded 5000 hors∣men over the river of Elve, with order to assault this City from behinde, and to hinder that Gen: Hatzfeld may not joyn with Gen: Gallas, but a great showre falling, they were forced to retire without any expedition. Duringer the 19. 29 of May. The 14. 24 of this Moneth, the Saxon Garrison at Leipzig, scaled and mastered the City of Weissenfels, the Swedes that lay in it, retired into the Castle, from thence they gave fierce fire upon the City, and flung many fire-balls into it, by which means the City was fired, and most part of it burned down; whereupon the Duke Francis Henry of Saxon Lawenburg with his Regiment, that had retired into the said Castle, broke up from thence, & marched towards Naumburg, and from thence to Zeitz, and so forwards to the Swedish Army, and in their march they have likewise fired Asterfelden, and divers other places in Saxony. Three daies ago, 1200 Imp: horsmen, and 500 foot arrived in this Coun∣try, and pillaged Franckenhausen, Greussen & other places, and 50 Cra∣bats straggled as far as Gotha, after which certain Swedish horsmen pur∣sued and took 4 of them prisoners. Th'other day came strict order from Gen: Bannier, that all old and new levied horsmen, as also all Musqueti∣ers, which hitherto hath layn in Duringen, shall march speedily without any excuse to the Army, it is thought, that he will assault the City of
Prague from behinde, and hinder, that Generall Hatzfeld may not joyn with Gallas. Zwickaw the 16. 26 of May. The Swedish Lieutenant Gen: Dorstenson with 3 Regiments of horse and 300 foot, hath forced the whole Country of upper Lusatia, as name∣ly, the Cities of Camentz, Bautzen, Goerlitz, Loebenan, Sirtaw and Lauben, to pay unto him a great sum of mony; the most part of the Swe∣dish forces is gone out of these Countries into Bohemia, and lay the 11: 21 of this Moneth, 3 Leagues from Prague, the Imperiall Souldiers run away in great number, and take pay under Gen: Bannier; 3 Imperiall Re∣giments do mutiny and straggle over the whole kingdom of Bohemia; At Prague they are in fear, and labour both day and night in the Tren∣ches, the Jews themselves must help to it, and the Schollers and Citizens keep the walls; the City of Molnick, which lyes 4 leagues from Prague, the Swedes have pillaged and forsaken again, and brought from thence great store of provision to Leutmaritz and Lawastits, and from thence commanded 5000 men towards Tabor, Rudolfs and Budweis. Leipzig the 18: 28 of May. In these parts lye now few Swedish Souldiers, they are all gone into Bohemia. Last Wednesday went from hence 600 Musquetiers, intend∣ing to surprise at Weissenfels, the Duke of Saxon Lawenburg, but being the said Duke had retired with his Regiment out of the City into the Castle, they were forced to return back again, with the losse of 40 dead and wounded. This day 250 men are to go again towards Moersburg, to drive away the Swedes from thence. An Extract of a Letter from Basel, the 28 of May, the 7 of Iune. The 23 of May, 4 of June, Duke Bernhard of Weymar, with 400 horsmen, marched secretly from Bryssack towards the Lake of Con∣stance, and surprised about Lindaw divers Imperiall quarters, and the 27 of May, came back again to Lauffenburg with above 1000 horses, which he had obtained of the Imperialists; His Highnes is now comming back again into the French County, to draw together His troops, and to un∣dertake his great march, it is thought, that he will first assault the City of Salines, which City, as also the City of Besanson, being they see that all passages towards Switzerland are cut off from them, offer now to come to a composition; but the city of S. Claude, being it would neither swear to the French King, nor contribute to His Highnesse, Duke Bernhard of Weymar, and moreover, kept secret correspondence with the Enemy, was fired by the Weymarish and burned down to the ground, together with a great part of the Abby. London, printed Iune 21. 1639, for Nath: Butter and Nicholas Bourn; with Privilege. Imprimatur R. Reade.
