18507.157 S460 22454390 25545
Nouem. 22. Numb. 42. The continuation of our weekly Newes, Containing these particulers following. ¶ The warlike proceedins and good successe of the French and their Confederates in the Grisons and Valtoline. The great Victories which the Hollanders haue gotten in Perue. The taking of seuerall Townes in the land of Marke by the Forces of the Marquis of Brandenburg, and the States of the vnited Prouinces. ¶ The Incursion of the Tartars vpon Podolia, when the Turkes inuaded Hungary. ¶ The Commaund of the Emperor to bring in all the protestant Bookes in Anstria, and a sum∣mons of all the Protestant Preachers to appeere at Ʋienna whether priuate in Gentle∣mens houses, or others. ¶ Certaine Letters from Thuin concerning the meeting of seuerall Embassadors of France, of Venice, of England; with their consultations with the Duke of Sauoy concerning the recouery of the Valtoline. The Death of the Lord of Southampton and his Sonne the Lord Wriotheously, with the valiant exploit of thes Lord of Oxford and Essex vpo the Enmies Conuoy, whereupon the Lord of Oxford receaued some hurt; ey gined of the Enemy some 20. Wgons besides other spoiles. With the Newes of diuers other Parts of Christendome. London Printed by E.  for Nath Butter and Nicho. Bou, 1624.
The continuation of our weekely Newes, from Italy, Germany, Spaine, France, the Low-Countries, and diuers other places. From Ʋienna the 29. of October. WE haue receaued tydings from Cashaw, that many thousands of Tartarians aue made of late an in∣roade in Podolia, and haue done great hurt both with the fire and sword, and taken many Christians prisoners, euen about the same time when the Turkes did the like about the Townes which lye on the hilles and mountaines of Hungary.
His Imperiall Maiestie is yet here, and the Stationers which dwell in Austria hauing beene commanded to send all their Protestant bookes into Germany, haue pack't them vp to be car∣ried thitherwards. The Protestant States of Austria are appoin∣ted to meete here on the next day. All the Protestant Preachers and States of the Land of Ouer-ens are cited to appeare here and to answere for themselues within the space of sixe weekes and three dayes; for the Em∣pretendeth that they haue lost their liues, lands and goods, by reason of their former rebel∣lion, and hath therefore commanded that none shall alter the possession of their estates or of any part of them. There is likewise published by an open Pro∣clamation, that all the Protestant Preachers which liue yet with such Lords in Austria, as haue beene faithfull to the Emperour must goe out of the Land. The States of the Land of Ouer-ens hauing gotten notice of this Proclamation, sent the young Lord of Staremberg to his Imperiall Maiestie (who maketh great account of him, to intercede and speake for the Preachers that they might not be banished. But being come to the Emperour to declare his Commission, he charged him presently to stay with it, vntill the Ambassadours of the
Land of Ouer-ens should come to Vienna, and gaue him warning that although he should bee sent againe, he should not speake in the behalfe of the Protestant Religion. From Breslaw in Silesia the 24. of October. The Cossacks being many thousands strong, haue made an inroade in Silesia, and pillaged amongst other places the whole Countie of Plesse, so that the Princes, Lords, and States of Silesia haue beene compelled to summon many of the Dukedome of Silesia, to resist them by mayne force of armes. From Prage the 26. of October. The Regiment of the Count Colaldo which lyeth some 14. leagues hence, is commanded to marche towards Alsatia. Fewe dayes agoe were the Protestant Bur∣gers of this Cittie warned, that vnlesse they payed fully (within the space of fewe dayes) such moneys as were demanded for their pardon, that they should be banished▪
From Prage the 29. of October. The Land-graue of Lichtenstain maketh great preparation against his iourney towards Vien∣na: And the Count of Waldtsteyn prepareth all manner of necessaries to bring an Armie in the field. From Cullen the 1. Nouember. The Spanish leauy yet many Souldiers, and them which they haue taken vp in the County of Rauensberg, they inquarter there at the charge of the Country people. From Arnhem the 4. Nouember. It is here still rumored that there shall bee leauyed for Count Mansfield and the Duke Christian of Brunswicke 20000. foote, and 4000. horse. And the Prince of Orange and the States of these vnited Prouinces haue chosen some Officers out of their Companies, and Cornets to leauy them.
From Antwerp the 5. of Noue. Wee vnderstand by Letters written from Madrill the 6. day of October, how that the Duke of Ossina dyed on the 20. day of Septem∣ber last past, hauing beene some three yeares in Prison, and that he was very repentant, and ad∣monished his Bastard Sonne (who leadeth the Neapolitan Regiment in Austria) that he would not acknowledge any Princes for his soueraigne but the King of Spaine or the Emperour. By the same Letters we learne likewise, how that the Fleet which is to Sayle towards Brasiel, to take the Bay Todos Los Sanctos again, was not likely to be soone ready; and that they hoped there that the Inhabitāts of Brasiel shal recouer it themselues, before their Fleete commeth there. The Ambassadour of the King of Denmarke hauing dispatched his affaires in the Court of the King of Spaine, he made himselfe ready to goe homewards. And it is rumored that the King of Spaine had restored the Danish shippes which were arrested in Spaine. The King of Spaine sent lately many Horse to seuerall Princes: Namely, 24, to the Empe∣rour,
6. to the Elector of Saxony, and 6. to the Duke of Bauaria. From Brussel the of 2. Nouem. They write from Antwerpe, that some 3. daies agoe, the Ordinance played very fiercely about Preda, and that some souldiers of the vnited Brouinces haue fought very cruelly with one of the Spanish Conuoyes. Moreouer this same Letter relateth a strange thing which happened there, if we will belieue the Author, his words are these. On the 26. of October was heere one that went out of this Citie to make a triall to goe on the water, which he did afterwards, for hee went on a deepe pond being in his harnish, & armed with his rapier & pistol, in the presence of many Lords of the Court & Burgers of this Citty, and leaped and walked vpon the water as if it had beene land, and discharged there his Pistol: Hee desired entertainment, and offers to instruct some thousands that they shall bee able to doe the like, and be fit to make any great enterprize.
Turin the 27 of October. 1624. SInce my last Letter to you, we haue beene at Susa, where my Lord Ambassador went to ac∣company the Duke of Sauoy and the French Am∣bassador, and the Venetian Ambassador, to treat and negotiate with the great Constable of France concerning the present affaires in these parts, the Constable being accompanied with Mons: le Mareschall de Crequi, and with Monseur de Bullion; the first being one of the greatest men in all France, the last is priuy Councellor to the French King, being both annexed in commissi∣on with the Constable, and both in quality of ex∣traordinary Ambassadors. The Marshall de Crequi was likewise to condole with the D. of Sauoy in the King his Masters be∣half, the death of Prince Philipert. After their ari∣uall at Susa they had diuers meetings and confe∣rences. Hauing beene ten dayes in the said place they departed, we for Turin, the Constable for
Grenoble. What hath beene treated, and the con∣clusion of the Treaty is not knowne to any as yet, but the common coniecturation is, that they haue resolued to recouer the Valtolina by force: and the Constable for the execution hath deter∣mined to make his Troupes passe the Alpes with all possible speede, notwithstanding that Winter draweth neere. This is all I can say concerning the negotiation, time will shew vs the event of the businesse: but one thing I feare much, the Iesuiticall predomi∣nant power. Fiat voluntas Domini. In the State of Milan they are all in armes, and in readinesse to oppose any that dare come. Those of Genoa are more afeard then hurt, they take vp men alla Gagliarda to secure their Com∣mon-wealth. The Venetians haue sent for Colonell Oben∣straut, being stipendiated by them, and conse∣quently for all those that draw pay of S. Marco, what their intention is I cannot tell. Monseur de Tilly hath quartered his armie in the Marquisate of Baden, and finding his forces too weake to keepe it, hath sent for a supply. The Svisses are all sicke of a Lethargy, and wil hardly be put out of their drowsiness, especially being kept in this sleepe by the Spanish pistols, for the which by degrees they haue almost sold their former liberty. The Archduke Leopold maketh a great shew of
leauying troupes, ma non ha danari. God keepe him in that case. The Emperour hath sent cer∣taine Commissaries to the Citie of Strasburg, with three propositions. First, he desires that the Magistrate of the said citie should deliuer all that are fled out of the Palatinate, with all their goods into his hands, and annexed to this is, that all that Count Mansfield hath within that Citie (for they say hee hath a great quantitie of goods and mo∣ney) should likewise be deliuered vnto him. Se∣condly, that they should prepare a great summe of money for to pay the Emperours souldiers. Lastly, they should keepe victuals and munition in readinesse, that whensoeuer occasion should present it selfe that any troops of the Emperour should passe that way, to furnish them withall. The first proposition they answered them, that in consideration of the priuiledge and liberty of their City, they could not condescend vnto it: as for the other two, they answered, that in an Im∣periall Diett they would resolue as other States and Imperiall Cities should doe. From Prage we heare that the plague reigneth there: and that the Protestants Church hath bin taken from them, and giuen to the King of Spain his Ienesaries, (that is to say) his Iesuits.
From Tarim the 9 of November. Very little Newes are stirring now being a dead time of the yeare, Winter comming on apace: being rather a fit time to consult, then to effectuate any martiall Designes. From Milan wee haue certaine newes, that the Spanish ministers haue intercepted a Packet of letters, sent by Monseur de Bethunes Ambas∣sador, resident at Rome for the French King, to the Marquis of Corvare, likewise Ambassadour for the said King, resident in Suisserland: the contents of the Letter were these; He earnest∣ly entreateth the Ambassadour in Suisserland, to vse all meanes possible to gaine the Suisses to lea∣uie some thousands of men, the number not be∣ing exactly known by me, and those to be imploy∣ed for the recouery of the Valtolina: whereupon the Duke of Feria, Gouernor of Milan, hath caused sundry copies to be made of the said Let∣ter, sending them where hee thinketh they may most turne to the preiudice of the French, as to Rome to the Popes holinesse, entreating him to consider how little the French do respect his ho∣linesse, in respect that the Garisons in the Valto∣lina were Milite di Santa Chiesa, and that com∣ming against those of the Valtolina, was as much as if he made war against the Church. Another
Copie he hath sent vnto the Suisses in their Die∣ta at Baden. From Berne wee heare that all our Protestant Cantons haue leauyed a competent number of men, for the defence of themselues, so that if Tilly should dare to make any incursion, they may be able to withstand him. The King of Spaine hath sent an extraordina∣ry Ambassador to Germany to assure those Prin∣ces and States that the Troupes hee keepeth in the Empire, or is to send, is not with an inten∣tion to vsurpe any imaginable thing, but that his onely intent and purpose is to settle a quiet and and stable peace in the Empire, and for the ad∣uancement and propagation of the Romane Ca∣tholike Religion.
NEWES FROM the Low-Countries. From Bergen op Zoom, Noucmb. 12. VVE receiued Letters from Bergen op Zoom bearing dare this twelfth of Nouember, 1624, that the handmaid of Warre, and scourge of great armies, a cruell Pestilence, rageth and reigneth in his Excellencies armie in the Nether∣lands: by the contagion whereof more haue pe∣rished then by the enemies sword or bullet. It doth not onely rage in the field, as at Rosendale and Longstraten, where the Prince of Oranges forces lye encamped, but the next good townes feele a portion of this calamity, as Breda, Bergen op Zoom, and others.
The Prince of Orange, to the great griefe of euery good man, was grieuously sicke of this ma∣lady, but God be thanked, hee is reasonable well recouered, to the vnspeakable comfort of al those who fight vnder his banners. The enemies did much reioyce at the report of this disaster: and it was giuen out in the Spa∣nish quarters, that either he was dead, or else so desperately sicke, that hee was past all recouery. Quae volumus, facile credimus: It being an easie matter to beleeue those things which our wils with affectation and earnestnesse doe desire. But yet he liues, and long may liue to fight the battels of the Lord of Hosts, and defend the in∣nocent from the sword of the oppressor. But see how the Sunneshine of this ioy is sud∣denly ouershadowed with a cloud of sorrow for my Lord Wriothesly, sonne and heyre to that ho∣nourable Lord my Lord of Southampton, who went ouer in this last expedition into the Ne∣therlands, Captaine of a foot Company vnder his fathers command, being Coronell of one of the foure new Regiments, fell sicke at Roscndale in the Princes Leaguer; and to auoid the discom∣modities of the field, he retired himselfe to Ber∣gen op Zoom, a towne not farre distant, there to vse the best meanes he could for the recouery and re-establishing of his health.
But marke how Gods prouidence ouerswayeth mens prouisions and purposes. He had not lyen there many dayes vnder the tortures of this con∣tagion, but he exchanged this mortall life into immortality, deceasing vpon Sunday last was a sennight, it being the seuenth of Nouember. His noble father comming to visit his son to Bergen, fell sicke of this Pestilence also, and what with the violence of the sicknesse, and the griefe of mind for his sonnes decease, hee gaue vp his glo∣rious and now glorified ghost into the hands of his Creator, the Wednesday following, the tenth of Nouember. These two, both the father and the sonne, wee cannot too much condole nor mourne for their losses, they being as truly honorable in their con∣ditions, as they were in their dignities and cal∣lings. My old Lord in his younger yeares had tooke a taste of the French and Netherland warres, and after that he was thought worthy by Queene Elizabeth of famous memory, to be Generall of her horse in that expedition, which was made vn∣der the conduct of the Earle of Essex, against the Earle of Tiroan, and other Rebels of Ireland, where he caried himselfe brauely and vnblemish∣ed. He was a braue Souldier, both for his execu∣tion and knowledge, and likewise learned, as hee was military and valiant.
Besides he was a great fauorer and Mecaenas vnto Armes and Artes, and a liberall acknowledger and rewarder of those who could challenge any dignity from these professions. His Sonne was the True Image and Chara∣cter of his Father, so that without wronging others by way of comparrison, he was as hope∣full as any young Noble-man in Christendome whatsoeuer. But Is feare me that my poore Panegericke, and commendation doth rather dis∣grace them: then dignifie their Worthynesse; wherefore I will fall from it and a little looke vpon Marquis Spinolaes: Leagur, where you shall see the sicknesse raine as bad, as in our Mauritian Quarters. The Famine griping the hungry maw of your poore souldier, the Itallians and Spani∣ards two Nations who can better indure the Schorching heat, then the cold of Winter, most vehement for the most partes in these Northerne Countries, cursing the ambition of their Prince, which must make their bodies fight against the in∣sufferable difficulties of nature; and therefore for these respects inclining to mutiny and hardly to be commanded. To aggriuate which calamities, the Marques his Souldiers runne away by parties euery day, their pay falls short, and their Conuoyes which bring their Ammunition bread and other victualls, are dayly cut off by the States Souldiers comming from Rosendale, Long straten and elsewhere. A∣mongst the rest it is commonly reported, and
most certainely auerred by Letters written from Geertruydenbergh, and dated the ninth of this Moneth, that my Lord of Essex, and my Lord of Oxford, going out vppon a party to seeke some aduenture, met with a Conuoy of the ene∣mies as they were trauailing from the further most parts of Brabante, vnto Marquesse Spinolaes quarter. Our English greedy of the pray and Honour besides, giue in roundly vpon these Conuoyes, and after some resistance make themselues Masters of the Waggon-men, and victualls. But yet it was not Incruento Victoria, for some men were lost of both sides, and my Lord of Oxford carryed away an Honorable Skarre, and the testimony of his vallor, being wounded in this conflict. There were twenty waggons or vpwards lost by the Enemies with diuers spoyles of good vallew, which was truely and equally deuided amongst the Souldiers who were Actors in this exployt. Newes from SPAINE. Wee receiued certaine information by letters dated at the Growine, about the middest of this last Month, that there is great preparation for a mighity Fleete in Gallicia, Bisca, and other the more Southerne parts of Spaine. There are besides the Sea-men and Marriners, ten thousand Land Souldiers to bee embarkt in
this action. And few of these are Behemies or fresh-water Souldiers, but such as are of the Ter∣tiues of their old Garrisons. There is likewise a great impresse and stay of shipping of seuerall Countries, as English, Scots, French, and Easterlins to the great griefe and discontent of their poore maisters and owners, who are like to suffer great detriment and losse by this meanes. The coniectures of this new preparation are di∣uerse: For some giue out that it is for scouring the Leuante and strengthning of their Garrisons in Naples, Sicilia, and Lumbardy: Others thinke it is against the Grande Signior, and his Vice-royes of Tunes and Argiers, who make their Sanziake ships, and those Harbours which are in them a receite of custome for all Pirats. But those whose iudgements are most curious: Iudge these prepara∣tions to be made against the Hollander for the re∣couering of Todos los Sanstos in Brasilia, which we may the sooner be indust to beleeue, if we shall but once consider, how loath the Spaniards are to part with any thing which they haue once ap∣propriated and made their owne. Out of Swisserland the 25. of October. His Maiesty of France leauieth yet dayly many men, and our Commissioners which haue beene sent to his Maiesty are come backe againe with great satisfaction, and haue reported that they dispatched their affaires according to their owne minde, and that he hath promised to lend vs con∣tinually
his helping hand, and hath moreouer giuen charge to Monsieur Ladiguera to looke to vs and to leauy yet eight regiments of foote, and 2000 horse to assist vs. They of Basil being affrayd of a siedge, haue receiued yet 3000 men into their City, besides great store of powder and lead, and they are moreo∣uer fetching dayly more prouision of victualls for them out of the Country there about: Monsieur de Chrich as was mentioned before, is with 15000 foote, and 2000. horse gone into Sauoy: And Monsieur de Convre who hath taken some passages of great importace in Veltolina, hath both there and in Swisserland, leauied many thousands of Souldiers: And the three Sonnes of the Gouernor of Lyons haue likewise gotten Patents to leauy each a Regiment. Those Souldiers which are leauied in the City of Bearne, and are many thousandes strong, haue had the first skmish with them of the house of Austria, which are in the Veltolina, and haue slaine many of them, and haue sop all the passa∣ges about Chur, with a resolution to besiedge the same Towne: whereupon the Gouernour of chur hath written to the Arch-duke Leopoldus for ayde. They of the house of Austria doe mhe meane time likewise what they can, and fortifie the Castles of Cleue, and of Della Riva, and prouide them with all manner of necessaries.
From Lyons the 31 of this Moneth. The Secretary of Mounsier Ladiguiera is sent to this Citty as a prisoner by his Master, because he hath giuen intelligence to the House of Austria. Wee haue heere tidings that the Duke of Boulion is gone with great store of mony to Moun∣siur Ladguiera, by order of our King of France: who hath giuen him order to set with his pow∣erfull Army vpon Voltolina, if the House of Au∣stris or the Pope will not restore it presently. From Rosendale the 7 of Nouember. Few dayes agoe sent the Prince of Orange ma∣ny horse abroad, without any Cornets vpon good intelligence which he had receiued, and they re∣turned within a while: with many prisoners and rich bootyes of our Enemyes. The Marquis Spinola is now expecting some prouision which is comming out of Artos, and Henegow: with some 4000. waggons, and seeing that he hath vnderstood that our Forces are wait∣ing vpon it, he hath giuen order that all the high∣wayes which it is to come, shall along be intrench∣ed: and that they shall haue 3000 horse and 6000 foote to conuey them to his Camp. From hence are many fire-lookes carryed to the Camp of Count Henry of Nassaw, and wee vnderstand by good intelligence that although the Conuoy of the Marquis Spinola was lately
twice vpon the way to come from Shertogenbosh to the Camp, that it returned neuerthelesse euery time, seeing it was not strong enough in respect of our Forces which waited vpon it. From Amsterdam the 9 of Nouemb. With the last Letters of Spaine we vnderstand that they were there very confused, by reason of the confirmation of the last newes, namely how that the Generall L'Hermite hath not onely taken and Pillaged Lima, Arika, and Poidsi, but likewise many other strong Holds, and Fortes, and was ortifying himselfe vpon the Sea-coasts of Peru, where was come such a feare amongst the Inhabitants, by reason of the great ayde which hee hath of the King of Chilly, that they forsooke in many Places both Houses, and Lands. They write from Bremen, that the Drumme was there dayly sounded, to leauey both Horse and Foote, for the High and Mighty Lords, the States Generall of the Vnited Prouinces, and that the Count of Lippe was likewise gone into the Lan of Hessen, to leauie there a Regiment of Foote for Count Mansfield. Moreouer we vnderstand by seuerall Letters, written out of the Dukedome of Gelderland how that some souldi▪ of the Marquis of Brandenborg, and of the Stat of the Vnited Prouinces haue lately taken durs Townes in the County of Marke from the pnish. FINIS.
