1964.3 S1779 22716278 25671
A WEEKES WORKE. AND A WORKE FOR EVERY weeke. By R. B. The third Edition. LONDON, Printed by Felix Kyng∣ston, and are to be sold by Nathanael New∣bery. 1616.
TO THE VER∣TVOVS AND RELI∣gious Ladies, the Ladie Eli∣zabeth Barkley of Bruton, the Ladie Elizabeth Barkley, of Yearlington, and the Ladie Anne Horner; that wisdome which is from aboue; that true peace, which is from within; and the manifesta∣tion of both in the fruits of the spirit, to their perfect ioy. AS I consider with my selfe how Mary did make choice of the bet∣ter part, I cannot but blesse God for the worke of grace: So (Right Worshipfull) on the contrary, marking the
mad choyce of others, I fol∣low the counsell of the Pro∣phet Esaiah, I stay & won∣der. Eue had free-will, the choyce of an apple and Para∣dise was before her: God said, eate not, and liue: but eate, said the Serpent, thou shalt not die. The diuell was cre∣dited, God not beleeued: the apple was eaten, & Paradise lost: a miserable choice. But led she the way in this point of follie, and hath shee had no followers? What, none of her posterity to walk in her steps? Behold the sonnes of God chose the daughters of men, and forsooke the generation of the righteous. Lot left A∣braham, and made choyce to
dwell in Sodome: Esau lo¦ueth his bellie, and for a pre∣sent messe of pottage selleth a∣way his birth-right. The mixt people among the Israe∣lites, rather desire garlicke, and onyons, and to sit by the flesh-pots of Egypt, then to eat that sweet Manna frō heauē. Yea, so mad are men in their choyce, as the Iewes from the highest to the lowest, cry out to haue a rebell, a theefe, a mur∣therer, euen a Barrabas, in¦stead of that iust one and in∣nocent, Christ the righteous. As I haue stayed in my thoughts vpon these; so now should I wonder, but that a∣mong our selues, I finde many as foolish, and as vnreasona∣ble
in their chusing. They e∣steeme more of pleasure, then of peace wiih God: they will sell godlines for earthly gain: they preferre profit before pi∣ety; worldly goods they like of better then heauenly gra∣ces: they chuse rather to rest vpon an idle conceit in them∣selues of saluation, then vpon the witnesse of Gods word, & a truly informed conscience; they wil plead rather custom, then diuine precepts; mens examples now for liberty in sinn e, rather then the holy liues of the godly recorded in Scripture: most, in a word, chuse rather to be reputed re∣ligious, then so to be indeed. But perhaps you (Ladies)
will say, what of all this to you? Surely, that you behol∣ding nature corrupted, and your selues, through Gods mercy, sanctified by grace, may in your more happie choyce, giue due praises hear∣tily vnto God, who affoordeth you from aboue so much po∣wer and strength, that you may in some measure with holy Elizabeth, walke in the Commandemēts of the Lord; with religious Mary, sit down at Christs feet & heare his word; with that blessed Virgin Christs mother, pon∣der the words, and lay them vp in your hearts; with af∣flicted Hannah, poure out in your necessities, your soules by
prayer vnto God; and with that deuout Anna, serue God in fasting and prayers day and night. For this end and purpose, to further euery well disposed Christian, in the path that leadeth vnto life and glory; I haue now this third time published this Weeks work, & worke for euery weeke. I haue presumed to send it forth vnder your names, not in any merit of the worke, but in my true esteeme of your godlinesse, and certaine per∣swasion of your good desires to please God; which the Lord encrease in you more & more with such inward comfort of spirit, as you may perseuere in
euery good worke of grace, to goe boldly to the throne of grace, in euery state and con∣dition, to the end of your daies; euen so, Amen. Your Ladyships in all Christian duties, RIC. BERNARD. Batcombe Iuly 14.
A DIALOGVE BETWEENE IOHN the beloued Apostle, and his beloued Gaius. Epist. 3. vers. 1. Iohn. GRace be with thee (Noble Gaius) mercy and peace from God the Father, and from the Lord Iesus Christ, the Sonne of the Father, with truth and loue. Gaius. Reuerend Father,
let this thy prayer, this day preuaile with God: for Grace & Peace, Mercy & Truth in Loue I much long after. Iohn. Well may wee wish for these things, (friend Gaius) as the foun∣dation of all good fauours with God and all good men. Gaius. Oh (my Lord) I thanke God, these things with me are of greater price, then any thing which may seeme most pretious with the world. For Grace maketh me acceptable to God: Peace comforteth mee within my selfe: Mercy from God af∣fordeth me remission of sins, and Mercy from me, shewed
towards others, maketh them both to pray and praise God for me. The Truth of God warranteth my course and way; and truth obserued of me, iustifieth my words and workes: Loue in God to me, procureth peace, bringeth forth mercy, and confirmeth truth; loue in our selues maintaineth peace, vrgeth to mercy, and bindeth one to another, and all vnto the truth. Therefore (Sir) doe I in soule desire earnestly after the same, but I cannot attain vnto that measure which I would. I hunger after the per∣fection of all true holinesse; but (alas) I cannot bee satis∣fied. I thirst after righteous∣nesse,
but (ah miserable man that I am) who shall deliuer mee from the body of this death, which so much doth hinder mee in my heauenly progresse. Iohn. I reioyce greatly (worthie Gaius) that I find thee thus well prepared for further instructions; blessed art thou for so hungring and thirsting af∣ter the best things, for thou shalt be satisfied. Gaius. My Lord, I am not ignorant (blessed be God for this knowledge of my selfe) that I am heere indeed in this present world, but not of this world; one as a pil∣grime and stranger, without
any certaine mansion; hither sent of the Lord for a time to bee employed in his seruice, and so to stay till hee call mee hence; which houre I waite for, looking for death daily, and the Lords comming to iudgement. And therefore I desire to bee ready prepared, and to learn whatsoeuer may be needfull both for continu∣ance, and encrease of grace in the way of life. Especially see∣ing how the world groweth so on to worse and worse; and this our present age declining so fast vnto wickednesse; lest I bee intrapped, and become guiltie of the common sinnes, and so perish in the deserued plagues.
Iohn. Indeed (good Christian heart) wel may∣est thou so tearme theseEuill daies. our present times. Is not pietie turned by many in∣to policie? sincerity by o∣thers into schisme? true zeale is decayed, conscience is now but a customarie fashion graced with con∣formitie: faith is altoge∣ther a formal seruice with∣out fasting, without true feare of God and feruen∣cie of spirit, without grati∣ous words tending to edi∣fication, or good workes assuring vs of saluation: godly gouerment is gros∣ly abused by couetous persons, and made a base
course for filthie gaine: true deuotion is not knowne from Popish su∣perstition; religion is held but an opinion, or a point of state, which is therefore often pretended, but sel∣dome truly intended. For many indeed loathe the word of life; they loue ri∣ches, they reckon not of Christs righteousnesse; if they can enioy a present honour and prosperity, they will hazard heauen, and the eternall Paradise. Such profane Esaus will sell their future hopes for a present mease of pot∣tage: if euer such Atheists haue recourse to God at
any time for mercy, it is then only, when they per∣force come vnder the hand of his iustice. For where is that man, which, in onely hatred of the worlds vanities, in true detestation of his owne foule corruptions, vpon good assurance of life e∣ternall, will in his health and highest prosperity be∣gin heartily to sing the song of Simeon, and to say, Lord, now lettest thou thy seruant depart in peace, for mine eyes haue seene thy sal∣uation, embracing Christ by faith, as hee tooke him in his armes? Gaius. Alas (my Lord)
this is our carnall state, in∣deed in a fleshly security, for the most part. For many haue a religion without the vertue of the spirit, and power of the word: they frame a God all of mercy, without terrour in execution of iustice: they i∣magine a Christ without a fan in his hand, to diuide the chaffe from the wheate to burne it, and without an iron rod, to breake the wicked in pieces. But what should I thus complaine of others? Oh that I could pray and mourne for them, and amend my owne waies, which verily I desire; and therefore doe I humbly craue of thee farther directi∣ons, how I may daily exercise
my selfe in true holinesse and righteousnesse, that so I may auoid what is euill, and in the end find death aduantage vnto me, and the last iudge∣ment, the day of my perfect redemption. Iohn. (Welbeloued Gai∣us) this thy heauenly de∣sire, holy purpose, & most gratious affection, dispo∣sed so happily to good∣nesse, doe cause me great∣ly to reioyce. It is a rare thing now a dayes, to find so humble a spirit in so learned a person; such pi∣ety in so great prosperity: such hunger and feeling of wants still, in so great a∣būdance of grace. I know
not whether I more ad∣mire thee, then loue thee: both are so high in degree in my thoughts and me∣ditations vpon thee. Gaius. Reuerend Sir▪ I thanke you for your vndeser∣ued loue; but I cannot cease to maruell, how my meane gifts and graces should bee e∣steemed of so great worth with you; when I know, that of my selfe I am nothing, and haue nothing but of God; that more strength of corrup∣tion is in mee, then power of grace; much more yet to bee desired, then I haue attained vnto, & wherein many thou∣sands excell me. Iohn. Good heart, vp∣on
this thy humility, the Lord in mercy looke, and will exalt thee, as he hath promised them that are humble and meeke. Gaius. If God be pleased to shew me mercy in any mea∣sure, I will acknowledge it his good grace without my merit. But may it please thee (thou holy man of God) to cease to admire my poore deeds, and no desarts; and with the eye of pitie to look vpon my great defects, and by thy gracious words instruct mee yet fur∣ther how to demeane my selfe, that my wants may bee supplied, my present state of grace preserued, and by little and little, through prayer
and practice, good things may by Gods mercy bee encreased vnto the end. Iohn. It pleaseth me well (good Gaius) though not to cease to admire thee, yet willingly to aduise thee (wherin I can) to the vtmost. Therefore for the present take this my coun∣sell and aduice: thou shalt doe well to obserue these rules following, for the ge∣nerall course of life. First and aboue all, setGene∣rall rules for the whole course of life. God euer before thy face: thinke him alwaies with thee, present by thee, and earnestly looking vpon thee, iudging rightly, and as thou deseruest, iustly
to reward thee. Secondly, behold his glorious Angels atten∣ding thee; perfect pat∣ternes of pietie, and all pu∣rity; in well doing they doe guard thee; through wickednes they flie from thee. Thirdly, haue an awful regard to all Gods Com∣mandements, omit no du∣tie; commit no iniquitie; feare to offend in the least sinne, and be zealous of e∣uery least good worke; e∣steeme not lightly of any of Gods Commande∣ments; iudge euery part of his will set downe in his word, worthie of all
holy reuerence, and that with obedience in feare. Fourthly, in the mat∣ters of God, and holy mo∣tions, abandon thine own will; shut out carnall rea∣son; seeke not thine owne glory, fauour, or praise of other in thy seruice to God; but onely respect his good pleasure, and a conscionable discharge of thy owne dutie. Fifthly, haue alwaies a loue vnto the Word, a re∣uerend estimation of his Ministers, and a religious care to sanctifie the Sab∣bath; three things most v∣sually of a very prophane carelesnesse, neglected &
despised. Sixthly, in what estate soeuer thou doest stand, take wisely an occasion from thence to become more holy towards God, to man more iust, and in thine owne heart more truly humble and graci∣ous. If it be in abundance enioy thy wealth with thy brethrens welfare; supply their wants, by gi∣uing freely, or lending in true loue. Thinke not thy selfe an absolute Lord of thine own, but Gods Ste∣ward, who giueth, & can take away; looke so vpon the poore, as on thy selfe, who may bee in their
stead. Make not riches thy hearts habitation, nor the power of reuenge vpon thine enemie, nor the prop to beare vp iniquity, nor as fuell to maintaine the fire of lusts, nor any e∣uill whatsoeuer; but with thy riches honour God; doe therewith publike good, in maintaining reli∣gion, iustice, truth, charitie, and euery good way. If thou beest in honour, bee not puffed vp; contemne no inferiour, he may bee thy equall: presume not to e∣qualize thy selfe to thy better; acknowledge thy equall euery where, as thy fellow: and to such ra∣ther
giue then take honor from. Pride is hatefull, but true humility (not a base spirit) is a badge of true honour. For know this, that meanely borne are in place of honour euermore high minded, and of a more presuming disposition, with contempt of others, then the truly descended of ancient noble progenitors. In aduer∣sitie, of what kind soeuer, take it from God alwaies thankfully; bee quiet and contented, looke to the Lords promises; and vse all good & lawfull means for deliuerance; wait with patience; giue God glo∣ry; iudge it thy desert;
know thy offences; and cease to sinne. Euer being perswaded, that thy pre∣sent estate is best for thee, and most for Gods glory: and withall beleeue, that in the end thou shalt haue a comfortable issue of all thy troubles. Seuenthly, liue to the world as a stranger, and as an enemie to thine owne corruptions. When thou seest other grow rich, en∣uie not their prosperity: but if they bee godly, re∣ioyce and praise God: if wicked, admire Gods mercy, and pray for them. Think that what thou thy selfe hast, is more then
thou well deseruest, or rightly canst vse, without Gods speciall grace: the lesse thou hast, the lesse ac∣count thou art to make. Striue to bee well pleased with Gods will and his disposing of all things: & for this ende pray much and feruently; fast often, but beware of hypocrisie: reade the holy Scriptures diligently, and that with all reuerence, attention, and faith: make them thy counsellours in all thy en∣terprises; thy comforts in aduersitie, thy guide in prosperity, and the rule of thy whole life. Eighthly, be much ad∣dicted
vnto heauenly me∣ditations, lifting vp thy heart vnto the Lord, sen∣ding forth spirituall eia∣culations vpon euery oc∣casion; though prayers bee but short, yet may they pierce the heauens, by sighes that cannot be expressed. If thou doe thinke of God, let it be with high reuerence to his Maiestie: speake of him with feare, as his glo∣rious excellencie requi∣reth. So know him, as thou mayest in acknow∣ledging him, neuer dare to disobey his Comman∣dements. Behold him in his goodnes to loue him, in his iustice to feare him:
in his word to know him, and to beleeue in him. Behold him also in his workes, his wisedome andHow to behold the Lord in his creatures power in the workes of creation: his mercy and iustice in the worke of re∣demption: his euer being in our continuall preser∣uation. Acknowledge his prouidence, in prouiding for his creatures; his strength in the mightinesse of mountaines, and po∣wers vnresistable; his ho∣linesse by his Angels puri∣tie, and his Saints piety; his inuisibility by the aire and strong winds; his mi∣raculous hand by the Oce∣an sea; his glorious Ma∣iestie
by the brightnesse of the Sunne; his bountie by extending his goodnesse to euery creature; his do∣minion and soueraignty by his rule ouer the world; his patience, by not speedi∣ly confounding some pre∣sumptuous sinners, yet his iustice in due inflicted pu∣nishments vpon others. His beautie by the heauens brightnesse, the Sun in his glory, the shining starres, the glistering gold, and the liuely colours set vp∣on his faire creatures full of admiration to the be∣holders. His truth by the performance of his word; his stability, by the certain
and vnchangeable course of things; and his infinite∣nesse by the earths round∣nesse, the heauens circum∣ference, and the immeasu∣rable spatiousnes betwixt both. Praise this God in all his proceedings: dis∣grace none of his workes, magnifie his goodnesse for the least of his gifts: bee silent when hee cros∣seth thee: feare, when he is vsing vpon his children the rod of his correction: but tremble at his wrath, in his worke of destructi∣on, and euer submit to the powerfull hand of his prouidence. Ninthly, in the next
place, with thy thoughts of God, sauour also the things that are of God; that is, his word and ordi∣nances, ministery and ma∣gistracie, also all diuine truthes, though aboue all reason; likewise all holy motions, pressing downe the corruptions of thy heart; yea, sharpe rebukes for reformatiō; shew pati∣ence in bearing of wrōgs, and manifest loue to the godly, though neuer so poore; and let their ac∣count of thee bee more e∣steemed of, thē the coun∣tenance of the mightiest, that bee enemies to good∣nesse. Let mourning and
sorrow for sin please thee better then wicked mirth. Preferre Gods honor and diuine worship, before thine owne life, and al thy wealth. Hold it thy grea∣test preferment and glory to be a true Christian, and a companion to all that feare God, professing the truth with them in the way of life. Iudge it no disgrace to bee noted for zeale in religion, for fol∣lowing the holy Saints in true deuotion. But desire and striue to bee like the best; follow Dauid in fer∣uencie; Iosias in tendernes of spirit, and a melting heart; Barnabas in chari∣tie,
Nathaniel in sinceritie, without guile; Moses in the spirit of meeknes, and Ioshua in his resolution to feare God, and that alone with all thine household; and bee as Cornelius in his holy estimation of the mi∣nisterie, and alacrity of spi∣rit, to ioyne with the people of God. Step for∣ward euer with these and the like, in the way of ver∣tue, & that vnto the death, as holy Martyrs haue done constantly, & looke to the reward of glory in the end. Tenthly, as thou art re∣ligious; so bee also righte∣ous: serue God, and doe
thy dutie vnto men: obey lawful commands of such as haue authority ouer thee. Looke on God in the Commander, and for a reward at his hands. Be of a peaceable spirit: offerOf our carriage towards men. wrong to none, & wrongs receiued, seeke not to re∣uenge: desire onely that which is thine owne; re∣quire yt peaceably, which other withhold wrong∣fully; vse law, but as a mo∣derator, and not as an a∣uenger; hate no man, though he haue deserued it; by loue win him, and by thy weldoing hold him fast to thee: make ac∣count of thy neighbour,
as of thy selfe: let his ho∣nour bee thy ioy; his sor∣row, thy griefe; and his life to thee pretious, his chastitie preserue, as thine owne honesty: thinke thy good name touched, in the cracke of his credit, for the Gospels sake: wish him euer well; do as thou wouldest be done vnto. If in his absence thou spea∣kest of him, let it be good; and in his presence onely for his good. Couet not to bee preferred before him; that is, pride: not to haue his life; that is bloo∣dy cruelty: nor to satisfie thy lust; that is filthie dis∣honestie: nor to get his
goods, that is the euerie: nor to take away his good name; that is worse then death. Though he dislike of thee; yet loue thou him: faile not thou of any dutie, albeit other doe not obserue thee according, as is meet. There is in thee, the more grace; and the greater praise thou doest deserue, when thou canst subdue thy passions, passe by contempt, neg∣lect thy selfe, and teach o∣ther men their duties one∣ly by thine owne weldo∣ing. This will procure loue, make all thy paths peaceable, and get thee praise and due honour
with men: if not; yet God seeth, hee will iudge, and plead thy cause for thee in their consciences, reuenge thy wrongs vpon obsti∣nate enemies, and recom∣pence fully thy goodnesse vpon thy selfe. Let this comfort thee against their vnthankfulnesse, and re∣member the end, obserue the commandement of loue, liue euer in daily ex∣pectation of death, & the reward of life, the crowne of glory, and by the helpe of Gods spirit, thou shalt neuer doe amisse. Gaius. O blessed Lord God! how do I hunger, to haue part in this blessednes! my soule is
as the thirstie land. I preceiue heereby my great wants, and bewaile my imperfections. I see now the narrow way, and the straight gate to life, and feare. Ah how much is pro∣fessed, how little practiced? I should vtterly despaire of my safety, but that I rest vpon Gods mercy, and relie onely vpon Christ his merits. Now the Lord vouchsafe mee his spirit, and the helpe of his grace, that I may be a true ob¦seruer of all these things, thus to doe his will, thus to per∣forme my bounden dutie. Oh (Sir) that I could in this manner liue towards God so in holines, & towards men so righteously: Oh that I might
passe thus thorow this sinfull world, with that peace of con∣science, with that ioy of the spirit, with that preparednes for death, & with that long∣ing after our Lord Iesus his comming, which is gotten hereby, and which the very creatures doe groane for, and all the godly true repentants heartily wish for. Oh how grieuous is it now to mee to consider, how far I am from this practice of piety, especial∣ly when I doe weigh my owne weaknesses, and also want of grace to attaine to the due & full performance of this so conscionable a course? Oh what shall I doe? Oh what shall I do? I am so loden with
corruptions, and the world so full of tentations, compassing mee about with examples of wickednesse, that I feare my fall. He that seeketh goodnes, oh how little is he regarded! vertue wanteth praise, vice is not abhorred; innocency made a prey, iustice set to sale; sincerity reputed follie, and iust dealing is held the high way to beggerie. If yet for all these things I should disclaim the way of well doing, I should therewith loose the hope of heauen: if I should embrace vngodlinesse and vanitie, I am sure to be damned in hell. As (Sir) what shall I doe? Ah my poore imprisoned soule! oh that I were dissol∣ued!
let mee loose (O Lord) out of this prison of my body: O come Lord Iesu, O come quickly, and make an end of these dayes of sinne; I desire bee dissolued, and to bee with thee. Iohn. Alas (good soule) what moueth thee thus to bemone thy selfe? thou art a happie Creature, and hast no such cause to com∣plaine in this so sorrowful a manner. Comfort thy selfe (my heart) in that large portion of piety gi∣uen vnto thee: thy desire in time shall bee satisfied, vpon thy lowlinesse, assu∣redly, the Lord doth look. Feare not to finde mercy
and fauour, he will refresh those that trauell and bee heauie loden. And there∣fore let vs proceed on, as wee haue done hitherto, & if thou wouldest know more, wherein I may en∣forme thee, demand, and I will make answere; shew wherin, and I will instruct thee, and the Lord direct thee in the way that thou shalt chuse. Gaius. Sir, seeing I haue thus found fauour in your eyes, and that you iudge mee among the faithfull; I desire to be informed more particu∣larly,The vse and end of this booke. how from time to time euery day, as a worke for e∣uery weeke, during life, I
may behaue my selfe religi¦ously in the way to eternitie? Iohn. Is it thy desire (be∣loued Gaius) to haue mee set downe, how thouThe sum and parts handled herein. shouldest exercise thy selfe, first in the morning, on the day time abroad, in the euening returning home, and in the night time awakening, and so in the end of the weeke, for a preparation to the Sab∣bath? Gaius. Euen so, this, in∣deed (Sir) is my desire: for hauing particular rules so set before me, I may the better vnderstand what to doe, more orderly goe forward, and according to the distin∣ction
of times, looke ouer dai∣ly my precepts, till I become cunning by a conscionable practice: which the holy one vouchsafe mee of his great goodnesse and mercy. Iohn. Euen so be it (myDirecti∣ons for euery morning. bowels). Now therefore awaking in the morning forthwith before other things, I. Consider how1. Dutie. graciously God hath re∣newed his mercy towards thee, preseruing thee aliue in the night, and giuing thee (as it were) in the morning a new life, awa∣king thee (perhaps) by the voice of man, by the crowing of a cooke, by the sound of a bell, or o∣therwise,
and opened a∣gaine thine eyes in darke∣nesse, to behold the shi∣ning light; for which mer∣cy giue him hearty thanks and praises; and withall, desire him to giue thee sight to thy soule, as thou hast light for thy body: and that as hee expelleth darknesse from thee, and affoordeth thee day light and Sun-shine, to the eyes of the body: so in like ma∣ner to bee pleased to re∣moue ignorance, that spi∣tuall darknesse from thy minde, by the light of his illuminating spirit, that thy soule by the sun-shine of the holy Scriptures,
may see how to walke in this vaile of teares, & tho∣row this darkenesse (in which the world lieth without sight of sinne, or remorse of conscience) vnto thy heauenly har∣bour. Then secondly, fall to2. Dutie. Medita∣tions vp∣on our a∣waking. meditation, and first, how God can awake vs from the sleepe of sinne, and o∣pen our eyes, to see the light of the truth, either by extraordinarie means, or by ordinarie, and these weake, or more forcible, as it pleased him to awake Dauid by Nathan, and Pe∣ter by the cocke; although wee haue slept as many
yeeres in sinne, as houres in our bed. Secondly, that after a sleeping, though long, if there be life, there follow∣eth a wakening: so is it with the elect, though they fall asleepe againe in sin, and lie therein a long time, yet because they are not vtterly without the life of God, they shall at length awake againe. Thirdly, that as awa∣king in the morning by the day light, in the ap∣pointed time to arise, and men vp & in health, there is not by and by a retur∣ning to sleepe in bed a∣gaine; no more shall bo∣dily
death seaze vpon any, there shall be no more re∣turning to rest in the graue, in the day of the last resurrection. Fourthly, that as a care∣full husband, aiming at his thrift, is ashamed to lie sleeping in bed, as if it were still night, when the Sunne is vp, yea shining vpon him, and hee called to his businesse: euen so should euery good Chri¦stian carefull of saluation be ashamed to lie sleepiing in any sinne, when the cleare light of the Gospell shineth vpon him, and is called vpon by faithfull Teachers to the perfor∣mance
of his duties. Fifthly, by thy rising vp,Medita∣tions in rising. thinke vpon thy resurre∣ction, which is twofold: first, from the kingdome of darknesse, and our natu∣rall corruption, to the true light and kingdome of grace; and of the second re∣surrection, from the dark∣nesse of the graue, to the heauēly light of the king∣dome of glory. Sixthly, in arising vpMedita∣tions vp∣on our naked▪ nesse. without clothes, as naked; 1. consider how naked we be by nature of all holines and righteousnesse, when wee come into the world, so to bewaile our wretch∣ednesse. 2. That wee shall
arise naked at the last day, as Adam was in his inno∣cencie. 3. That as in this bodily nakednes without clothes wee bee ashamed, for the vncomelines ther∣of, to bee seene so of men, vnlesse wee bee fooles, or madde: euen so should we be ashamed to be seen of God, of his Angels, and of any good men naked, without the couering of grace and goodnesse, be∣cause of the filthinesse of sinne. And as none but fooles and madde men come naked before men; so do none but mad men, wicked fooles, and men desperately leaud, liue na∣ked
of goodnesse before God, and his Church. 4. Think also, that thou shalt arise out of thy graue as thou doest arise out of thy bed, and so, indeed, ap∣peare in iudgement. Seuenthly, being vp, &Medita∣tions in putting on of our clothes. putting thy rayment vpon thee, meditate of these things. That as thou loo∣kest for raiment for thy body; so must thou looke for clothing to thy soule, which is Christs righte∣ousnesse. 2. That, as with∣out a hand thou canst not aray thy selfe; so without faith, thou canst not put on Christ. 3. That as bo∣dily raiment is to couer our
shame (and not therefore to bee proud of it) so is Christs righteousnesse for to couer our sinnes. 4. That as a rayment fitted vnto thee, then doth thee good, affordeth thee com∣fort, maketh thee comely, preserueth thy body from dangers, which by wal∣king naked it might be an∣noyed with, and thy selfe brought to destruction thereby: euen so Christ his righteousnesse, appli∣ed vnto thee, doth thee then good, affordeth thee cōfort, maketh thee com∣ly before God, and is thy preseruation, to saue thee from the burning wrath
of God for sin, and other perils of destructiō, which all that walke naked with∣out it fall into, and perish vtterly. 5. That, as when thy rayment is on, thou darest then boldly bee seene, and go before men; so hauing on this robe of Christ, thou mayest come boldly to the throne of grace before God. 6. As thou doest prouide a co∣uering for euery part of thy body, &, being able, doest beautifie thy clothes with other ornamēts: so labour for spirituall graces to e∣uery part of the soule, and beautifie thy profession with the comly ornamēts
of good words, and good workes: adorne thy eare with the earing of attenti∣on to the word, thy necke with the golden chaine of Peters Euangelicall ver∣tues; thy hands, with the bracelets of Almes▪ deeds to the poore; let thy white linnen put thee in mind of inward puritie; thy other outward rayment of com∣mon honesty; thy well shapt apparell, of decent be∣hauiour; thy clenly going, of auoiding spirituall vn∣cleannesse; the maske (to one of that sexe) of mo∣desty; the long garments of chastitie; the mufler of wo∣manly silence; the fan, of
Christs ran, with which hee will win now the wic∣ked chaffe frō his Church to consume it with fire. Let thy old garment, put thee in minde of thy old habite in sinne cast away; and thy new rayment of thy better estate, and rege∣neration. Gaius. Surely I doe per∣ceiue well hereby, that a wise and godly minded man, may make good vse to himselfe of many things which wee doe lightly regard, either through ignorance, or want of grace. Iohn. True it is (Gaius) that holy and sanctified meditations afford, as it were, food to the soule, e∣uen
in those things which all men can vse, by nature and reason, for the bene∣fit and beautie of the bo∣dy, but few can make good vse of for the soule; with which yet, the godly mans mind is delighted, and thereof reapeth no small profit. Gaius. But (Sir) when I am vp and thus apparelled, what other good meditations may be made vpon the rest of my actions? Iohn. As thou goest toMedita∣tions in washing. wash, consider, 1. that as thy body needeth wash¦ing, so doth thy soule of cleansing. 2. That, as wa∣ter washeth away the fil∣thines
of the flesh; so doth Christs blood sinne from thy soule. 3. that, as ther∣fore thou doest wash, be∣cause thou wouldest bee cleane, and hatest filthi∣nesse: euen so, in hatred of sinne, and loue of puritie must we haue recourse to the blood of Christ, that we may be cleansed of all vncleannesse. 4. As thou hast washed to goe to thy meat; so be washed in in∣nocencie to goe to the Lords Table. In brushing and ma∣kingMedita∣tions in brushing & wash¦ing of clothes. cleane thy garments; thinke that as thy rayment is subiect to dust, and o∣ther vncleannesse, in the
vse, or to mothes in lying still: euen so art thou thy selfe subiect to corrupti∣ons, both in trauell and rest. 2. That as thou canst not endure to haue thy garments dustie, or vn∣cleane, but will brush them, to haue off the dust and filth, so shouldest thou not endure to haue the dirtie filth, or any du∣stinesse of sinne to cleaue vnto thee. 3. That as some spots and for incklings wil not off with light brush∣ing; but need more forci∣ble meanes, and therefore thou wilt vse rubbing, yea and washing too; if other∣wise the dirt will not out▪
euen so, some sinnes will not off with easie meanes, but wee must vse rubbing & washing, that is, ardent prayer, and much fasting, & wash them with abun∣dant teares of a penitent heart: yea and bring our selues vnto the fountaine of grace, & desire of God to rinse vs throughly in the blood of Christ, that throughout wee may bee purged and made cleane. 4. That as washed clothes▪ need wringing, and also the warme Sunne to drie them againe, so needeth the penitent spirit, sory for sinne, and wrung with contrition, the comforta∣ble
promises, of the warm Sun beames of the Gos∣pell, to drie vp his deepe sorrow, and to refresh the heauinesse and sadnesse of his soule. 5. That as, when thou hast bespotted thy clothes, or els others haue besprinkled them, thou yet doest not cast them a∣way desperately, but vsest the best meanes to make them cleane, to vse them againe: euen so, though thou through thy owne frailty, or Satan and the wicked by tentations haue bespotted thy pro¦fession & good name; yet despaire not, neither vtter∣ly cast of thy profession
and care of a good name, but vse good meanes to recouer again these things by well doing. In looking into a glasse,Medita∣tions in looking into a glasse. consider, that as this is a meanes for thee to see thy selfe bodily; so there is a meanes, euen Gods word, by which (as in a glasse) thou maiest behold thy selfe spiritually. 2. That as without a glasse thou canst not see thy selfe, no more canst thou know thy selfe without Gods word. 3. That as a glasse sheweth a man his deformities to himselfe, yet the man which wanteth eyes, can∣not see how the glasse
doth set him forth; so, al∣beit Gods word shew to euery man his estate: yee, for want of the eyes of the soule (knowledge and di∣uine wisdome) men doe not see their corruptions. 4. That as a glasse is true or false, so doth it represent the person looking into it, if a true glasse, truly; if naughty and false, falsely and corruptly: euen so, there is a true glasse, Gods word, shewing vs truly our selues; also a false and corrupt glasse, which if we doe looke into, it doth deale corruptly with vs, not shewing our selues truly vnto our selues; such
a glasse is mans corrupt rea∣son, mens praises of vs, the traditions and doctrines of men in wil-worship, the wittie discourses of meere mo∣ralists, in their Naturals, and such like; these bee all corrupt and false glasses, which we must not looke into to see our selues, but into the only true glasse, the word of God. For as a true glasse, 1. sheweth thy selfe to thy selfe, as thou art foule or faire without flat∣terie or deceit; so doth Gods word shew either thy faire graces, or foule vices without partialitie. 2. As thou delightest to see thy comely parts, and
so more to grace them; and as thou doest see thy spots, and lookest after them, that thou mayest wash them off: euen so, behold thy graces in Gods word, to delight therein, and seeke to beau∣tifie them the more; as al∣so thy deformities & spots of sinne, to wash them a∣way. 3. As thou appro∣uest of a glasse, and de∣lightest to looke into it, because it is a true glasse, though it shew thy spots; so should wee allow of, & delight in Gods word, albeit it discouer vnto vs our iniquities and sinnes. After these meditati∣ons,3. Dutie.
betake thy selfe toIn the morning is prayer. prayer; and cast downe thy selfe before the Lord; craue pardon for euery sinne: nights pollution, naturall corruption, dayes transgression; desire the spirits illumination, the direction of the word, the graces of the spirit, the protection of Angels, the helpe of his holy hand to beare thee vp in all thy waies, whatsoeuer thou puttest thy hand vnto in the day following, accor∣ding to thy vocation and course of thy lawfull cal∣ling. Hauing thus called vp∣on4. Dutie is to read the Scrip¦tures. God, take some time
to looke into Gods word, to reade some portion of Scriptures. As thou canst looke into a glasse euery morning; so haue a care to looke into the law of God, to see the state of thy soule; behold what thou art by nature; what by grace, what here now, and what thou mayest bee in the life to come. Also con∣sider of thy place and stan∣ding, thy course of life & calling: what thy dutie is therein either to God, or to man: what charge thou hast vpon thee, whether of a child, a parent, a mar∣ried person, a ruler of a fa∣mily, a master, or of a ser∣uant,
a publke or priuate person, a pastor, or one of the flocke, a labourer, or trades▪ man, and so forth▪ and according to the se∣uerall respects; consider of thy dutie. By this glasse, looke into the order of thy family, thy conuersa∣tion with men, and thy dealings in the world; by it set modestly thy coun∣tenance, frame reuerently thy gesture, guide thy vn∣ruly tongue, set thy hands on worke, and order thy footsteps; & so reforme whatsoeuer is amisse. If thou doest looke into it for thy attire, consider by this glasse of truth, not on∣ly
how thy raiment dothConside∣ration of apparell. become thee; but also how lawfull to be worne, how conuenient for thee in respect of thy place, de∣gree, age, sexe, and habili∣tie: thereby to preuent iust occasion of giuing of∣fence; and if yet thou wilt needs excell in brauerie, and goe with the best for outward garments; see that thou also be as readie to imitate the most holy in heauenly graces: else thou art but the diuels en∣signe-bearer, lifting vp the standard of pride to thy owne confusion. After all these things5. Dutie. weigh seriously with thy
selfe before thou goestGodly conside∣rations in going abroad. forth. 1. What businesse thou hast abroad. 2. What warrant thou hast for thy intendments therin from God & his word. 3. How lawfull thy proceeding and act it selfe is in it selfe. 4. How lawfull vnto thee, what calling thou hast thereunto. 5. What means to effect it, what hope of a blessing, what honour may bee thereby to God, what good to others, what profit to thy selfe. Do nothing rashly, nor a∣ny thing at any time, a∣gainst religion, charity, pub∣like peace, equitie, or common honestie, lest thou sinne a∣gainst
God, against men and against thy owne soule. To conclude, consider that thy preparation to thy businesse in thy Chri∣stian calling, is a preparati∣on to goe forth vnto the battell with thy spirituall enemies, and therfore for∣get not to keep euer with∣in the Citie, the new Ierusa∣lem,The Christi∣an Gari∣son. the true Church of God, vnder thy Generall Iesus Christ, guided by his Vice-gerent his holy spirit, following his Ensigne the preaching of his word, hauing vpon thee the whole Armour of God, the girdle of veritie, the brest∣plate
of righteousnesse, the helmet of saluation, the shield of faith; on thy feet, the preparation of the Gospell of peace; in thy hand, or rather in thy heart, the sword of the spi∣rit, the word of God and vse all these with feruent praier; attend the Ensigne-bearers, the true Preachers of Gods word▪ displaying their colours, openly and liuely teaching the truth. Keepe with the court of Guard, the fellowship of the faithfull; vnder the Castle of Gods gracious protectiō; being to watch, stand firme in thy holy profession, and abide in
thy particular calling. Let the Captaine religion com∣mand thee, the Lieutenant soundnesse of iudgement in the truth settle thee, the Sergeant prudence order thee; let thy Corporall ap∣prehension, set thy atten∣tion Sentinell, when thou shalt heare the Gentlemen of the Round comming, godly discourses and holy motions: keepe the watch∣word, the witnes of Gods Spirit diligently; if thou shalt perceiue any secret conspirators, inward cor∣ruptions, outward tenta∣tions, make an alarme, let flie from thy heart spiritu∣all eiaculations vnto Iesus
Christ for aide against them. If the common soul∣diers corrupt reason, and loose affections begin to be disorderly, and to mu∣tinie through vaine plea∣sures, against Captaine reli∣gion, complaine presently to the Generall the Lord Iesus, that by his Spirit he may suppresse them, and by the power of consci∣ence keepe them in obe∣dience, lest the terrible shot of thundering iudge∣ments bring an vtter de∣struction: In all assaults fight valiantly, resist thy enemies with courage, and bee perswaded in the end of victorie; howsoe∣uer
for thy bodily life care not; neuer yeeld to thine enemies, but fight it out as a souldier of Iesus Christ to the death, rather then to bee taken and led captiue; for that is worse then a thousand bodily deathes. Lastly, going forth thus6. Dutie. In being abroad. well resolued, set God be∣fore thee; hide his com∣mandements within thee; cleaue to the rule of his word; purpose wholly to do well, and endeauour it; take heede of ill intend∣ments. Auoid ill compa∣nie, beware of ill counsell; fauour not thy owne cor∣ruptions; seeke not thine
owne will▪ aime principal∣ly at Gods glory; and thus goe forth in the name of the Lord, bee confident that thou doest goe vnder Gods protection, and ex∣pect a safe returne. For blessed is such a one in his going forth, and blessed shall he be in his returning in againe. But if before thou go∣estMedita∣tions in going to meate. out, or afterward (whē thou wilt) thou shall re∣ceiue any bodily nou∣rishment: consider these things, 1. That as thy bo∣dy stands in need of food, so doth thy soule also. 2. That as hunger maketh meate pleasant, and for∣ceth
thee to looke for food, and to receiue it thankfully; euen so a soule hungering after grace, maketh the word plea∣sant, causeth vs to seeke it, and hauing it, to thanke God heartily for it. 3. As nothing maketh vs deli∣cate in feeding, or to de∣sire variety of dishes, and daintie fare: but quezie stomackes, or a custome in nice feeding, want of ap∣petite, or weaknesse in di∣gestion: so nothing but daintinesse and an appe∣tite to varietie, weake spi∣rits, yet withall full of proud conceits, fleshly ap∣prehēsions, itching eares,
want of good stomackkes and hearts vnhumbled, doe cause the fine and de∣licate cooking of Gods word, and saucing it with the froth of mens wits, to make it fleshly sweet, and pleasant to vaine persons. 4. Consider how thou canst lay aside thy world∣ly businesses, thy pleasures and profits to take thy bo∣dily repast either at home, or as occasion serues a∣broad, where thou may∣est haue it; euen so shoul∣dest thou lay aside thy pleasures and profits at times fitting, for to get food for thy soule, either at home or abroad: for
as food is necessarie for the bodie; so is the word of God preached for thy soule. 5. As thou knowest that food preserues not life without Gods bles∣sing, and that the least crum may bereaue thee of thy life, if it go wrong: and therefore doest thou pray to God before: euen so, know also, that hea∣ring, and preaching of the word doth not giue, not preserue the life of the soule▪ except God blesse the same; yea the least mi∣staking in the chiefest points (if God preuent it not) may cause thee to erre euen vnto death. And
therefore before we come to the word, let vs pray heartily to God for a bles∣sing. 6. As thou wilt not sit downe to receiue food but with cleane hands; so come not to Gods word, or the Lords Table, with∣out a cleane heart: and as thou wilt sit downe, if thou hast a good stomack, when meate is prepared for thee, laying aside thy businesse for a while; so indeed if our hearts bee good, whē the Lord hath prepared by his Ministers food for vs, let vs, as wee ought, lay aside worldly businesses a while, to heare his doctrine, words of in∣struction,
for our strength and edification. And being set downeMedita∣tions be∣ing set at the ta∣ble. at a feast, then let the house in which thou art, put thee in remembrance of Gods Church: the Master of the house, of Christ Iesus the head of his Church, and Lord of the feast; the ta∣ble, of the Lords Table: thy sitting downe, the spiri∣tuall rest at the heauenly banquet: the faire linnens, of puritie; the furnishing of the Table, the variety with plentie of all things, of the things prepared for vs by Christ. Let the cleanly & decent seruice, put thee in mind of the pure worship
of God: the wholesome food of sound doctrine, the orderly placing of di∣shes, the orderly admini∣stration of holy things. The seruitours, let them re∣member thee of Gods Ministers; the bread, of the word of God, and Christs body in the Sacrament; the drinke and wine, of the water of life, and blood of Christ; milke, of the prin∣ciples of religion and ca∣techizing; strong meate, of harder points of doctrine; salt, of the ministery of the word; sauce, of affli∣ctiōs mingled with Gods mercies, to make them taste the better. The cun∣ning
caruing, and cutting vp of the food, of the right diuiding of Gods word; the reaching of it cut, of the giuing to euery man his part and portion; thy hand, of thy faith; thy chewing in thy mouth, of thy meditation in heart; thy digestion, of thy true receiuing of the word. Remember by thy com∣panie, the communion of Saints; by their talke toge∣ther, the holy conference; by their▪ idle speech, the na∣ture of vaine and iangling spirits; and by their graue and sober speaking, the wis∣dome of their words, which are wise in heart.
By the musicke, (if any be) consider of the sweet me∣lody, in concord of louing hearts, liuing in vnity; and of the ioies in heauen, and mirth vnspeakable; by the chearing of the heart with meate and drinke, causing thee to bee merrie, weigh the sweet comforts of the word refreshing thy soule making thee glad in the peace of a good consci∣ence, which is a continual feast. When thou offerest of that thou hast vnto any, let it put thee in mind, of the cōmunicating of thy graces, and gifts of hea∣uenly things vnto others. When thou receiuest wil∣lingly
with thankes what other offer to thee, thinke how willingly and thank∣fully thou shouldest re∣ceiue the food & meanes of saluation from other, when any shall offer the same vnto thee. Being at length well re∣freshedBeing refresh∣ed and readie to arise frō the ta∣ble. and ready to arise, thinke what a blessing of God it is to haue food to refresh the body; and so in like manner to haue meanes of instruction to thy soule. Let him that gi¦ueth thankes in the end, call to thy remembrance, how the Minister giueth thankes at the end of the time of the publike wor∣ship,
which thou art to stay for them, as at the Ta∣ble for saying of grace. To conclude this, as thou feelest strength of body by taking corporall food: so labour to feele strength of grace, by receiuing the food of the soule. And as thou perceiuest that the body will famish, without nourishing of it daily; so the soule wil perish where there is no vision. And as thou canst find in thy hart to bee at cost for the bodi∣ly food, and canst labour and go farre for it: so, such a loue and hunger shoul∣dest thou haue for the foode of the soule, that
thou shouldest willingly bee at cost for it, to labour for it, to seeke it, as siluer, and to search for it as trea∣surie; that thou mayest come to the feare of the Lord, and find the know∣ledge of God. Gaius. Alas my heart is heauie, my soule is perplex∣ed within me; Oh how wan∣ting hitherto haue I been of these duties, and ignorant of these meditations. I confesse, I haue risen without any true reuerent remembrance of God; a few prayers, perhaps, I haue made, more in sound of words, then with sighes and grones from an earnest affection of the heart. But
now haue I better vnder∣stood how euery morning, I am to demeane my selfe; the Lord giue mee grace, what now I know, and thou (good man of God) hast so largely instructed mee in, hereafter neuer to neglect. Iohn. Comfort thy selfe (my bowels) thou hast a large portion in the Lords inheritance, I wish chiefe∣ly, that thou mayest pros∣per, as well as thy soule prospereth: thy begin∣nings in goodnes; thy de∣sire to encrease in grace, & thy faithfull endeauour to attaine thereunto, by Gods blessing, shall bring thee to perfection, and to
thy desired wish in the end. Gaius. Thou hast spoken (I thanke thee) comfortably vnto thy seruant: but if that I haue now obtained thy grace, and that I bee accepta∣ble in thine eyes, before thou proceedest any further, I be∣seech thee to frame me a form of prayer for euery morning, as may fitly agree with my former meditations. Iohn. (Faithfull Gaius) I very willingly condis∣cend to this thy holy de∣sire; if therefore it please thee, in this or the like ma∣ner, thou mayest frame thy prayer.
Blessed be thy name, (mostA Prayer for the morning. gracious Father, the Lord of life) for that thou hast of thy goodnesse and mercy thus preserued mee this present night past; and hast awaken∣ed mee, raised mee vp, giuen vnto mee comfortable medi∣tations, and a most sweet taste of thy heauenly graces; Oh my Father, my Father, how is my spirit delighted with these celestiall ioyes! af∣ford me stil, I humbly beseech thee, the like measure of thy mercy daily, that I may euer feele these comforts, and ne∣uer cease to praise thy good∣nesse. Indeed (O Lord) I freely confesse vnto thee, that I
haue lien in the bed of my corruptions, and slept in the darke ignorance of my mind, and therein tooke such de∣light, as if thou haddest not sent out the sweet beames of the light of truth, and called me vp by thy faithfull teach∣ers, I had yet remained in the night of misdeeds, and peri∣shed in my sinnes. Sythen therfore (O Lord) thou hast thus brought mee from darknesse to the light, and opened mine eyes to see that which before I could not discerne; cause mee now, I be∣seech thee, to shake off al flesh∣ly drousines, that in so broad a sun-shine of the Gospell, I may not, as carelesse of spiri∣tuall
thrist, sloathfully lie downe againe in the sinfull corruptions of mine owne heart: but so partake of the first resurrection in the state of grace, as I may enioy the blessing of the second in the kingdome of glory. I doe acknowledge to thee, how without thee, I am (O Lord) very miserable, poore and naked, so as I am asha∣med to come before thee; but in mercy doe thou pitie mee, and clothe me with that faire rayment of Christ his righte∣ousnesse, that I may be bold to draw neare to the throne of grace; this best robe by the spirit put vpon me, and giue me the hand of faith to apply
the same vnto me, that I may thereby be preserued from the heate of thy wrath for sinne, and escape eternall destructi∣on. Giue mee grace (good Lord) to beautifie my holy profession with ornaments of grace, good words, and good workes; let mee neuer want the linnen of inward sinceri∣ty, nor the outward garment of Christian honestie, that I may be welcome to the com∣panie of thy Saints, the onely comely creatures, whom thou (O Lord) hast washed and made cleane. Wash me (O Lord) with them, for I confesse my selfe polluted with manifold sins; and that they stick so hard &
cleaue so fast vnto mee, that I cannot be deliuered nor clen∣sed, except thou (my God) by thy mercifull hand, the worke of thy Spirit, dost rinse mee in the precious blood of Christ. Surely, if it were not for the hope which I haue of thy gracious fauour, I should verily despaire of my saluati∣on. For when by the glasse of thy word I see my selfe so vn∣cleane, my corruptions also to be so many, and withall, feele them so strong in mee, I can∣not but mourne with teares, and lament with heauinesse of heart, my present estate de∣seruing death, and iustly cau∣sing me to feare rather dam∣nation, then to haue any hope
at all of saluation. But there is mercy with thee, (O thou blessed God of mercy) to which I now ap∣peale, humbly crauing at thy hands the ful pardon of al my sinnes; behold (deare Father) the merits of my Redeemer, the price which hee hath paid to satisfie thy iustice, that so of thy goodnesse, thou mayest be well pleased with mee, that my prayers may bee granted, and my requests, which I now put vp vnto thee, may graci∣ously be heard of thee. It is thy will (O Lord) that euery one should haue a cal∣ling to walke in, and that wee should performe such duties diligently as do belong there∣unto,
now (Lord for thy mer∣cie sake) as thou hast giuen mee a calling, and desire to performe the charge laid vp∣on me therby; so, I do earnest∣ly beseech thee, to help, guide, aide and strengthen me ther∣in; put vpon mee that whole furniture of thine, for my spirituall warfare, that I may be armed at all assayes, to re∣sist, & also to preuaile against all my ghostly enemies. O Lord, thou knowest well how manifold the tentations bee, which doe follow all those that desire to liue in, and by their callings religiously, and honestly. Thou doest also know, how I desire like a true Israelite, to walke before thee
in godly simplicity, and to∣wards the world without fraud or guile peaceably; but Satan is so powerfull and of∣ten in his tentations, the world so full of deceitfull al∣lurements, and my heart so weake, and vnable to resist, that (vnlesse thou by thy spi∣rit doe aide me, by thy power defend mee, by thy word in∣struct mee, and by thy grace preuent mee) I shall vndoub∣tedly goe astray from my in∣tended purpose of wel▪ doing. O my God, helpe me, helpe me therefore (O my God). In al my iust proceedings protect me: make my good purposes prosperous, if it bee thy will, I heartily pray thee. Bend my
mind euer to thy good plea∣sure and will, that I encline not vnto wickednesse, by ill companie, ill counsell, ill ex∣amples of others, though for a time they flourish by il means Make mee (O Lord) to delight more in thy fauour and loue, then in the gaine of all earthly goods. Possesse so my heart with vprightnesse, and true intendment of iust dealing, and peaceable wal∣king towards all, in all my courses, that I may boldly come to thee, and make thee (my God) the Iudge of all my actions. Goe out, Lord, before me, and let my eyes be this day as at all times, euer vpon thee,
that so before I speake, I may consult with thee; before I do any thing, I may bee aduised by thee; that so in going out, and in continuing abroad, thy care may be ouer mee, thy prouident hand may helpe me, thy mercy also may couer me, that so, I may by thee re∣turne home in good peace and safety, through Iesus Christ, our Lord and onely Sauiour, in whose name I fur∣ther call vpon thee, for my self, & for the whole Church, and euery member of the same, in that holy forme of prayer which hee taught his blessed Apostle, saying, Our Father which art in heauen, &c.
Gaius. For this (thou blessed seruant of God) I most humbly thanke thee; now if it please thee, proceed on to the second point, how I may carrie my selfe abroad on the day time. Iohn. Hold thy selfe (Gaius) to this mornings worke constantly; then go forth in Gods name, feare not, neither be faint-hear∣ted, for the Lord is with thee. Walk as a Saint amongDirecti∣ons for the day time. men, striuing daily to per∣fection: let them as appa∣rantly see thee to be come out of Satans house of bondage spiritually, as they can behold thee out
of thine owne house bo∣dily. Liue in the light of Gods word, with respect vnto all and euery one of Gods Commandements, as thou doest walke with thy body, and sight of the eyes in the shine of the Sunne. Behold and looke vp often to the heauens, as thy eternall mansion; consi∣der of the earth, as but the place of thy pilgrimage, not any continuing habi∣tation. Thinke of thy re∣moue all, prepare for a bet∣ter home. Prouide for thy selfe with God; thereup∣on often set thy mind: but
vpon this world, vaine and fading away, no more thē needs must: knowing that he, which is least intangled in mundane affaires, is most fit for God, and can with the greatest ease bid farwell to this world. Make all the day time the manifestation of thy gra∣ces; thy calling, the circuit of thy walking, thy iust dealing with men, the true triall of thy faith towards God: thy painfull labour in thy vocation, the ordi∣narie means of thy main∣tenance; be neuer either idle, or ill exercised. In thy conuersing withHow to behaue our selus in con∣uersing with o∣thers. men, doe as thou woul∣dest
bee done vnto; buy and sell in truth and equi∣tie, moderate by mercy, what thou mayest haue by law in extremity. Seek not gaine vnlawfully; nei∣ther that which may vn∣doe thy brother. Make no vniust prey vpō thy poore neighbours necessity: nei∣ther seeke aduantage vp∣on meere mistakings in word or deed. Hee that trusteth thee, faile him not; frustrate not a hope∣full expectation of thy goodnesse. Secrecies in friendship reueale not, no though the partie be∣come thy deadly ene∣mie.
Bee not hastie to pro∣mise, but thy word being past, keepe it faithfully: deale warily, and yet liue innocently. In companie with persons vnknowne, haue a wise respect to thy words and behauiour: and be religiously suspici∣ous: feare the worst till thou know more; as thou shalt find men worthy thy loue, so afford it them, and therein proceed by de∣grees, and abide constant. Loue onely for vertues, and forsake not friendship because of humaine frail∣ties. Intermeddle not in o∣ther mens matters; be no
busie body to speake or do without the compasse of thy vocation. If thou bee intreated to interpose thy selfe betweene parties, let thy words & aduice tend to peace, and iudge with∣out partiality, be alike iust therein to friend and foe. To conclude, so liue in the view of all, as none may iustly condemn thee, though some maliciously slander thee: so also as all good men may behold thee in thy iourney to∣wards heauen, & as Gods steward in thy course rea∣dy at euery houre to giue vp thine account to the Lord, with a chearful hart.
Gaius. A men, amen, I beseech thee good God of Is∣rael. For if euery man would thus behaue himselfe abroad,The good which cōmeth by mens iust and faithfull dealing. then would fraud and false∣hood bee sent packing; op∣pression would be suppressed; cruelty would bee turned into Christian compassion, and friendly courtesies; biting v∣surie, into workes of mercie; vniust gaine, by periurie, bri∣berie, robberie, and symonie, into iust dealing, equitie and pietie. Wee should heare no more of hard hartednesse, ex∣tortion, malicious reuenging, the extremitie of iustice: the mischiefs of iniustice: for all misse-deeds would bee turned into almes-deeds,
and duties of loue, by which peace is preserued, and chari∣ty practised. And so, though wee were abroad, wee should neither offend, nor easily bee offended; and when wee bee returned home, wee might sit downe with ioy to meditate vpon Gods mercies, to sing praise to him, to conferre of the best things, & to be think our selues in the euening how to prepare our selues to our nights rest; in which point also I desire to bee instructed. For hauing learned my mor∣nings meditations, and the duties therof, also how to car∣rie my selfe abroad on the day, I would be glad (my Fa∣ther) to know how to behaue
my selfe returning home, sit∣ting in the house, and going to my rest at seasonable houres. Iohn. (Good Gaius) IDirecti∣ons for the euē∣ing. perceiue thou art loath to break off, before thou hast perfected the worke: it is my ioy to goe on with thee, being sure that thou doest willingly turne eue∣ry good precept into a cō∣scionable practice. When therefore thou doest re∣turne home: First, giue thy selfe toMedita∣tions in returning home. meditation vpon these things, 1. That as the end of the day cuts off thy worldly businesse abroad, and causeth thee to re∣turne
home; euen so the worlds end shall cut off all earthly businesses, and bring vs to our euerlasting home. 2. That as the set∣ting of the Sunne, and the darknesse of the night co∣uering vs, doth make vs, that we cannot follow our callings abroad; euen so, by the declining of Gods grace, the losse of the light of truth, blindnesse and darke errour possessing vs, wee cannot follow the workes of pietie, nor doe the duties of good Chri∣stians. 3. That as after thy long trauel and absence from home, yet thou doest re∣turne again; euen so, there
is a time comming, when thou must, though heere staied very long, returne to thy home, thy euerla∣sting mansion. 4. That as thy house, being faire andHeauen. pleasant, they also which liue in it, louely, peace∣able, and ioyfull at thy comming, doe much re∣ioyce thy heart to enter in, and to sit downe with them, hauing sustained much trouble abroad; e∣uen so, may it be great ioy to vs, after this miserable life ended, to enter into heauen, into that pleasant Paradise, and to sit downe among that louely, peace∣able and ioyfull company
of elect men and Angels. And on the contrary, as mā hauing had pleasures, honour, and all content∣ment abroad, returning home, to a filthy house,Hell. the people in it most dis∣orderly, and nothing a∣mong them but wicked∣nesse, & the punishments thereof, woes, miseries, & much lamentations, as such a man, I say, would be exceedingly cast down to thinke that he must goe to such a home; and it would be as bitter to him as death, to enter into his house; euen so will it bee to all such as here liue in this world full of honour,
pleasures and riches, with all fleshly and carnall con∣tentment, whē they must needs goe to their home, euen hell, the harbour for all those that liue and die irrepentantly, there to bee tormented with the di∣uels and his Angels for e∣uer. Secondly, being entredAnother duty be∣ing set downe. into thy house and set downe, then call to re∣membrance what God hath done for thee; what mercies hee hath shewed, what benefits bestowed, what friends raised, what comforts affoorded, and so forth. And againe on the other side, what euils
preuented, what dangers auoided, how peaceably continued and preserued, and such like, that so the Lord for them may bee most worthilie magnifi∣ed. Consider what thou hast done, what duties performed, to see the con∣tinuance of grace, what duties omitted, and sinnes committed, to behold thy imperfections, and decay in goodnesse, except thou repent. Thirdly, after theseA third dutie at night. things, take Gods booke into thy hand, reade it for thy selfe, & others, if thou hast a familie, & conclude
with prayer, and a Psalme of praises vnto the Lord. And withall, meditate vp∣on the candle, brought for thee to reade by, that as thou canst not reade with∣out light; no more canst thou vnderstand without the illumination of Gods Spirit. 2. As the light of the candle, being in our eye but a little light; yet gi∣ueth a great light to the whole house; euē so doth that heauenly enlighten∣ing of God, though it seeme neuer so little to worldly wisedome, yet doth it greatly enlighten vs. 3. As while the candle is light, we can reade, and
it being out, wee cannot see: no more can wee see heauenly things, if once the light of Gods spirit be taken from vs. So likewise meditate, that the word is as fire, which thou sittest by. The fire thaweth off frostines, and expels cold: so the word melteth fro∣zen hearts: it comforteth vs going to rest; so doth the word, going out of the world: it trieth mettals, so the word doth men. It diuideth things, sending some vpward, and leaueth some on the earth; so the word diuideth people, some sending vpward, some leauing below, &c.
Fourthly, in going to thy4. Dutie. Medita∣tions in going to rest. rest, thinke vpon the ende of this earthly toylesome∣nesse, in the eternall rest: in putting off thy clothes, thinke how thou shalt at length be vnclothed, and as thou art naked in a shirt, so shalt thou bee na∣ked in a sheet. Thinke also as thou arisest naked in the morning, and so returnest to thy bed naked in the euening: euen so camest thou naked into the world and so naked shalt thou returne againe. Fifthly, in lying downe5. Medi∣tations in lying downe. in thy bed, consider thy bed as thy graue: thy lying downe, the laying of thy
body in the place of the dead; the couering, the earthly molds vpon thee: the closing of thine eyes, the representation of death: the sleepe possessing thee, deaths ceasing vpon thee: the impossibility to pre∣uent sleepe euer, the ine∣uitablenesse of death: the ringing of the bell, the sound of the last trumpet. Thinke by thy compani∣on in bed, of the dead with thee in the graue; & that two may be together, the one receiued, the o∣ther refused. Consider how, as a flea in the bed may bite thee, so the wormes in graue
shall eate thee: as sleepe ta∣keth away all care of the world from thee; so shall death in like manner set thee free from the same. And as thou doest not feare to sleepe, because thou art in hope to awake againe: so be not afraid to die, for that thou shalt a∣rise afterwards to life eter∣nall. Lastly, as thou knowest thou hast a soule awaking; though thy body bee slee∣ping: so know, that albe∣it thy bodie lie a while a∣sleepe in the graue; yet thy soule euen then liueth and partaketh of ioy: let this be for thy comfort.
Thus by these thy hea∣uenly meditations, thy last thoughts being so fix∣ed vpon God and good things, before thou doest fall asleepe, they will cause thee to lift vp thine eies to the Lord, to entreate him to take protection of thee, (for he neither slumbreth nor sleepeth, which kee∣peth Israel.) These will preuent vaine dreames, idle fantasies, and prepare thy soule to better cogita∣tions. Yea, thus graciously exercised, albeit thou do∣est lie down to rise againe in the morning; yet wilt thou so rest secure, and lie downe without feare, as
one assured of life, though for this light thou behold it no more with bodily eies, vntil the day of iudg∣ment. It is euer therefore best to haue thy mind full of godly meditations, in betaking thy selfe to rest: and it shall not bee amisse so to lie downe, as think¦ing no more to rise till the last day: the preparation to death, doth not any whit soo∣ner hasten it, but maketh it more comfortable when it doth come. Gaius. Blessed is that man, that thus meditateth of his mortalitie: happie is he, surely, that thus prepareth to his rest; vndoubtedly hee
shall finde the sweet fruites thereof in the end. But I now desire to heare of some godly directions, how to meditate in the night sea∣son, if happily I doe awake; but I thinke, I heard thee speak of prayer before I should goe to my bed; therefore as it hath pleased thee, to set me downe a forme of prayer for the morning, so I beseech thee, affoord me the like helpe for the euening. Iohn. It is, indeed (Gai∣us) as necessarie to praise God, and to pray vnto him in the euening, as in the morning; and there∣fore hast thou well done to put me in mind hereof.
In the name therefore, & mediation of Christ Iesus, thus, or in some such like maner, mayest thou make thy prayers vnto the Al∣mighty. Honour and praise bee gi∣uenA Prayer for the euening. to thee (most holy Fa∣ther, my most gracious Lord, and strong protector) which hast of thy great goodnes this day, both led me forth safely, and now brought me home in peace. This hath been thy mercy wholy, of which I haue abundantly tasted, blessed bee thy name therefore for euer and for euer. I confesse to thy praise and glory, O God, that by thy
light I haue walked, by thy power I haue been preserued, by thy grace preuented from sinnes which I might haue run into, from perils which I might haue fallen into, and by thy spirit haue I been dire∣cted in that, which hath been comfortable vnto mee, and wherin I haue cause to reioyce Albeit I doe acknowledge, that in my best actions I haue shewed much humaine frail∣ty, and not a little offended thy diuine Maiesty, in thought, in words, and in deeds; which yet, of thy great mercy, thou hast passed by, and not laid vnto my charge, as thou mightest iustly haue done.
Now (O Lord) I beseech thee, so be still gracious vnto me, for Iesus Christ his sake, and continue thy fauourable countenance, and bee euer with me; as heretofore, and this day past, so also the rest of my life, & this present night now come vpon me. Vnclothe mee, I pray thee, of my old raymēt of vnrigh∣teousnesse, and make mee to throw away all my vncleane ragges of filthie corruptions, that I may goe in the white∣nesse of sincerity and holines vnto my eternall rest. In the meane space, giue mee the candle light of the truth to shine vnto me in this darke world, and make thy
word as a fire to heate and enflame my affections with the loue of thee (O God) and all goodnesse, that I may see the way, and go with a warm zeale of thy spirit, vnto my graue. And seeing I came na∣ked into the world, and so must lie downe naked, bring∣ing nothing, neither carry∣ing away any thing; Oh blesse mee from couetousnesse, and greedie cares of this fading world; If I haue but to liue, let mee bee therewith conten∣ted. Put away from mee the feare of death, seeing it is but as a sleepe, and cannot de∣priue me of life. Yea, sythen
I am mortall, make mee wil∣ling to goe vnto my rest, that I may cease to sinne, and bee freed from the manifold ten∣tations, and troubles which accompanie vs heere, that al∣though my bodie lie in the graue asleepe, my soule may ascend vnto my blessed Saui∣our, with whom I desire to bee. Sanctifie vnto me my rest, keepe my minde in heauenly meditations, from vncleane, vnquiet and foolish dreames: and so refresh me by the quiet benefit of sweet sleepe, that I may arise more chearfully & comfortably in the morning to the labours of my particu∣lar calling.
While I doe sleepe, watch, I beseech thee, ouer me; cause thy holy Angels to pitch their tents about me, that so I may rest, and also arise in safety, and therby be moued to laud and praise thee, still renewing my thankes, as thou doest re∣new thy mercies daily. And now (Lord) going to my bed, I commend my selfe, my soule and body into the hands of thy fatherey prote∣ction, for thou art awake, when I sleepe, and thou onely art able to preserue mee. If it so please thee now this night to take my life from me, and to remoue me out of this vale of miserie, this doe (O Lord) of thy great mercy, pardon
me all my sins, wilfull trans∣gressions, negligences, and ig∣norances, euils committed, and duties omitted in any measure, manner, or any way displeasing to thy Maiesty, and that for the death and passion, the righteousnesse, the merits and intercession of Ie∣sus Christ thy Sonne, and our blessed Sauiour, I humbly be∣seech thee; and for his sake take vp my soule to thy hea∣uenly habitation, there to rest, vntill I come wholly body and soule vnto thee, in that great day of the resurrection. But if it yet please thee, stil further to prolong my life; then I hartily pray thee (good God) of thy tender mercy,
herein to heare mee; that as dayes be added to the time of life, so graces may bee encrea∣sed; that as I grow in yeeres, so may I also bee fruitfull in good workes, encreasing in grace, to thy praise, my better preparednesse to death, and to my eternall comfort at the last day, the time of my per∣fect redemption, through Ie∣sus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee, and that blessed Spirit bee giuen all honour, glory and praise of me and all thy people, as is most due for all thy louing mercies, past and present, for the future hope of eternall blisse, this night and for euermore, A∣men.
Gaius. Now, if it please thee (my Father) proceed to the next point, and shew vnto me, what meditatiōs I should haue in the night season, if it happen, that then I should a∣wake. Iohn. Let it, 1. put theeMedita∣tions vp∣on our a∣waking in the night. in mind of awaking from sinne, as thou hast awaked frō sleep, that thou perish not by death. 2. Thinke also how God can make men which are dead in the graue, to liue againe, as easily, as hee hath made thee to awake out of thy sleepe. 3. By thy sudden awaking, to consider how suddenly thou mayest bee raised vp and summoned
to iudgement. Secondly, by the darknesOf dark∣nesse. of the night, first, thinke of the spirituall darknesse, in which natural men sinful∣ly and desperately doe sleepe, to pray that God would open their eyes, to see the wonders of his law: then of the vtter dark∣nesse, into which all such impenitent sleepers shall bee cast, to moue thee to mourne for them aliue, that they may not bee damned when they bee dead; further, by this dark∣nesse so comfortlesse, be∣hold also their comfortles estate; for as they cannot, which are in darknes, see
either themselues, or o∣thers, or their way, or house, or friends, or ene∣mies: no more can men in spirituall darknesse, know thēselues nor the Church of God, nor discerne the godly from the vngodly, nor the way of life, from the way of death: nor foresee perils, or the pit prepared for them, no more then men which re∣maine in darknesse can see to auoide the dangers, which they may fall into, vntill the light doe againe shine vpon them. Thirdly, (if thou canst)Of dreames. cal thy dreames to remem∣brance, by their vanitie,
iudge of thy leuity; by their vncleannesse, thy fil∣thinesse; by their idlenes, thy foolishnesse; by the furie in them, thy madnes; by their much vncertain∣ty, thy wauering and in∣constancie; the delight in▪ their deceits, thy easinesse to bee led by delusions; the fearfulnesse in them, thy timorous heart; the seldome thoughts of goodnes, thy much delight in wic∣kednesse, and little care of godlinesse. Fourthly, in the silent night vpon thy bed, it is good to fall into an exa∣mination of thine owne heart: it is the time freest
from disturbance, in re∣spect of outward impedi∣ments, thou mayest haue with thy soule free and peaceable conference. By a true and serious search, thou mayest finde out thy selfe, and so bee better knowne to thy selfe, and the more thou art ac∣quainted with thy owne corruption, the more wilt thou bewaile thy wants, and seeke after the grace of sanctification. Fifthly, in thine inclina∣tion to sleepe againe, note thereby how a man may awake from sin, through Gods mercy, and yet bee readie to sleepe againe in
sinne, by his owne infir∣mitie. Sixthly, before thou sleepe againe, commend thy selfe in some short prayer to God, according to the former meditati∣ons, and so asleepe for re∣freshment, taking so much as may suffice nature, for more strength of labour, but not to satisfie the flesh to grow thereby lazie and lustfull. Gaius. Oh what concei∣ted Laodiceans are we! wee, out of an ordinarie profession in any measure aboue our brethren, hold our selues full of deuotion; wee iudge our selues goodly Christians; rich
in graces, flowing in good∣nesse, lacking little to perfe∣ction; but, alas, now I see by the neglect of these things, that we are wretched and mi∣serable, and poore, and blind, and naked: & I confesse that the Lord hath cause to re∣buke and chasten vs, except wee speedily grow more zea∣lous and amend. Iohn. Indeed (Gaius) men are too wickedly carelesse of a holy conuer∣sation, and how to keepe a good cōscience towards God & man. Men seeme to hate so very much po∣pish superstition, as they neglect altogether Chri∣stian deuotiō; it is iudged
enough to bee no Papist, though otherwise a man bee little better then a ve∣ry Atheist in all his cour∣ses. Gaius. Right so (my fa∣ther) such as see it, may la∣ment it, but not remedie it; I pray for better vnto him that can reforme it. But lea∣uing this, proceed on, I be∣seech thee with mee, as thou hast begun, and come to the last particular, how I may make my selfe readie for the sanctifying of the Sabbath. Iohn. I perceiue that thy heart thirsteth after grace, the Lord more and more perfect the same so happily begun in thee.
First, besides these thingsDirecti∣ons for a prepara∣tion to the Sab∣bath. before mentioned, care∣fully haue in remēbrance euery day the Lords day, to keepe it holy when it commeth; therefore fore∣see thy businesse, neglect no ordinarie labour, order thy worldly affaires so, as that day bee set apart for the speciall and publike worship of God, that so thy deuotion bee not hin∣dered, nor the day pro∣phaned: hee hath vtterly lost the power of religion, that is carelesse of the Sabbaths sanctification. Secondly, in the end of the weeke, iudge by this holy course of thy growth
in religion, of the death of sin, the strength of grace, of thy contempt of the world, and of thy desire to bee with Christ: for by a constant course in this daily exercise thou shalt see these things more and more to encrease vpon thee, if, indeed, this worke for euery weeke, without formall and customarie hypocrisie, in a holy and conscionable respect of thy dutie, bee religiously and constantly perfor∣med. Thirdly, consider how thou hast passed ouer so many dayes, the allotted time for worldly labours,
and so hast brought the weeke to an end, that so thou mayest meditate of thy shortening of thy daies, and drawing nearer vnto iudgemēt. Also how thou hast ended daies and weekes, and so shouldest end thy sins, and as times renew vpon thee, and yeeres encrease, so shoul∣dest thou be daily renew∣ed in minde, and bee en∣creased in goodnesse; that so the longer thou doest liue, the better thou may bee; more holy to God, more vpright to men; more spiritual, lesse world∣ly, more desirous of im∣mortality, lesse regarding
vanitie; so liuing as there∣by leauing a blessed name to posterity; so dying, as thou mayest enioy a bet∣ter life in eternity. Fourthly, with the rest of thy former daily deuo∣tions, and euery nights ex∣ercise and godly medita∣tion, going to bed, adde to this night these two con∣siderations. That the week is as the end of the world, and the seuenth day fol∣lowing, as the eternall Sabbath, when all the e∣lect of God shall be assem∣bled to worship him for euer and euer. Gaius. Reuerend Sir, al∣though thus be ended the du∣ties
and meditations for the sixe daies in the weeke, yet is not this worke for euery weeke fully finished. One thing remaineth, of which, though many haue spoken, I beseech thee say something, and set downe in a few words how I may behaue my selfe vpon this day of rest to san∣ctifie it, and to keepe it holy vnto the Lord. Iohn. Friend, and faith∣full Gaius, thy desire is good, and I cannot but condescēd to thy request, to make vp this so little a worke for him that rea∣deth it, which yet will bee a most holy labour to him that practiseth it. Concer∣ning
this, thou art to know three things; first,3. Things to bee knowne for the keeping of the Lords day holy. what to doe, before thou goest to the assembly, then how to demeane thy selfe there; and thirdly, how to behaue thy selfe after∣wards. Gaius. What am I to do, I beseech▪ thee, in the mor∣ning? Iohn. Thou art not on∣ly now to performe thy e∣uery day mornings deuo∣tion, but thou must make a speciall preparation for this day. First, awake early, andWhat to doe vp∣on the Lords day in the mor∣ning. arise be times as thy age and health wil suffer thee: the sooner vp, the more
ready for holy exercises, and longer time for them: It is meet thou shouldest as∣soone rise for the Lords ser∣uice to the soules safety, as in the weeke day for thy selfe, or earthly master to get mainte∣nance for the body. Secondly, being thus ri∣sen and ready, bee earnest and ardent in prayer, and therin, first, for thy Pastor and Teacher, that God would enlarge his gifts vpon him, that hee would giue him vtterance and li∣berty of speech, that hee might speake powerfully, that the spirit might work both in him, and by him effectually; that so he him∣selfe
might be a preacher in word and works, a liue∣ly paterne of his doctrine in a holy life and conuer∣sation: then for thy selfe, and the rest of the hearers, that they might haue pre∣pared harts as good groūd for the Lords seede, that they might bring forth plentifully for the Lords haruest, for your ministers encouragement, and your owne comfort. After this, reade some portion of Scripture, with the text to be handled, if hee goe on with a scripture, calling to minde what hee hath spo∣ken, & where hee left, that so you may prepare your
selues better to that which remaineth: and so with some sweete Psalme ofPsal. 14. & 92. & 95. comfort praise God. Thirdly, and lastly, af∣ter all these things speedi∣ly dispatch all businesse of absolute necessity, auoide whatsoeuer is superflu∣ous, leaue as few as possi∣bly may be at home, make hast to the assembly, and thinke whether thou art going, looking to thy feet before thou enter into the house of the Lord, and be more ready to heare, then to offer the sacrifice of fooles. Gaius. Oh Lord God,Of mens vnprepa∣rednesse to Gods house. how vnpreparedly come most
into Gods house, wee doe vsu∣ally rush into the holy assem∣blie, without doing any of these duties; from worldly businesse stuffed with cares of this life, which choke the seed of Gods word: some out of the Alchouse, with red faces, bidding defiance to all sober spirits: other hardly gotten from their beds, hauing not shaken off their idlenesse, and perhaps their wantonnesse; other spend all the time in dressing and attiring them∣selues, that they may come to see, and to bee seene, into the congregation, as the diuels ensigne-bearers of vanity & pride. Some come with coue∣tousnes, as Iudas; some with
hypocrisie, as Ananiah; some with enuie, as the Pha∣risies; some with Prophane∣nesse and mocking spirits, like the Iewes; some to cauill and catch aduantage, as cer∣taine did in Ieremies daies; some come for companie, as good fellowes, not for consci∣ence; some onely of a fashion, and of a custome taken vp vpon a kind of religion, but neither knowing why, nor wherefore, nor euer learning any thing for their reforma∣tion. Some come for feare of man, but not of God; most that come, come as the people did to Ezechiel, to heare, but very few to doe; because, in∣deed, they come not thus in a
conscionable preparation. But I haue been too long in this sorrowfull complaint, shew me, I pray thee, what I am to do, in the open congregation? Iohn. 1. Be thou respe∣ctiueHow to carry our selues in the open congre∣gation. of Gods presence, & the presence of his holy Angels. 2. Shew a reuerent be∣hauior in thine eies, coun∣tenance & gesture of thy whole body, whether it bee standing, sitting, or kneelings. 3. Wholly addict thy selfe to attentiue hearing, ioyning with the minister and the rest of the congre∣gation in all the publike exercises, is the preaching
of the word, in admini∣stration of the Sacramēts, in distributing to the poor in their necessities, in prayer, and singing of Psalmes vnto God. 4. Auoid all wandring thoughts, idle gazing, drowsie sleeping, supersti∣tious praying there alone; also priuate reading, and whatsoeuer may shew ei∣ther neglect, or contempt of the publike administra∣tion of holy thing. 5. Continue constant with the congregation, a∣bide to the end, and con∣clude with the rest; de∣part with a heart lifted vp vnto God, for such hea∣uenly
means of saluation: and so goe forth with a re∣uerent and a holy behaui∣our in respect of God, of his Angels, of Gods Mi∣nisters and his people, and in respect of departing so immediately from such holy and heauenly exer∣cises, and also in regard of the place (but without su∣perstition) set apart to so holy an end. Gaius. Alas, alas, how contrary heereunto are the most, and how defectiue are the best? I may mourne hea∣uily for the multitude, and much lament my own wants: but as I heare now my dutie, so will I endeauour to per∣forme
by Gods grace more carefully hereafter, the pre∣sent desire of my heart, and therefore proceed (thou best beloued Apostle of the Lord) to teach me what to do, when the publike seruice to God is ended? Iohn. 1. Preuent al pre∣sent occasions of worldly vnnecessarie communica∣tion. 2. Betake thy selfe aOur duty after publike seruice of God. while to some priuate place for priuate medita∣tion and prayer vpon that which thou hast heard & remembrest. 3. Receiue that day so much nourishment only, as may satisfie for necessi∣tie,
auoiding superfluitie, arising of variety, which may cause drousines, dul∣nesse of spirit, and hinder thy meditation. 4. Vse conference with other, and occasion them to holy speeches: if thou doest doubt, thou mayest perhaps bee resolued, if thou hast forgot, the me∣mories of other may help thee, as also giue thee vn∣derstanding in that thou thy selfe knowest not. 5. Being disposed to be merrie, sing Psalms, aban∣don foolish and leaud sports, and vaine compa∣nie. 6. Forget not this day
to shew forth workes of mercy, to visit the sicke, to relieue the poore, and to comfort the afflicted. Lastly, in the end of the day, praise God for the comforts thereof, remem∣ber what thou hast heard, and that which especially; concerned thy selfe; make some vse of all, but forget not that, pray for a bles∣sing, resolue to put what thou learnest, into daily practise, and then before thy rest, fall to thy daily deuotion, and in all good things bee euer constant vnto the end. Gaius. O Lord grant me so great mercy, how happie
were I, if thus I could doe! I earnestly desire it, Oh that I could attaine vnto it. This were indeed a blessednesse here, a heauen vpon earth, a celestiall felicity in a terre∣striall place in this wretched state of miserie. This pearle, if I could purchase, I offer wil∣lingly to giue away all my carnal pleasures, al my world∣ly profits, all vaine honour, and my selfe wholly for the loue of it. For what am I, if I had all the world, without the effectuall sauing power and grace of the word? if I had all pleasure, and had no por∣tion in the heauenly Para∣dise? If I had all honour, without certaine hope of hea∣uen?
Woe would bee to mee, endlesse woes would seaze vp∣on mee. I will therefore now resolue to walke with God, seek fellowship with the faith∣full, and abandon the waies of wickednesse, whatsoeuer be∣falleth mee in this present world. Iohn. A most blessed resolution: sweet soule go on and prosper: looke for ioyfull fruits of thy blessed labour by well do∣ing, thou shalt haue assu∣red hope of Gods fauour; boldnesse in Christ to go vnto God; who will be to thee a Father, the Spirit a Comforter, as Christ thy Redeemer and Iustifier.
Feare not death, dread not hell; heauen is thine inhe∣ritance. The godly pray for thee, Angels accom∣panie thee, the Law will not curse thee, the Gospel is for thy comfort, and thy conscience will speake peace vnto thee. Satan dare not claime thee, God doth acknowledge thee for his owne, and hath thee in his safe keeping to bring thee to heauen. Gaius. Blessed man of God, thou beloued of the Lord: thou hast comforted me, and spoken comfortably vnto thy seruant, the Lord recompence thy worke, and a full reward bee giuen thee of
the Lord God of Israel, and now behold thy seruant, and the seruant of the Lord, bee it vnto mee according to all these thy words. Yet (good Sir) before I end, I must needs craue a lit∣tle more helpe. I was aduised to pray vpon the Sabbath day in the morning, before I goe vnto the publike congregati∣on, and in the euening, when the day is ended, vouchsafe, I beseech thee, to help my weak∣nesse heerein also, and to set me downe, how to pray mor∣ning & euening, on the Sab∣bath. Iohn. Friend Gaius, I am ready to further thy gracious desires in al good
things, much reioycing in thy vnfained loue to the Lord, and to the holy ex∣ercises of religion; I hear∣tily wish thee heerein all happie successe, such fer∣uencie, such growth, such constancie, as thy exam∣ple may moue many to imitate thy vertues, and to ioyne with thee in the way to eternitie. Thus therefore mayest thou, or to the like effect, pray in the morning. O Lord our God, whoseA Prayer for the Sabbath day in the mor∣ning. will and commandement it is, that wee should keepe holy this day, as set apart, for the publike worship and seruice
of thy most holy name. Now I do heartily beseech thee, in thy tender compassion and mercy, so to looke vpon me in Christ Iesus; that my sinnes may not be a wall of se∣paration betweene thee and me, but that of thy gracious goodnesse through my blessed Sauiour, I may obtaine ful re∣mission of all my sinnes; and by him the gift of thy most holy spirit, which may happi∣ly prepare and make ready my heart, that I may goe to the holy assembly of thy Saints, as well prepared ground, fit to receiue the good seed of thy most holy word. Oh Lord, open mine eyes to see thy truth, mine eares
encline to harken attentiuely, bend my will to follow what I shall heare, that I may not be a bare hearer, but a doer of thy word. Giue me wisdome to iudge of the truth, humility to re∣ceiue it, faith to beleeue it, conscience to practise it; make it vnto me the Sauiour of life vnto life, a word of reconcili∣ation, that I may for euer by it, be wonne vnto thee. Withdraw my mind and affections wholly from euery thing, that may hinder mee from the performance of my duty this day in thy diuine seruice. Take from me, blindnesse of mind, dulnesse of wit, dis∣orderlines
of affections, dead∣nesse of spirit, hardnesse of heart, vnbeleefe, pride, selfe∣conceit, presumption of mer∣cy, and wicked prophanenes, that so I may not contemne, nor yet make light account of thy holy ordinances, the word read and preached, the admi∣nistration of the Sacramēts, prayer, and thankes giuing, with the whole congregati∣on. Being set to heare (good Father) blesse me from wan∣dring thoughts, vaine ima∣ginations, Satans suggesti∣ons, drowsinesse of the flesh, and whatsoeuer is an enemie to the sauing hearing of thy blessed word.
Sanctifie my vnderstan∣ding rightly to conceiue, my memory to retaine and keepe, and my heart truly to affect what thy seruant shall speake vnto mee, and to the rest of thy people this day. O Lord, open his mouth, that hee may speake onely thy truth, enforme his vnder∣standing, settle his iudge∣ment, enflame his affections with that truth which he shal deliuer vnto vs, and guide so his tongue, that he may speak wisely, seasonably, aptly, and also with great power of thy spirit to the heart and consci∣ences of euery of vs his hea∣rers so, as we may liuely feele the power of thine owne ordi∣nance,
and may also truly say of him, that thou, Lord, art most assuredly with him. Giue mee, and the rest of thy flocke, this grace, (O Lord God of heauen) I doe humbly beseech thee, that as hee shall teach soundly, aptly and pow∣erfully; so wee may all most humbly submit our selues vn∣to his ministery, as well when hee conuinceth our errours, rebuketh vs of sinne, and threatneth Gods fearfull plagues for the same; as when he preacheth peace to the pe∣nitent, and comforteth the sorrowfull spirit. Oh let vs not make excep∣tions against any thing com∣manded him to speake: but
rather iudge him the more faithfull, and so to loue him more for the truth sake, and for his sincere handling of the same. Qualifie him euery way for vs, as he may go wisely in and out before vs, in sound∣nesse of doctrine, in holinesse of life, in humility, in godly grauity, with wisedome and authority familiarly conuer∣sing among vs. And for his encourage∣ment, make vs willing to fre∣quent diligently the Church, to heare attentiuely, to abide reuerently, and to learne of him gladly, not to looke vpon his humaine frailties, but in true loue to passe them by, to
make much of him, lest wee stumble at his doctrine. Make vs conscionable towards him in his maintenance, to deale vprightly and liberally, that hee may doe the worke of his ministery cheerfully. And when we haue heard thy word, blesse vs (O Lord) with conscience of holy medi∣tation and prayer; suffer not me, nor any of thy seruants, as the common custome is, to be content onely to heare, and to remaine still in ignorance and errour, to come and goe, and yet neuer the better; let not thy word so be the sauour of death vnto death, to our deeper condemnation. O Lord pardon my former
negligence, and forgiue vs all this wretched prophanenesse, and carelesnesse of our salua∣tion, as if we were either soul∣lesse, or senseles: Lay not this sin (O Lord) vnto our charge but afford vs thy grace to heare, & in hearing to learn, and in learning to beleeue, & so to professe constantly, and practise religiously euery day more & more, till we become perfect in Christ Iesus. Giue mee grace (O Lord) to auoid all occasions of pro∣phaning this day; keepe mee from ill companie, and from all vaine, carnall, & world∣ly minded people, which may withdraw my heart and thoughts from better things.
Cause me to make conscience of my whole carriage, of my thoughts, words, and deeds, that by vaine talke, leaud sports, light behauior, vnne∣cessary businesses of the world, I may not my selfe bee guiltie of prophanenesse, neither by example may moue others to doe amisse. Let my thoughts be vpon that which I haue heard, and other heauenly things, my words vttered to tend to edi∣fication. Let my mirth be that heauenly melody, singing Psalmes to thee (O Lord) in my heart; and my companie such, as I may either learne good from them, or doe some good vnto them; that so the
day thus set apart wholly to thee▪ and diuine exercises, wee thereby may the better be fur∣nished and made able in the weeke following to do the du∣ties of our calling consciona∣bly, in all truth and equitie, to thy glory and our owne cō∣forts, & that for Iesus Christ his sake, our only Lord & Sa∣uiour, in whose name, for my selfe, for this congregation, and thy holy Church vniuer∣sall, I call vpon thee further, saying, Our Father, &c. Gaius. By the helpe of my God, I will surely make more conscience of this dutie, then I haue hitherto done. I well perceiue the necessity of praier
before; for indeed, Paul may plant with his profound lear∣ning, & Apollos may water by his powerfull eloquence, but all is nothing, except God giue the encrease; except hee giue eyes to see, eares to heare, and hearts to vnderstand, the Teacher shall teach in vaine, and we also heare in vaine. Iohn. Thy resolution (Gaius) is very good; and thou hast also well consi∣dered of the necessity of prayer before thou doest go to Gods house. Verily, the neglect of this holy dutie, and the comming of people so prophanely to Gods worship (as thou formerly hast complai∣ned)
without due prepa∣ration, is the very cause, why men reape so small fruit by the meanes. Cur∣sed is their irreligious cō¦ming, their cursed custo∣marie seruing of God, their hellish luke-warme∣nesse, their presumptuous prophanesse, without any feare of God, estimation of Gods ordinances, reue∣rēt respect of his ministers or care at all truly, of their owne saluation. Oh daies without pure deuotion! O times for temporizers! But goe thou on (good Gaius) as thou doest; and as thou stil resoluest to do; he that is filthie, let him be
filthy stil, follow thou not their guise: pray continu∣ally, and the Lord deliuer his people from the tenta∣tions of the times of luke∣warmenes, and carnall se∣curitie in a worldly peace, which is the blūter of zeale, the death of true deuotion, the very prison of sincere pie∣ty, the breeder of Atheisme, the cause of the contempt of religion, the nurse of proud presumption of mercy, of va∣nity & wantonnesse, with all kind of wickednesse. Gaius. Sir, wofull experi∣ence hath proued this for truth, in many ages; I haue learned it; but by your words I haue more reason to consi∣der
of it. And therefore the Lord directing mee, and in his mercy making good these fatherly aduisements vpon me, that I may haue the grace to follow the same. I hope hereafter to auoid better the occasions of euill, and the in∣trapments of Satā, & this se∣ducing wicked world, which I will daily pray for, and in mercy I hope the Lord will heare me. But (reuerend Sir) lest I be too tedious, let it please you to finish this work, in adding that one thing remaining, which is a forme of prayer vpon the Sabbath day in the euening. Iohn. Hauing meditated
somewhat before, of the doctrines, vses and instru∣ctions deliuered, of the be∣nefit of the Sacraments, of the excellency of religi∣on, as also of the publike worship, of the diuine ex∣ercises, and of the fellow∣ship of the godly; and in like manner, hauing consi∣dered what good thou hast receiued thereby, wherein informed for re∣ctifying of iudgement, wherein instructed to fol∣low vertue, wherin repro∣ued for amendmēt of life, wherein conuinced of er∣rour, wherein comforted concerning affliction, and strengthened against ten∣tation,
thou mayest thus, or after such a like maner, both heartily praise God, and humbly pray vnto him, as followeth. O Lord God, most graci∣ousEuening Prayer for the Sabbath. and mercifull Father, I doe render vnto thy heauenly maiesty, all humble & hearty thanks, praising and lauding thy most holy name, for that of thy great compassion thou hast affoorded vnto mee and thy people, the preaching of thy word, the effectual means of saluation, to as many as truly beleeue. Oh how pleasant is thy dwelling place to all that de∣light in goodnesse! better is
one day in thy house, then a thousand yeeres elsewhere: right ioyfull are the feete of thy faithful messengers brin∣ging to vs poore soules the glad tidings of peace. Oh that I might dwell in thy house for euer; I had ra∣ther bee there a doorekeeper, then dwell in the tents of the vaine and wicked, though mighty in the world. Surely there is no company compa∣rably to the blessed commu∣nion of Saints, who are Christs members, the temple of the holy Ghost, and hee in the middest among them. Make me highly to esteeme of the publike assembly, where thy word is preached, and thy
name called vpon, and cause mee euer to bee vnfainedly thankfull for the same. Oh, it is thy exceeding great mercy towards me, and towards vs all this day, that wee may with such freedome and liberty enioy that truth in peace, which the blessed A∣postles taught and sealed with their blood; which many thousands of Saints after thē did professe and maintaine with their very liues in the middest of bloody persecution, because otherwise they could not enioy the benefit of the word. What ingratitude were therefore this in vs, if wee should not laud thy name, &
daily sing praises vnto thy most diuine Maiesty, which hast thus in so great mercy dealt with vs, that may with∣out feare of open enemies keep publike meetings, & frequent those places set vp in the ho∣nour and praise of thy blessed sonne Iesus? How vnworthie should we make our selues of this vn∣speakeable grace and fauour, if wee should carelesly neglect (as too many doe) so great meanes of our saluatiō? Those that died for the truth, may well perswade vs to the loue of the truth; and they that shead their blood for preach∣ing it, others also, who rather then they would not heare it,
and enioy the benefit of it, were contented to hazard their liues, they may iustly condemne vs of negligence, and shall rise vp in iudge∣ment against vs, if wee will not leaue our vaine pleasures, and our worldly profits for it. O Lord our God, lay not this iniquitie to our charge, the too much neglect, if not contempt of the sauing means of saluation, thou mayest in thy iust iudgment vtterly de∣priue vs of all meanes of our spirituall life, of all grace, and heauenly comforts; for that, indeed, we doe not so esteeme of the ministerie of thy word, and of the Gospell of thy Son, as we should.
Turne vs of thy mercy (O God) from the accursed loa∣thing, to a blessed louing thereof. And make vs to ac∣count of it, as a thing most precious, & to shew the same in a more earnest seeking af∣ter knowledge therein, in a greater desire thereof, with feruencie of spirit for the truth against sinne in our selues and others; against su∣perstition and idolatrie, a∣gainst prophanenesse, against contempt of good gouern∣ment, and base account of thy faithfull ministers, then hi∣therto wee haue done: and cause vs to bring forth also better fruits, worthy the Gos∣pell of Christ, and our profes∣sion.
That so it may appeare, that we be Christians indeed, professors in good earnest, sin∣cere louers of the truth: that so these thy mercies may be e∣stablished vpon vs, continued with vs, and propagated to posterities; whereby not onely we, but euen our children, & childrens children may haue cause herein with vs to mag∣nifie thy name for euer, and for euer. And here (O Lord) I call not vpon thy name for my selfe alone, and these thy peo∣ple knowne vnto me, but for all thy whole Church euery where in all the world: re∣member them (Lord) in thy mercy: call those that are not
yet called; confirme such as are; bring backe such as slip out of the way; resolue such as stand doubting; raise vp such as doe fall; comfort the af∣flicted; stand by such as be in combate with the diuell, with the world, or with the strong and violent streame of cor∣ruptions flowing out from their owne euill hearts. Stand by them (good Lord) helpe them for the victorie, and de∣liuer them from euill, and by thy grace euer either preuent their falles, or forgiue their offences. Blesse these particular Churches of England, Scot∣land, and Ireland, and herein especially the principall mem∣ber
of the same, our dread So∣ueraigne the Kings, Maiestie, the Queene, Prince Charles, Fredericke Prince Elector, and the Lady Elizabeth, the Honourable Councell, and worthy Nobles, the Ministery and Ministers of thy Gospell, and all Schooles of learning, for the furtherāce of religiō. Lord continue peace among vs, vnite our hearts in one in the truth, and for the truth: cause iustice in true iudgmēt to bee maintained, grieuous wrongs and oppressions to bee vtterly suppressed good, works of zeale, mercy, & piety to be euery way furthered, and the instruments to be highly ad∣uāced. And if there be any ene¦mies
to thee (O God) and to thy people maintaining that man of sinne, (O Lord thou mighty God of heauen) re∣ueale them to the world, dis∣couer all craftie Achito∣phels, set thy selfe against them, and all wicked seducers misleading thy people by er∣rour into Antichristian su∣perstition and idolatrie, and either conuert them, or con∣found them, for the safety of thy people and their great peace, yea for the more full manifestation of thy hatred against that man of sinne, a∣gainst that tyrannicall regi∣ment, and that bloody perse∣cuting power, with all the tre∣cherous, and traiterous adhe∣rents
to the same; and this doe, (O Lord) for thy owne name sake also, euen for the merits of Christ Iesus our on∣ly Lord & Sauiour, in whose name we pray vnto thee, as he hath taught vs saying, Our Father, &c. Gaius. I giue vnto thee, (thou mā of God) most hum∣ble thankes for this so great labour, vndertaken for my sake, I wish I could recom∣pence this thy so great good∣nesse: but albeit I cannot, I doubt not, but he that is able, and hath promised to reward euery good worke, hee assured∣ly will, to whom I shall daily pray, that hee may recom∣pence,
and euerlastingly blesse thee for euery good deede, e∣uen so, Amen. Iohn. I thank thee (good Gaius) I haue done but my dutie, of God I deserue nothing: of thee, for a requitall, I looke for no more, but that, which I know already thou wilt do, euen constantly make to a good vse of al. Therin the Lord blesse thee, and I am satisfied, and so fare∣wel, till our next meeting. Gaius. The Lord be with thee my Father, my Father, and his holy Angels take safe custodie of thee for euer and euer. Amen. FINIS.
