20.3 21633774 24848
Let vs praye. O God, mercyfull father, that despisest not the sigh¦ing of a contrite hart, nor the desyre of soch as be so∣rowfull, mercyfully assyst our praiers that we make before ye in al our troubles and aduersities, whensoe∣uer they oppresse vs: And graciously heare vs, that those euils which the craf¦te & subteltye of the deuyll or mā worcketh agaīst vs be brought to naught & by the prouidēce of thy good∣nes thei may be dyspersed  seruauntes,  t,
beyng hurt by no persecu∣tions, may euermore geue thākes vnto the, in thi ho¦ly church, through Iesus christ our lorde. amen. O lorde aryse, helpe vs, and dely¦uer vs for thy names sake. O God, we haue hearde wyth our eares, & oure fa∣thers haue declared vnto vs the noble workes that thou dyddest in theyr day∣es, & in thee olde tyme be∣fore them. O lord aryse, helpe vs, & deliuer vs, for thyne honour. Glorye to the father. &c. As it was in the begīnīg is and euer sh
alway hauing sufficyent, maye be rych and plētiful in all good workes throu∣ghe oure lorde Iesu christ Amen. Lord haue mercy vpō vs Christ haue merci vpō vs Lord haue mercy vpō vs Our father &c. & let vs not be led into tēptacion. But deliuer vs frō euyl. Lorde heare my prayer. And let my cry come to the. From the fir  of the deil  oure
christes sake. Amen. ALmighti god, which hast geuē vs grace at this time with one accord to make our cōmon suppli¦catyons vnto the, & doeste promise that when two or three bee gathered in thy name, thou wylt graunte their requestes: fulfil now O Lord, thee desyres & pe¦ticiōs of thy seruaūtes as may be most expedient for thē: Graūting vs in thys worlde, knowledge of thy th, & in the world to  e, lyfe euerla∣sting. Amen.
¶Certayne graces to bee sayde before and af∣ter meate. Grace before dyner. THe eyes of al thinges do loke vp & truste in the, O Lorde: Thou ge∣uest them meate in due sea¦son. Thou doeste open thy hand, and fyllest with thy blessing, euery liuīg thing Good lorde blesse vs & all thy gyftes, whyche we re∣ceaue of thy bounteous li∣beralitie. Through christ our lorde. Amen. The king of eternal glor make vs perteners of the
heauenly table. amen. God is charitie, & he that dwelleth in charitie, dwel¦leth in god, & god in him, god graunt vs all to dwel in hym. Amen. Grace after dyner. THe god of peace and loue, vouchsafe al∣wai to dwel with vs. And thou lord haue mercy vpō vs, glory, honour, & praise be to the, O God, whyche hast fed vs frō our tender age, & g  nce to e  ge re∣  wyth
the lyfe euerlastynge, tho∣roughe oure Lord Iesus chryst. amen. Grace before dyner or supper. PRaysed bee thou oure moste mercifull & hea∣uenly father which of thy inestimable goodnes hast geuen thy most dearly be∣loued sōne Iesus to payn¦ful deth for our sakes, ther¦by not al only deliueringe vs & al faithful from euer¦lasting death & damnatiō but also purchasing vnto vs euerlasting lyfe, ioye & felicite: sēde we besech the thy holye spirite into our
hartes that we may daily more and more walke and go forward in the pleasāt pathwayes of thy righte∣ous lawes and commaun∣dementes. So be it. After dyner or supper. NOw you haue wel re∣freshed youre bodyes remember the lamentable afflictiōs & miseries of ma¦nye thousandes of youre neighbours & brethren in christ, visited by the hand of god, some with mortall plages, and diseases some with imprisonment, some wyth extreme pouertye &
necessitye, so yt eyther they ā not or they haue not to ede on as ye haue done, re¦mēbre therfore how moch and how depely ye present are bound to the goodnes of almighty god, for your health, welthe, lybertye, & manye other hys benefy∣tes geuen vnto you. Responce. Graces and thankes, be now vn∣to hym & alwayes, for these and al other hys benefytes so mercy∣fully, louingly and aboundantly powred vpon vs. amen
God saue our Kynge and the Realme, and send vs peace in christ. Amen. ¶Imprinted at London in Fletestrete at the signe of the Sunne, ouer agaynst the Conduyte, By Ed∣warde Whyt-churche. M.D.LI. Cum Priuilegio ad Impri∣mendum Solum
