20138 99850200 15387
SVERIE OF W IN THE COVN¦TIE OF LAN∣CASTER. VVith the Arraignement and Triall  notorious WITCHES, at the Assi  generall Gaole deliuerie, holden at the Castle of LANCASTER, vpon Munday, the se∣uenteenth of August last, 1612. Before Sir IAMES ALTHAM,  Sir EDWARD BROMLEY, Knights; BARONS  Court of : And Iusti Together with the  and Triall of IENNET PRESTON, at the Assizes  at the Castle of York, Published and set forth by commandement of his LONDON,
TO THE RIGHT HO∣NORABLE, THOMAS, LORD KNYVET, BARON OF ESCRICK in the Countie of Yorke, my very honorable good Lord and Master. AND TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND VERTVOVS LADIE, THE Ladie ELIZABETH KNYVET his Wife, my honorable good Ladie and MISTRIS. RIGHT HONORABLE, LET it stand (I beseech you) with your fauours whom profession of the same true Religion to∣wards God, and so great loue hath vnited together in one, Jointly
to accept the Protection and Patronage of these my labours, which not their owne worth hath encouraged, but your Worthi∣nesse hath enforced me to consecrate vnto your Honours. To you (Right Honourable my very good Lord) of Right doe they belong: for to whom shall J rather present the first fruits of my learning then to your Lord∣ship: who nourished then both mee and them, when there was scarce any being to mee or them? And whose iust and vp∣rght carriage of causes, whose zeale to Justice and Honourable curtesie to all men, haue purchased you a Reuerend and worthie Respect of all men in all partes of this Kingdome, where you are knowne. And to your good Ladiship
they doe of great right belong likewise; Whose Religion, Iustice, and Honoura∣ble admittance of my Vnworthie Seruice to your Ladiship doe challenge at my handes the vttermost of what euer J may bee able to performe. Here is nothing of my own act worthie to bee commended to your Honours, it is the worke, of those Reuerend Ma∣gistrates, His Maiesties Iustices of Assizes in the North partes, and no more then a Particular Declaration of the proceedings of Iustice in those partes. Here shall you behold the Iu∣stice of this Land, truely administred, Proemium & Poenam, Mercie and Iudgement, freely and indifferently bestowed and inflicted; And aboue all
thinges to bee remembred, the excellent care of these Iudges in the Triall of of∣fendors. It hath pleased them out of their res∣pect to mee to impose this worke vpon mee, and according to my vnderstanding, I haue taken paines to finish, and now con∣firmed by their Iudgement to publish the same, for the benefit of my Countrie. That the example of these conuicted vpon their owne Examinations, Confessions, and Euidence at the Barre, may worke good in others, Rather by with-holding them from, then imboldening them to, the Atcheiuing such desperate actes as these or the like. These are some part of the fruits of my time spent in the Seruice of my Coun∣trie,
Since by your Graue and Reuerend Counsell (my Good Lord) I reduced my wauering and wandring thoughts to a more quiet harbour of repose. If it please your Honours to giue them your Honourable respect, the world may iudge them the more worthie of accep∣tance, to whose various censures they are now exposed. God of Heauen whose eies are on them that feare him, to bee their Prote∣ctor and guide, behold your Honours with the eye of fauor, be euermore your strong hold, and your great reward, and blesse you with blessings in this life, Externall and Internall, Temporall and Spirituall, and with Eternall happines in the World to come: to which I commend your Ho∣nours;
And rest both now and euer, From my Lodging in Chancerie Lane, the six∣teenth of Nouember 1612. Your Honours humbly deuoted Seruant, Thomas Potts.
VPon the Arraignement and triall of these Witches at the last Assizes and Generall Gaole-deliuerie, holden at Lancaster, wee found such apparent matters against them, that we thought it necessarie to publish them to the World, and thereupon imposed the labour of this Worke vpon this Gen∣tleman, by reason of his place, being a Clerke at that time in Court, imploi∣ed in the Arraignement and triall of them. Ja. Altham. Edw. Bromley.
AFter he had taken great paines to finish it, J tooke vpon mee to reuise and correct it, that no∣thing might passe but matter of Fact, ap∣parant against them by record. Jt is very little he hath inserted, and that necessa∣rie, to shew what their offences were, what people, and of what condition they were: The whole proceedings and Euidence a∣gainst them, J finde vpon examination carefully set forth, and truely reported, and iudge the worke fit and worthie to be published. Edward Bromley.
Faults escaped in the Printing. Page, C 3: M. Banester, for Bannester, brough, for brought. Page, E 2 This people, for these. Page, H Here they parted, for there. page, K 2 these, for this hellish. page, S 3 In the Ver∣dict of Life and Death, Not guiltie, for guiltie. page, S 3 one Horse or Mare, for one Mare in the Indictment. page eadem, for the Triall of her life, reade for the triall of her offence. page, T their view, for your view. Gentle Reader, although the care of this Gentleman the Author, was great to examine and publish this his worke perfect according to the Ho∣norable testimonie of the Iudges, yet some faults are committed by me in the Printing, and yet not many, being a worke done in such great haste, at the end of a Tearme, which I pray you, with your fauour to excuse.
A particular Declaration of the most barberous and damnable Practises. Mur∣thers, wicked and diuelish Conspiracies, practized and executed by the most dangerous and malitious Witch Elizabeth Sowthernes alias Demdike, of the Forrest of Pendle in the Countie of Lancaster Widdow, who died in the Castle at Lancaster before she came to receiue her tryall. THough publique Iustice hath passed at these Assises vpon the Capitall offendours, and after the Arraigne∣ment & tryall of them, Iudgement being giuen, due and timely Execu∣tion succeeded; which doth im∣port and giue the greatest satisfacti∣on that can be, to all men; yet be∣cause vpon the caryage, and euent of this businesse, the Eyes of all the partes of Lancashire, and other Counties in the North partes thereunto adioyning were bent: And so infinite a multitude came to the Arraignement & tryall of these Witches at Lancaster, the number of them being knowen to exceed all others at any time heretofore, at one time to be indicted, arraigned, and receiue their tryall, es∣pecially for so many Murders, Conspiracies, Charmes, Meetinges, hellish and damnable practises, so apparant vpon their owne examinations & confessions. These my honourable & worthy Lords, the Iudges of Assise, vpon
great consideration, thought to necessarie & profitable, to publish to the whole world, their most barbarous and damnable practises, with the direct proceedinges of the Court against them, aswell for that there doe passe diuers vncertaine reportes and relations of such Euidences, as was publiquely giuen against them at their Arraigne∣ment. As for that diuers came to prosecute against many of them that were not found guiltie, and so rest very dis∣contented, and not satisfied. As also for that it is necessary for men to know and vnderstande the meanes whereby they worke their mischiefe, the hidden misteries of their diuelish and wicked Inchauntmentes, Charmes, and Sor∣ceries, the better to preuent and auoyde the danger that may ensue. And lastly, who were the principall authors and actors in this late woefull and lamentable Tragedie, wherein so much Blood was spilt. Therefore I pray you giue me leaue, (with your pati∣ence and fauour,) before I proceed to the Indictment, Ar∣raignement, and Tryall of such as were Prisoners in the Castle, to lay open the life and death of this damnable and malicious Witch, of so long continuance (old Demdike) of whom our whole businesse hath such dependence, that without the particular Declaration and Record of her Euidence, with the circumstaunces, wee shall neuer bring any thing to good perfection: for from this Sincke of vil∣lanie and mischiefe, haue all the rest proceeded; as you shall haue them in order. She was a very old woman, about the age of Foure-score yeares, and had been a Witch for fiftie yeares. Shee dwelt in the Forrest of Pendle, a vaste place, fitte for her profession: What shee committed in her time, no man knowes. Thus liued shee securely for many yeares, brought vp
her owne Children, instructed her Graund-children, and tooke great care and paines to bring them to be Witches. Shee was a generall agent for the Deuill in all these partes: no man escaped her, or her Furies, that euer gaue them any occasion of offence, or denyed them any thing they stood need of: And certaine it is, no man neere them, was secure or free from danger. But God, who had in his diuine prouidence prouided to cut them off, and roote them out of the Common∣wealth, so disposed aboue, that the Iustices of those partes, vnderstanding by a generall charme and muttering, the great and vniuersall resort to Maulking Tower, the com∣mon opinion, with the report of these suspected people, the complaint of the Kinges subiectes for the losse of their Children, Friendes, Goodes, and Cattle, (as there could not be so great Fire without some Smoake,) sent for some of the Countrey, and tooke great paynes to en∣quire after their proceedinges, and courses of life. In the end, Roger Nowell Esquire, one of his Maiesties Iustices in these partes, a very religious honest Gentle∣man, painefull in the seruice of his Countrey: whose fame for this great seruice to his Countrey, shall liue after him, tooke vpon him to enter into the particular exa∣mination of these suspected persons: And to the honour of God, and the great comfort of all his Countrey, made such a discouery of them in order, as the like hath not been heard of: which for your better satisfaction. I haue heere placed in order against her, as they are vpon Record, a∣mongst the Recordes of the Crowne at Lancaster, certified by M. Nowell, and others.
The voluntarie Confession and Examination of Elizabeth Sowtherns alias Demdike, taken at the Fence in the For∣rest of Pendle in the Countie of Lancaster. The second day of Aprill, Anno{que} Regni Regis Iacobi Ang∣liae. &c. Decimo, et Scotiae Quadragesimo quinto; Before Roger Nowell of Reade Esquire, one of his Maiesties Iustices of the peace with∣in the sayd Countie. Viz. THe said Elizabeth Sowtherns confesseth, and sayth; That about twentie yeares past, as she was comming homeward from begging, there met her this Examinate neere vnto a Stonepit in Gouldshey, in the sayd Forrest of Pendle, a Spirit or Deuill in the shape of a Boy, the one halfe of his Coate blacke, and the other browne, who bade this Examinate stay, saying to her, that if she would giue him her Soule, she should haue any thing that she would request. Wherevpon this Examinat demaunded his name? and the Spirit answered, his name was Tibb: and so this Examinate in hope of such gaine as was promised by the sayd Deuill or Tibb, was contented to giue her Soule to the said Spirit: And for the space of fiue of sixe yeares next af∣ter, the sayd Spirit or Deuill appeared at sundry times vnto her this Examinate about Day-light Gate, alwayes bidding her stay, and asking her this Examinate what she would
haue or doe? To whom this Examinate replyed, Nay no∣thing: for she this Examinate said, she wanted nothing yet. And so about the end of the said sixe yeares, vpon a Sab∣both day in the morning, this Examinate hauing a litle Child vpon her knee, and she being in a slumber, the sayd Spirit appeared vnto her in the likenes of a browne Dogg, forcing himselfe to her knee, to get blood vnder her left Arme: and she being without any apparrell sauing her Smocke, the said Deuill did get blood vnder her left arme. And this Examinate awaking, sayd, Iesus saue my Child; but had no power, nor could not say, Iesus saue her selfe: where∣vpon the Browne Dogge vanished out of this Examinats sight: after which, this Examinate was almost starke madd for the space of eight weekes. And vpon her examination, she further confesseth, and saith. That a little before Christmas last, this Examinates Daughter hauing been to helpe Richard Baldwyns Folkes at the Mill: This Examinates Daughter did bid her this Examinate goe to the said Baldwyns house, and aske him something for her helping of his Folkes at the Mill, (as aforesaid:) and in this Examinates going to the said Bald∣wyns house, and neere to the said house, she mette with the said Richard Baldwyn; Which Baldwyn sayd to this Exa∣minate, and the said Alizon Deuice (who at that time ledde this Examinate, being blinde) get out of my ground Whores and Witches, I will burne the one of you, and hang the other. To whom this Examinate answered: I care not for thee, hang thy selfe: Presently wherevpon, at this Examinates going ouer the next hedge, the said Spirit or Diuell called Tibb, appeared vnto this Examinat, and sayd, Reuenge thee of him. To whom, this Examinate sayd againe to the said Spirit. Reuenge thee eyther of him, or his. And so the said Spirit vanished out of her sight, and she
neuer saw him since. And further this Examinate confesseth, and sayth, that the speediest way to take a mans life away by VVitch∣craft, is to make a Picture of Clay, like vnto the shape of the person whom they meane to kill, & dry it thorowly: and when they would haue them to be ill in any one place more then an other; then take a Thorne or Pinne, and pricke it in that part of the Picture you would so haue to be ill: and when they would haue any part of the Body to consume away, then take that part of the Picture, and burne it. And when they would haue the whole body to consume away, then take the remnant of the sayd Picture, and burne it: and so therevpon by that meanes, the body shall die.
The Confession and Exami∣nation of Anne Whittle alias Chattox, being Prisoner at Lancaster; taken the 19. day of May, Anno{que} Regni Regis Iacobi Angliae, Decimo: ac Scotie Quadragesimo quinto; Before William Sandes Maior of the Bor∣rough towne of Lancaster. Iames Anderton of Clayton, one of his Maiesties Iustices of Peace within the same County, and Thomas Cowell one of his Maiesties Coroners in the sayd Countie of Lancaster. Viz. FIrst, the sayd Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, sayth, that about foureteene yeares past she entered, through the wicked perswa∣sions and counsell of Elizabeth Southerns, alias Demdike, and was seduced to condes∣cent & agree to become subiect vnto that diuelish abhominable profession of Witchcraft: Soone after which, the Deuill appeared vnto her in the liknes of a Man, about midnight, at the house of the sayd Demdike: and therevpon the sayd Demdike and shee, went foorth of the said house vnto him; wherevpon the said wicked Spirit mooued this Examinate, that she would become his Subiect, and giue her Soule vnto him: the which at first, she refused to assent vnto; but after, by the great perswa∣sions made by the sayd Demdike, shee yeelded to be at his commaundement and appoyntment: wherevpon the sayd wicked Spirit then sayd vnto her, that hee must haue one part of her body for him to sucke vpon; the which shee denyed then to graunt vnto him; and withall asked
him, what part of her body hee would haue for that vse; who said, hee would haue a place of her right side neere to her ribbes, for him to sucke vpon: whereunto shee assented. And she further sayth, that at the same time, there was a thing in the likenes of a spotted Bitch, that came with the sayd Spirit vnto the sayd Demdike, which then did speake vnto her in this Examinates hearing, and sayd, that she should haue Gould, Siluer, and worldly Wealth, at her will. And at the same time she saith, there was victuals, viz. Flesh, Butter, Cheese, Bread, and Drinke, and bidde them eate enough. And after their eating, the Deuill cal∣led Fancie, and the other Spirit calling himselfe Tibbe, car∣ried the remnant away: And she sayeth, that although they did eate, they were neuer the fuller, nor better for the same; and that at their said Banquet, the said Spirits gaue them light to see what they did, although they neyther had fire nor Candle light; and that they were both shee Spirites, and Diuels. And being further examined how many sundry Persons haue been bewitched to death, and by whom they were so bewitched: She sayth, that one Robert Nuter, late of the Greene-head in Pendle, was bewitched by this Examinate, the said Demdike, and Widdow Lomshawe, (late of Burne∣ley) now deceased. And she further sayth, that the said Demdike shewed her, that she had bewitched to death, Richard Ashton, Sonne of Richard Ashton of Downeham Esquire.
The Examination of Alizon Deuice, of the Forrest of Pendle, in the County of Lancaster Spinster, taken at Reade in the said Countie of Lancaster, the xiij▪ day of March, Anno Regni Jacobi Angliae. &c. Nono: et Scotiae xlv. Before Roger Nowell of Reade aforesayd Esquire, one of his Maiesties Iustices of the Peace within the sayd Countie, against Elizabeth Sowtherns, alias Demdike her Graund-mother. Ʋiz. THe sayd Alizon Deuice sayth, that about two yeares agon, her Graund-mother (called Elizabeth Sowtherns, alias old Demdike) did sundry times in going or walking togea∣ther as they went begging, perswade and aduise this Examinate to let a Deuill or Familiar appeare vnto her; and that shee this Examinate, would let him sucke at some part of her, and shee might haue, and doe what shee would. And she further sayth, that one Iohn Nutter of the Bul∣hole in Pendle aforesaid, had a Cow which was sicke, & re∣quested this examinats Grand-mother to amend the said Cow; and her said Graund-mother said she would, and so her said Graund-mother about ten of the clocke in the night, desired this examinate to lead her foorth; which this Examinate did, being then blind: and her Graund-mother did remaine about halfe an houre foorth: and this Exami∣nates sister did fetch her in againe; but what she did when she was so foorth, this Examinate cannot tell. But the next
morning this Examinate heard that the sayd Cow was dead. And this Examinate verily thinketh, that her sayd Graund-mother did bewitch the sayd Cow to death. And further, this Examinate sayth, that about two yeares agon, this Examinate hauing gotten a Piggin full of blew Milke by begging, brought it into the house of her Graund-mother, where (this Examinate going foorth pre∣sently, and staying about halfe an houre) there was Butter to the quantity of a quarterne of a pound in the said milke, and the quantitie of the said milke still remayning; and her Graund-mother had no Butter in the house when this Ex∣aminate went foorth: duering which time, this Exami∣nates Graund-mother still lay in her bed. And further this Examinate sayth, that Richord Baldwin of Weethead within the Forrest of Pendle, about 2. yeeres agoe, fell out with this Examinates Graund-mother, & so would not let her come vpon his Land: and about foure or fiue dayes then next after, her said Graund-mother did request this Examinate to lead her foorth about ten of the clocke in the night: which this Examinate accordingly did, and she stayed foorth then about an houre, and this Examinates sister fetched her in againe. And this Exami∣nate heard the next morning, that a woman Child of the sayd Richard Baldwins was fallen sicke; and as this Exa∣minate did then heare, the sayd Child did languish after∣wards by the space of a yeare, or thereaboutes, and dyed: And this Examinate verily thinketh, that her said Graund-mother did bewitch the sayd Child to death. And further, this Examinate sayth, that she heard her sayd Graund-mother say presently after her falling out with the sayd Baldwin, shee would pray for the sayd Bald∣win both still and loude: and this Examinate heard her cursse the sayd Baldwin sundry times.
The Examination of Iames Deuice of the Forrest of Pendle, in the Countie of Lancaster Labourer, taken the 27. day of April, Anno{que} Regni Regis Iacobi, Anglia, &c. Decimo: ac Scotie Quadragesimo quinto: Before Roger Nowell, and Nicholas Banister Esq, two of his Maiesties Iustices of Peace within the sayd Countie. THE sayd Examinate Iames Deuice sayth, that about a month agoe, as this Exami∣nate was comming towards his Mothers house, and at day-gate of the same night,Euening. this Examinate mette a browne Dogge comming from his Graund-mothers house, about tenne Roodes distant from the same house: and about two or three nights after, that this Examinate heard a voyce of a great number of Children screiking and crying pittifully, about day-light gate; and likewise, about ten Roodes di∣stant of this Examinates sayd Graund-mothers house. And about fiue nights then next following, presently after daylight, within 20. Roodes of the sayd Elizabeth Sow∣therns house, he heard a foule yelling like vnto a great number of Cattes: but what they were, this Examinate cannot tell. And he further sayth, that about three nights after that, about midnight of the same, there came a thing, and lay vpon him very heauily about an houre, and went then from him out of his Chamber window, coloured blacke, and about the bignesse of a Hare or Catte. And he further sayth, that about S. Peters day last, one Henry Bullocke came to the sayd Elizabeth Sowtherns house, and sayd, that her Graund-child Alizon Deuice, had bewitched a Child of his, and desired her that she would goe with him to his house; which accordingly she did: And there∣vpon she the said Alizon fell downe on her knees, & asked the said Bullocke forgiuenes, and confessed to him, that she had bewitched the said child, as this Examinate heard his said sister confesse vnto him this Examinate.
The Examination of Eliza∣beth Deuice, Daughter of old Demdike, taken at Read before Roger Nowell Esquire, one of his Maiesties Iustices of Peace within the Countie of Lancaster the xxx. day of March, Anno{que} Regni Jacobi Decimo, ac Scotie xlv. THe sayd Elizabeth Deuice the Exa∣minate, sayth, that the sayd Eliza∣beth Sowtherns, alias Demdike, hath had a place on her left side by the space of fourty yeares, in such sort, as was to be seene at this Exami∣nates Examination taking, at this present time. Heere this worthy Iustice M. Nowell, out of these par∣ticular Examinations, or rather Accusations, finding mat∣ter to proceed; and hauing now before him old Demdike, old Chattox, Alizon Deuice, and Redferne both old and young, Reos confitentes, et Accusantes Inuicem. About the second of Aprill last past, committed and sent them away to the Castle at Lancaster, there to remaine vntill the com∣ming of the Kinges Maiesties Iustices of Assise, then to receiue their tryall.
But heere they had not stayed a weeke, when their Children and Friendes being abroad at libertie, laboured a speciall meeting at Malking Tower in the Forrest of Pen∣dle, vpon Good-fryday, within a weeke after they were, committed, of all the most dangerous, wicked, and dam∣nable Witches in the County farre and neere. Vpon Good-fryday they met, according to solemne appoynt∣ment, solemnized this great Feastiuall day according to their former order, with great cheare, merry-company, and much conference. In the end, in this great Assemblie, it was decreed M. Couell by reason of his Office, shall be slaine before the next Assises: The Castle of Lancaster to be blowen vp, and ayde and assistance to be sent to kill M. Lister, with his old Enemie and wicked Neighbour Iennet Preston; with some other such like practices: as vpon their Ar∣raignement and Tryall, are particularly set foorth, and gi∣uen in euidence against them. This was not so secret, but some notice of it came to M. Nowell, and by his great paines taken in the Examination of Iennet Deuice, al their practises are now made knowen. Their purpose to kill M. Couell, and blow vp the Castle, is preuented. All their Murders, Witchcraftes, Inchaunt∣ments, Charmes, & Sorceries, are discouered; and euen in the middest of their Consultations, they are all confoun∣ded, and arrested by Gods Iustice: brough before M. Nowell, and M. Bauester, vpon their voluntary confessi∣ons, Examinations, and other Euidence accused, and so by them committed to the Castle: So as now both old and young, haue taken vp their lodgings with M. Couell, vntill the next Assises, expecting their Tryall and deli∣ueraunce, according to the Lawes prouided for such like.
In the meane time, M. Nowell hauing knowledge by this discouery of their meeting at Malkeing Tower, and their resolution to execute mischiefe, takes great paines to apprehend such as were at libertie, and prepared Euidence against all such as were in question for Witches. Afterwardes sendes some of these Examinations, to the Assises at Yorke, to be giuen in Euidence against Iennet Preston, who for the murder of M. Lister, is condemned and executed. The Circuite of the North partes being now almost ended. The 16. of August. Vpon Sunday in the after noone, my honorable Lords the Iudges of Assise, came from Kendall to Lancaster. Wherevpon M. Couell presented vnto their Lordships a Calender, conteyning the Names of the Prisoners com∣mitted to his charge, which were to receiue their Tryall at the Assises: Out of which, we are onely to deale with the proceedings against Witches, which were as followeth. Viz.
The Names of the Witches committed to the Castle of Lancaster. Elizabeth Sowtherns. alias Old Demdike. Who dyed before shee came to her tryall. Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, Elizabeth Deuice, Daughter of old Demdike. Iames Deuice, Sonne of Elizabeth Deuice. Anne Readfearne, Daughter of Anne Chattox. Alice Nutter. Katherine Hewytte. Iohn Bulcocke. Iaue Bulcocke. Alizon Deuice, Daughter of Elizabeth Deuice. Isabell Robey. Margaret Pearson. The Witches of Salmesbury. Iennet Bierley. Elen Bierley. Iane Southworth. Iohn Ramesden. Elizabeth Astley. Alice Gray. Isabell Sidegraues. Lawrence Haye. The next day, being Monday, the 17. of August, were the Assises holden in the Castle of Lancaster, as fol∣loweth.
PLACITA CORONE,  Lancasterium. DEliberatio Gaolae Domini Regis Castri sui Lancastrii ac Prisonariorū in eadem existent. Tenta apud Lanca∣sterium in com. Lancasterij. Die Lunae, Decimo septimo die Augusti, Anno Regni Domini nostri Iacobi dei gratia Angliae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, Regis fidei defensoris; Decimo: et Scotiae Quadragesimo sexto; Coram Iacobo Al∣tham Milit. vno Baronum Scaccarij Domini Regis, et Ed∣wardo Bromley Milit. altero Barono, eiusdem Scaccarij Domini Regis: ac Iustic, Domini Regis apud Lancastr. VPon the Tewesday in the after noone, the Iudges according to the course and order, deuided them selues, where∣vpon my Lord Bromley, one of his Maiestices Iudges of Assise comming into the Hall to proceede with the Pleaes of the Crowne, & the Arraigne∣ment and Tryall of Prisoners, commaunded a generall Proclamation, that all Iustices of Peace that had taken any Recognisaunces, or Examinations of Prisoners, should make Returne of them: And all such as were bound to prosecute Indictmentes, and giue Euidence against Witches, should proceede, and giue attendance: For hee now intended to proceed to the Arraignement and Tryall of VVitches. After which, the Court being set, M. Sherieffe was commaunded to present his Prisoners before his Lord∣ship, and prepare a sufficient Iurie of Gentlemen for life and death. But heere we want old Demdike, who dyed in the Castle before she came to her Tryall.
Heere you may not expect the exact order of the Assi∣ses, with the Proclamations, and other solemnities belong∣ing to so great a Court of Iustice▪ but the proceedinges against the Witches, who are now vpon their deliue∣rance here in order as they came to the Barre, with the particular poyntes of Euidence against them: which is the labour and worke we now intend (by Gods grace) to per∣forme as we may, to your generall contentment. Wherevpon, the first of all these, Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, was brought to the Barre: against whom wee are now ready to proceed.
The Arraignement and Tryall of Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, of the Forrest of Pendle, in the Coun∣tie of Lancaster, Widdow; about the age of Foure∣score yeares, or there∣aboutes. Anne Whittle, alias Chattox. IF in this damnable course of life, and offen∣ces, more horrible and odious, then any man is able to expresse: any man lyuing could lament the estate of any such like vpon earth: The example of this poore creature, would haue moued pittie, in re∣spect of her great contrition and repentance, after she was committed to the Castle at Lancaster, vntill the comming of his Maiesties Iudges of Assise. But such was the na∣ture of her offences, & the multitude of her crying sinnes, as it tooke away all sense of humanity. And the repeti∣tion of her hellish practises, and Reuenge; being the chie∣fest thinges wherein she alwayes tooke great delight, to∣geather with a particular declaration of the Murders shee had committed, layde open to the world, and giuen in Euidence against her at the time of her Arraignement and
Tryall; as certainely it did beget contempt in the Audi∣ence, and such as she neuer offended. This Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, was a very old withe∣red spent & decreped creature, her sight almost gone: A dangerous Witch, of very long continuance; alwayes opposite to old Demdike: For whom the one fauoured,Her owne examination the other hated deadly: and how they enuie and accuse one an other, in their Examinations, may appeare. In her Witchcraft, alwayes more ready to doe mischiefe to mens goods, then themselues. Her lippes euer chat∣tering and walking: but no man knew what. She liued in the Forrest of Pendle, amongst this wicked company of dangerous Witches. Yet in her Examination and Con∣fession, she dealt alwayes very plainely and truely: for vpon a speciall occasion being oftentimes examined in open Court, shee was neuer found to vary, but alwayes to agree in one, and the selfe same thing. I place her in order, next to that wicked fire-brand of mischiefe, old Demdike, because from these two, sprung all the rest in order: and were the Children and Friendes, of these two notorious VVitches. Many thinges in the discovery of them, shall be very worthy your obseruation. As the times and occasions to execute their mischiefe. And this in generall: the Spirit could neuer hurt, till they gaue consent. And, but that it is my charge, to set foorth a particular Declaration of the Euidence against them, vpon their Arraignement and Tryall; with their Diuelish practises, consultations, meetings, and murders committed by them,
in such sort, as they were giuen in Euidence against them▪ for the which, I shall haue matter vpon Record. I could make a large Comentarie of them: But it is my humble duety, to obserue the Charge and Commaundement of these my Honorable good Lordes the Iudges of Assise, and not to exceed the limits of my Commission. Where∣fore I shall now bring this auncient Witch, to the due course of her Tryall, in order. viz. Indictment. THis Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, of the Forrest of Pendle in the Countie of Lancaster Widdow, being Indicted, for that shee feloniously had practised, vsed, and exercised diuers wicked and diuelish Artes cal∣led Witchcraftes, Inchauntmentes, Charmes, and Sorce∣ries, in and vpon one Robert Nutter of Greenehead, in the Forrest of Pendle, in the Countie of Lanc: and by force of the same Witchcraft, feloniously the sayd Robert Nut∣ter had killed, Contra Pacem, &c. Being at the Barre, was arraigned. To this Indictment, vpon her Arraignement, shee pleaded, Not guiltie: and for the tryall of her life, put her selfe vpon God and her Country. Wherevpon my Lord Bromley commaunded M. She∣riffe of the County of Lancaster in open Court, to returne a Iurie of worthy sufficient Gentlemen of vnderstanding, to passe betweene our soueraigne Lord the Kinges Ma∣iestie, and her, and others the Prisoners, vpon their liues and deathes; as hereafter follow in order: who were af∣terwardes sworne, according to the forme and order of
the Court, the Prisoners being admitted to their lawfully challenges. VVhich being done, and the Prisoner at the Barre rea∣die to receiue her Tryall: M. Nowell, being the best in∣structed of any man, of all the particular poyntes of Eui∣dence against her, and her fellowes, hauing taken great paynes in the proceedinges against her and her fellowes; Humbly prayed, her owne voluntary Confession and Examination taken before him, when she was apprehen∣ded and committed to the Castle of Lancaster for Witch∣craft; might openly be published against her: which here∣after followeth. Viz. The voluntary Confession and Examination of Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, taken at the Fence in the Forrest of Pendle, in the Countie of Lancaster; Before Roger Nowell Esq, one of the Kinges Maiesties Iustices of Peace in the Countie of Lancaster. Viz. THe sayd Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, vp∣on her Examination, voluntarily confes∣seth, and sayth, That about foureteene or fifteene yeares agoe, a thing like a Christi∣an man for foure yeares together, did sun∣dry times come to this Examinate, and requested this Ex∣aminate to giue him her Soule: And in the end, this Ex∣aminate was contented to giue him her sayd Soule, shee being then in her owne house, in the Forrest of Pendle; wherevpon the Deuill then in the shape of a Man, sayd to this Examinate: Thou shalt want nothing; and be reuen∣ged of whom thou list. And the Deuill then further com∣maunded
this Examinate, to call him by the name of Fan∣cie; and when she wanted any thing, or would be reuen∣ged of any, call on Fancie, and he would be ready. And the sayd Spirit or Deuill, did appeare vnto her not long after, in mans likenesse, and would haue had this Exami∣nate to haue consented, that he might hurt the wife of Richard Baldwin of Pendle; But this Examinate would not then consent vnto him: For which cause, the sayd Deuill would then haue bitten her by the arme; and so vanished away, for that time. And this Examinate further sayth; that Robert Nutter did desire her Daughter one Redfearns wife, to haue his pleasure of her, being then in Redfearns house: but the sayd Redfearns wife denyed the sayd Robert; wherevpon the sayd Robert seeming to be greatly displeased there∣with, in a great anger tooke his Horse, and went away, saying in a great rage, that if euer the Ground came to him, shee should neuer dwell vpon his Land. Where∣vpon this Examinate called Fancie to her; who came to her in the likenesse of a Man in a parcell of Ground cal∣led, The Laund; asking this Examinate, what shee would haue him to doe? And this Examinate bade him goe re∣uenge her of the sayd Robert Nutter. After which time, the sayd Robert Nutter liued about a quarter of a yeare, and then dyed. And this Examinate further sayth, that Elizabeth Nut∣ter, wife to old Robert Nutter, did request this Examinate, and Loomeshaws wife of Burley, and one Iane Boothman, of the same, who are now both dead, (which time of request, was before that Robert Nutter desired the company of Redfearns wife) to get young Robert Nutter his death, if
they could; all being togeather then at that time, to that end, that if Robert were dead, then the Women their Coosens might haue the Land: By whose perswasion, they all consented vnto it. After which time, this Examinates Sonne in law Thomas Redfearne, did perswade this Ex∣aminate, not to kill or hurt the sayd Robert Nutter; for which perswasion, the sayd Loomeshaws Wife, had like to haue killed the sayd Redfearne, but that one M. Baldwyn (the late Schoole-maister at Coulne) did by his learning, stay the sayd Loomeshaws wife, and therefore had a Capon from Redfearne. And this Examinate further sayth, that she thinketh the sayd Loomeshaws wife, and lane Boothman, did what they could to kill the sayd Robert Nutter, as well as this Exa∣minate did.
The Examination of ELIZABETH SOTHERNES, alias OLD DEMBDIKE: taken at the Fence in the Forrest of Pendle in the Countie of Lan∣caster, the day and yeare aforesaid. Before, ROGER NOWEL Esquire, one of the Kings Maiesties Iustices of Peace in the said Countie, against ANNE WHITTLE, alias CHATTOX. THe said Elizabeth Southernes saith vpon her Exami∣nation, that about halfe a yeare before Robert Nut∣ter died, as this Examinate thinketh, this Examinate went to the house of Thomas Redfearne, which was a∣bout Mid-sommer, as this Examinate remembreth it. And there within three yards of the East end of the said house, shee saw the said Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, and Anne Redferne wife of the said Thomas Redferne, and Daughter of the said Anne Whittle, alias Chattox: the one on the one side of the Ditch, and the other on the other: and two Pictures of Clay or Marle lying by them: and the third Picture the said Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, was making: and the said Anne Redferne her said Daughter, wrought her Clay or Marle to make the third picture withall. And this Examinate passing by them, the said Spirit, called Tibb, in the shape of a black Cat, appeared vnto her this Examinate, and said, turne back againe, and doe as they doe: To whom this Examinate said, what are they doing? whereunto the said Spirit said; they are making three Pictures: whereupon she asked whose pictures they were? whereunto the said Spirit said; they
are the pictures of Christopher Nutter, Robert Nutter, and Marie, wife of the said Robert Nutter: But this Exami∣nate denying to goe back to helpe them to make the Pi∣ctures aforesaid; the said Spirit seeming to be angrie, therefore shoue or pushed this Examinate into the ditch, and so shed the Milke which this Examinate had in a Can or Kit: and so thereupon the Spirit at that time vanished out of this Examinates sight: But presently af∣ter that, the said Spirit appeared to this Examinate a∣gaine in the shape of a Hare, and so went with her a∣bout a quarter of a mile, but said nothing to this Exa∣minate, nor shee to it. The Examination and euidence of IAMES ROBINSON, taken the day and yeare aforesaid. Before ROGER NOWEL Esquire aforesaid, against ANNE WHITTLE, alias CHATTOX, Prisoner at the Barre as followeth. viz. THe said Examinate saith, that about sixe yeares a∣goe, Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, was hired by this Examinates wife to card wooll; and so vpon a Friday and Saturday, shee came and carded wooll with this Ex∣aminates wife, and so the Munday then next after shee came likewise to card: and this Examinates wife hauing newly tunned drinke into Stands, which stood by the said Anne Whittle, alias Chattox: and the said Anne Whittle taking a Dish or Cup, and drawing drinke seuerall times:
and so neuer after that time, for some eight or nine weekes, they could haue any drinke, but spoiled, and as this Examinate thinketh was by the meanes of the said Chattox. And further he saith, that the said Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, and Anne Redferne her said Daughter, are commonly reputed and reported to bee Witches. And hee also saith, that about some eighteene yeares a∣goe, he dwelled with one Robert Nutter the elder, of Pendle aforesaid. And that yong Robert Nutter, who dwelled with his Grand-father, in the Sommer time, he fell sicke, and in his said sicknesse hee did seuerall times complaine, that hee had harme by them: and this Exa∣minate asking him what hee meant by that word Them, He said, that he verily thought that the said Anne Whit∣tle, alias Chattox, and the said Redfernes wife, had be∣witched him: and the said Robert Nutter shortly after, being to goe with his then Master, called Sir Richard Shattleworth, into Wales, this Examinate heard him say before his then going, vnto the said Thomas Red∣ferne, that if euer he came againe he would get his Fa∣ther to put the said Redferne out of his house, or he him∣selfe would pull it downe; to whom the said Redferne replyed, saying; when you come back againe you will be in a better minde: but he neuer came back againe, but died before Candlemas in Cheshire, as he was comming homeward. Since the voluntarie confession and examination of a Witch, doth exceede all other euidence, I spare to trouble you with a multitude of Examinations, or Depositions of any other witnesses, by reason this bloudie fact, for the Murder of Robert Nutter, vpon so small an occasion, as to threaten to take away
his owne land from such as were not worthie to inha∣bite or dwell vpon it, is now made by that which you haue alreadie heard, so apparant, as no indifferent man will question it, or rest vnsatisfied: I shall now proceede to set forth vnto you the rest of her actions, remaining vpon Record. And how dangerous it was for any man to liue neere this people, to giue them any occasion of offence, I leaue it to your good consideration. The Examination and voluntarie Con∣fession of ANNE WHITTLE, alias CHATTOX, ta∣ken at the Fence in the Forrest of Pendle, in the Countie of Lancaster, the second day of Aprill, Anno Regni Regis IACOBI Angliae, Franciae, & Hiberniae, de∣cimo, & Scotiae xlv. Before ROGER NOVVEL, Esquire, one of his Maiesties Iustices of Peace within the Countie of Lancaster. SHe the said Examinate saith, That shee was sent for by the wife of Iohn Moore, to helpe drinke that was forspoken or bewitched: at which time shee vsed this Prayer for the amending of it, viz. A Charme. Three Biters hast thou bitten, The Hart, ill Eye, ill Tonge:
Three bitter shall be thy Boote, Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost a Gods name. Fiue Pater-nosters, fiue Auies, and a Creede, In worship of fiue wounds of our Lord. After which time that this Examinate had vsed these prayers, and amended her drinke, the said Moeres wife did chide this Examinate, and was grieued at her. And thereupon this Examinate called for her Deuill Fancie, and bad him goe bite a browne Cow of the said Moores by the head, and make the Cow goe madde: and the Deuill then, in the likenesse of a browne Dogge, went to the said Cow, and bit her: which Cow went madde accordingly, and died within six weekes next af∣ter, or thereabouts. Also this Examinate saith, That shee perceiuing An∣thonie Nutter of Pendle to fauour Elizabeth Sothernes, alias Dembdike, she, this Examinate, called Fancie to her, (who appeared like a man) and bad him goe kill a Cow of the said Anthonies; which the said Deuill did, and that Cow died also. And further this Examinate saith, That the Deuill, or Fancie, hath taken most of her sight away from her. And further this Examinate saith, That in Summer last, saue one, the said Deuill, or Fancie, came vpon this Examinate in the night time: and at diuerse and sun∣dry times in the likenesse of a Beare, gaping as though he would haue wearied this Examinate. And the last time of all shee, this Examinate, saw him, was vpon
Thursday last yeare but one, next before Midsummer day, in the euening, like a Beare, and this Examinate would not then speake vnto him, for the which the said Deuill pulled this Examinate downe. The Examination of IAMES DEVICE, sonne of ELIZABETH DEVICE, taken the seuen and twentieth day of Aprill, Anno{que} Reg. Regis IACOBI Angliae, &c. Decimo ac Scotiae xlv. Before ROGER NOVVEL and NICHOLAS BANISTER, Esquires, two of his Maiesties Iustices of the Peace with∣in the said Countie. viz. ANd further saith, That twelue yeares agoe, the said Anne Chattox at a Buriall at the new Church in Pendle, did take three scalpes of people, which had been buried, and then cast out of a graue, as she the said Chat∣tox told this Examinate; and tooke eight teeth out of the said Scalpes, whereof she kept foure to her selfe, and gaue other foure to the said Demdike, this Examinates Grand-mother: which foureteeth now shewed to this Examinate, are the foureteeth that the said Chattox gaue to his said Grand-mother, as aforesaid; which said teeth haue euer since beene kept, vntill now found by the said Henry Hargreiues & this Examinate, at the West-end of this Examinates Grand-mothers house, and there buried in the earth, and a Picture of Clay there likewise found by them, about halfe a yard ouer in the
earth, where the said teeth lay, which said picture so found, was almost withered away, and was the Picture of Anne, Anthony Nutters daughter; as this Examinates Grand-mother told him. The Examination of ALLIZON DE∣VICE daughter of ELIZABETH DEVICE: Taken at Reade, in the Countie of Lancaster, the thirtieth day of March, Anno{que} Reg. Regis IACOBI nunc Angliae, &c. Decimo, & Scotiae Quadragesimo quinto. Before ROGER NOVVEL of Reade aforesaid, Esquire, one of his Maiesties Iustices of the Peace, within the said Countie. THis Examinate saith, That about eleuen yeares a∣goe, this Examinate and her mother had their fire∣house broken, and all, or the most part of their linnen clothes & halfe a peck of cut oat-meale, and a quantitie of meale gone, all which was worth twentie shillings or aboue: and vpon a Sunday then next after, this Exami∣nate did take a band and a coife, parcell of the goods a∣foresaid, vpon the daughter of Anne Whittle, alias Chat∣tox, and claimed them to be parcell of the goods stolne, as aforesaid. And this Examinate further saith, That her father, called Iohn Deuice, being afraid, that the said Anne Chat∣tox should doe him or his goods any hurt by Witch∣craft;
did couenant with the said Anne, that if she would hurt neither of them, she should yearely haue one Agh∣en-dole of meale; which meale was yearely paid, vntill the yeare which her father died in, which was about e∣leuen yeares since: Her father vpon his then-death-bed, taking it that the said Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, did be∣witch him to death, because the said meale was not paid the last yeare. And she also saith, That about two yeares agone, this Examinate being in the house of Anthony Nutter of Pendle aforesaid, and being then in company with Anne Nutter, daughter of the said Anthony: the said Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, came into the said Anthony Nutters house, and seeing this Examinate, and the said Anne Nutter laughing and saying, that they laughed at her the said Chattox: well said then (sayes Anne Chattox) I will be meet with the one of you. And vpon the next day after she the said Anne Nutter fell sicke and within three weekes after died. And further, this Examinate saith, That about two yeares agoe, she, this Examinate, hath heard, That the said Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, was suspected for bewitching the drinke of Iohn Moore of Higham Gentleman: and not long after, shee this Exa∣minate heard the said Chattox say, that she would meet with the said Iohn Moore, or his. Whereupon a child of the said Iohn Moores, called Iohn, fell sick, and languished about halfe a yeare, and then died; during which lan∣guishing, this Examinate saw the said Chattox sitting in her owne garden, and a picture of Clay like vnto a child in her Apron; which this Examinate espying, the said Anne Chattox would haue hidde with her Apron: and this Examinate declaring the same to her mother, her
mother thought it was the picture of the said Iohn Moores childe. And she this Examinate further saith, That about sixe or seuen yeares agoe, the said Chattox did fall out with one Hugh Moore of Pendle, as aforesaid, about cer∣taine cattell of the said Moores, which the said Moore did charge the said Chattox to haue bewitched: for which the said Chattox did curse and worry the said Moore, and said she would be Reuenged of the said Moore: where∣upon the said Moore presently fell sicke, and languished about halfe a yeare, and then died. Which Moore vpon his death-bed said, that the said Chattox had bewitched him to death. And she further saith, That about sixe yeares agoe, a daughter of the said Anne Chattox, called Elizabeth, hauing been at the house of Iohn Nutter of the Bull-hole, to begge or get a dish full of milke, which she had, and brought to her mother, who was about a fields breadth of the said Nutters house, which her said mo∣ther Anne Chattox tooke and put into a Kan; and did charne the same with two stickes acrosse in the same field: whereupon the said Iohn Nutters sonne came vnto her, the said Chattox, and misliking her doings, put the said Kan and milke ouer with his foot; and the morning next after, a Cow of the said Iohn Nutters fell sicke, and so languished three or foure dayes, and then died. In the end being openly charged with all this in open Court; with weeping teares she humbly acknowled∣ged them to be true, and cried out vnto God for Mercy and forgiuenesse of her sinnes, and humbly prayed my Lord to be mercifull vnto Anne Redfearne her daughter, of whose life and condition you shall heare more vpon
her Arraignement and Triall: whereupon shee being taken away, Elizabeth Deuice comes now to receiue her Triall being the next in order, of whom you shall heare at large.
THE ARRAIGNMENT and Triall of ELIZABETH DE∣VICE (Daughter of ELIZABETH SOTHERNES, alias OLD DEMBDIKE) late wife of Io. DEVICE, of the Forrest of Pendle, in the Countie of Lancaster, wi∣dow, for Witchcraft; Vpon Tuesday the eighteenth of Au∣gust, at the Assises and generall Gaole-Deliuerie holden at Lancaster Before Sir EDVVARD BROMLEY Knight, one of his Ma∣iesties Iustices of Assise at Lancaster. Elizabeth Deuice▪ O Barbarous and inhumane Monster, be∣yond example; so farre from sensible vn∣derstanding of thy owne miserie, as to bring thy owne naturall children into mischiefe and bondage; and thy selfe to be a witnesse vpon the Gallowes, to see thy owne chil∣dren, by thy deuillish instructions hatcht vp in Villanie and Witchcraft, to suffer with thee, euen in the begin∣ning of their time, a shamefull and vntimely Death. Too much (so it be true) cannot be said or written of her. Such was her life and condition: that euen at the Barre, when shee came to receiue her Triall (where the
least sparke of Grace or modestie would haue procured fauour, or moued pitie) she was not able to containe her selfe within the limits of any order or gouernment: but exclaiming, in very outragious manner crying out a∣gainst her owne children, and such as came to prosecute Indictments & Euidence for the Kings Maiestie against her, for the death of their Children, Friends, and Kins∣folkes, whome cruelly and bloudily, by her Enchaunt∣ments, Charmes, and Sorceries she had murthered and cut off; sparing no man with fearefull execrable curses and banning: Such in generall was the common opini∣on of the Countrey where she dwelt, in the Forrest of Pendle (a place fit for people of such condition) that no man neere her, neither his wife, children, goods, or cat∣tell should be secure or free from danger. This Elizabeth Deuice was the daughter of Elizabeth Sothernes, old Dembdike, a malicious, wicked, and dange∣rous Witch for fiftie yeares, as appeareth by Record: and how much longer, the Deuill and shee knew best, with whome shee made her couenant. It is very certaine, that amongst all these Witches there was not a more dangerous and deuillish Witch to execute mischiefe, hauing old Dembdike▪ her mother, to assist her; Iames Deuice and Alizon Deuice, her owne na∣turall children, all prouided with Spirits, vpon any occa∣sion of offence readie to assist her. Vpon her Examination▪ although Master Nowel was very circumspect, and exceeding carefull in dealing with her, yet she would confesse nothing, vntill it plea∣sed God to raise vp a yong maid Iennet Deuice, her owne daughter, about the age of nine yeares (a witnesse vn∣expected) to discouer all their Practises, Meetings, Con∣sultations,
Murthers, Charmes, and Villanies: such, and in such sort, as I may iustly say of them, as a reuerend and learned Iudge of this Kingdome speaketh of the greatest Treason that euer was in this Kingdome, Quis haec posteris sic narrare poterit, vt facta non ficta esse vide∣antur? That when these things shall be related to Po∣steritie, they will be reputed matters fained, not done. And then knowing, that both Iennet Deuice, her daughter, Iames Deuice, her sonne, and Alizon Deuice, with others, had accused her and layd open all things, in their Examinations taken before Master Nowel, and although she were their owne naturall mother, yet they did not spare to accuse her of euery particular fact, which in her time she had committed, to their knowledge; she made a very liberall and voluntarie Confession, as hereafter shall be giuen in euidence against her, vpon her Arraign∣ment and Triall. This Elizabeth Deuice being at libertie, after Old Dembdike her mother, Alizon Deuice, her daughter, and old Chattocks were committed to the Castle of Lanca∣ster for Witchcraft; laboured not a little to procure a solemne meeting at Malkyn-Tower of the Graund Witches of the Counties of Lancaster and Yorke, being yet vnsuspected and vntaken, to consult of some speedie course for the deliuerance of their friends, the Witches at Lancaster, and for the putting in execution of some other deuillish practises of Murther and Mischiefe: as vpon the Arraignement and Triall of Iames Deuice, her sonne, shall hereafter in euery particular point appeare at large against her.
The first Indictment. THis Elizabeth Deuice, late the wife of Iohn Deuice, of the Forrest of Pendle, in the Countie of Lancaster Widdow, being indicted, for that thee felloniously had practized, vsed, and exercised diuers wicked and deuil∣lish Arts, called Witch-crafts, Inchantments, Charmes, and Sorceries, in, and vpon one Iohn Robinson, alias Swyer: and by force of the same felloniously, the said Iohn Robinson, alias Swyer, had killed. Contra pacem, &. being at the Barre was arraigned. 2. Indictment. The said Elizabeth Deuice was the second time indi∣cted in the same manner and forme, for the death of Iames Robinson, by Witch-craft. Contra pacem, &c. 3. Indictment. The said Elizabeth Deuice, was the third time with others, viz. Alice Nutter, and Elizabeth Sothernes, alias Old-Dembdike, her Grand-mother, Indicted in the same manner and forme, for the death of Henrie Mytton. Contra pacem, &c. To these three seuerall Indictments vpon her Ar∣raignement, shee pleaded not guiltie; and for the tryall of her life, put her selfe vpon God and her Countrie. So as now the Gentlemen of the Iurie of life and death, stand charged to finde, whether shee bee guiltie of them, or any of them.
Whereupon there was openly read, and giuen in e∣uidence against her, for the Kings Majestie, her owne voluntarie Confession and Examination, when shee was apprehended, taken, and committed to the Castle of Lancaster by M. Nowel, and M. Bannester, two of his Maiesties Iustices of Peace in the same Countie. viz. The Examination and voluntarie confes∣sion of ELIZABETH DEVICE, taken at the house of IAMES WILSEY of the Forrest of Pendle, in the Coun∣tie of Lancaster, the seuen and twentieth day of Aprill: Anno Reg. IACOBI, Angl. &c. decimo, & Scotiae xlv. Before ROGER NOWEL, and NICHOLAS BANNE∣STER, Esquires; two of his Maiesties Iustices of the Peace within the same Countie. viz. The said Elizabeth Deuice, Mother of the said Iames, being examined, confesseth and saith. THat at the third time her Spirit, the Spirit Ball, ap∣peared to her in the shape of a browne Dogge, at, or in her Mothers house in Pendle Forrest aforesaid: about foure yeares agoe the said Spirit bidde this Examinate make a picture of Clay after the said Iohn Robinson, alias Swyer, which this Examinate did make accordingly at the West end of her said Mothers house, and dryed the same picture with the fire and crumbled all the same pi∣cture away within a weeke or thereabouts, and about a
weeke after the Picture was crumbled or mulled away; the said Robinson dyed. The reason wherefore shee this Examinate did so bewitch the said Robinson to death, was: for that the said Robinson had chidden and becalled this Examinate, for hauing a Bastard child with one Seller. And this Examinate further saith and confesseth, that shee did bewitch the said Iames Robinson to death, as in the said Iennet Deuice her examination is confessed. And further shee saith, and confesseth, that shee with the wife of Richard Nutter, and this Examinates said Mo∣ther, ioyned altogether, and did bewitch the said Henrie Mytton to death. The Examination and Euidence of IENNET DEVICE, Daughter of the said ELIZA∣BETH DEVICE, late Wife of IOHN DEVICE, of the Forrest of Pendle, in the Countie of Lancaster. Against ELIZABETH DEVICE her Mother, Prisoner at the Barre vpon her Arraignement and Triall. viz. THe said Iennet Deuice, being a yong Maide, about the age of nine yeares, and commanded to stand vp to giue euidence against her Mother, Prisoner at the Barre: Her Mother, according to her accustomed manner, out∣ragiously cursing, cryed out against the child in such fearefull manner, as all the Court did not a little wonder at her, and so amazed the child, as with weeping teares
shee cryed out vnto my Lord the Iudge, and told him, shee was not able to speake in the presence of her Mo∣ther. This odious Witch was branded with a preposterous marke in Nature, euen from her birth, which was her left eye, standing lower then the other; the one loo∣king downe, the other looking vp, so strangely defor∣med, as the best that were present in that Honorable As∣sembly, and great Audience, did affirme, they had not often seene the like. No intreatie, promise of fauour, or other respect, could put her to silence, thinking by this her outragious cur∣sing and threatning of the child, to inforce her to denie that which she had formerly confessed against her Mo∣ther, before M. Nowel: Forswearing and denying her owne voluntarie confession, which you haue heard, gi∣uen in euidence against her at large, and so for want of further euidence to escape that, which the Iustice of the Law had prouided as a condigne punishment for the in∣nocent bloud shee had spilt, and her wicked and deuil∣lish course of life. In the end, when no meanes would serue, his Lord∣ship commanded the Prisoner to be taken away, and the Maide to bee set vpon the Table in the presence of the whole Court, who deliuered her euidence in that Ho∣norable assembly, to the Gentlemen of the Iurie of life and death, as followeth. viz. Iennet Deuice, Daughter of Elizabeth Deuice, late Wife of Iohn Deuice, of the Forrest of Pendle aforesaid Wid∣dow, confesseth and saith, that her said Mother is a Witch, and that this shee knoweth to be true; for, that
shee hath seene her Spirit sundrie times come vnto her said Mother in her owne house, called Malking-Tower, in the likenesse of a browne Dogge, which she called Ball; and at one time amongst others, the said Ball did aske this Examinates Mother what she would haue him to doe: and this Examinates Mother answered, that she would haue the said Ball to helpe her to kill Iohn Robin∣son of Barley, alias Swyre: by helpe of which said Ball, the said Swyer was killed by witch-craft accordingly; and that this Examinates Mother hath continued a Witch for these three or foure yeares last past. And further, this Examinate confesseth, that about a yeare after, this Exa∣minates Mother called for the said Ball, who appeared as aforesaid, asking this Examinates Mother what shee would haue done, who said, that shee would haue him to kill Iames Robinson, alias Swyer, of Barlow aforesaid, Brother to the said Iohn: whereunto Ball answered, hee would doe it; and about three weekes after, the said Iames dyed. And this Examinate also saith, that one other time shee was present, when her said Mother did call for the said Ball,Her Spi∣rit. who appeared in manner as aforesaid, and asked this Examinates Mother what shee would haue him to doe, whereunto this Examinates Mother then said shee would haue him to kill one Mitton of the Rough-Lee, whereupon the said Ball said, he would doe it, and so va∣nished away, and about three weekes after, the said Mitton likewise dyed.
The Examination of IAMES DEVICE, sonne of the said ELIZABETH DEVICE: Taken the seuen and twentieth day of of Aprill, Anno{que} Reg. Re∣gis IACOBI Angliae, &c. Decimo as Scociae, xlv. Before ROGER NOVVEL and NICHOLAS BANESTER, Esquires, two of his Maiesties Iustices of the Peace, within the said Countie. viz. THe said Iames Deuice being examined, saith, That he heard his Grand-mother say, about a yeare agoe, That his mother, called Elizabeth Deuice, and others, had killed one Henry Mitton of the Rough-Lee afore∣said, by Witchcraft. The reason wherefore he was so killed, was for that this Examinates said Grand-mother Old Demdike, had asked the said Mitton a penny; and he denying her thereof, thereupon she procured his death, as aforesaid. And he, this Examinate also saith, That about three yeares ago, this Examinate being in his Grand-mothers house, with his said mother; there came a thing in shape of a browne dogge, which his mother called Ball, who spake to this Examinates mother, in the sight and hea∣ring of this Examinates, and bad her make a Picture of Clay like vnto Iohn Robinson, alias Swyer, and drie it hard, and then crumble it by little and little; and as the said Picture should crumble or mull away, so should the said Io. Robinson alias Swyer his body decay and weare away. And within two or three dayes after, the Picture shall so all be wasted, and mulled away; so then the said Iohn Robinson should die presently. Vpon the agreement be∣twixt
the said dogge and this Examinates mother; the said dogge suddenly vanished out of this Examinates sight. And the next day, this Examinate saw his said mother take Clay at the West-end of her said house, and make a Picture of it after the said Robinson, and brought into her house, and dried in some two dayes: and about two dayes after the drying thereof this Exa∣minates said mother fell on crumbling the said Picture of Clay, euery day some, for some three weekes toge∣ther; and within two dayes after all was crumbled or mulled away, the said Iohn Robinson died. Being demanded by the Court, what answere shee could giue to the particular points of the Euidence a∣gainst her, for the death of these seuerall persons; Impu∣dently shee denied them, crying out against her chil∣dren, and the rest of the Witnesses against her. But because I haue charged her to be the principall Agent, to procure a solemne meeting at Malking-Tower of the Grand-witches, to consult of some speedy course for the deliuerance of her mother, Old Demdike, her daughter, and other Witches at Lancaster: the speedie Execution of Master Couell, who little suspected or de∣serued any such practise or villany against him: The blowing vp of the Castle, with diuers other wicked and diuellish practises and murthers; I shall make it appa∣rant vnto you, by the particular Examinations and Eui∣dence of her owne children, such as were present at the time of their Consultation, together with her owne Ex∣amination and Confession, amongst the Records of the Crowne at the Lancaster, as hereafter followeth.
The voluntary Confession and Examina∣tion of ELIZABETH DEVICE, taken at the house of IAMES WILSEY, of the Forrest of Pendle, in the Countie of Lancaster, the seuen and twentieth day of A∣prill, Anno{que} Reg. Regis IACOBI Angliae, &c. De∣cimo, & Scotiae Quadragesimo quinto. Before ROGER NOVVEL and NICHOLAS BANISTER, Esquires, two of his Maiesties Iustices of the Peace with∣in the same Countie. viz. THe said Elizabeth Deuice being further Examined, confesseth, that vpon Good-Friday last, there dined at this Examinates house, called Malking-Tower, those which she hath said are Witches, and doth verily think them to be Witches: and their names are those whom Iames Deuice hath formerly spoken of to be there. And she further saith, that there was also at her said mothers house, at the day and time aforesaid, two women of Burneley Parish, whose names the wife of Richard Nut∣ter doth know. And there was likewise there one Anne Crouckshey of Marsden: And shee also confesseth, in all things touching the Christening of the Spirit, and the killing of Master Lister of Westbie, as the said Iames De∣uice hath before confessed; but denieth of any talke was amongst them the said Witches, to her now remem∣brance, at the said meeting together, touching the kil∣ling of the Galoer, or the blowing vp of Lancaster Ca∣stle.
The Examination and Euidence of IENNET DEVICE, daughter of the said ELIZA∣BETH DEVICE, late wife of IOHN DEVICE, of the Forrest of Pendle, in the Countie of Lancaster. Against ELIZABETH DEVICE, her Mother, prisoner at the Barre, vpon her Arraignement and Triall, viz. THe said Iennet Deuice saith, That vpon Good Friday last there was about twentie persons (whereof one∣ly two were men, to this Examinates remembrance) at her said Grandmothers house, called Malking-Tower aforesaid, about twelue of the clocke: all which per∣sons this Examinates said mother told her, were Wit∣ches, and that they came to giue a name to Alizon De∣uice Spirit, or Familiar, sister to this Examinate, and now prisoner at Lancaster. And also this Examinate saith, That the persons aforesaid had to their dinners Beefe, Bacon, and roasted Mutton; which Mutton (as this Examinates said brother said) was of a Wether of Chri∣stopher Swyers of Barley: which Wether was brought in the night before into this Examinates mothers house by the said Iames Deuice, this Examinates said brother: and in this Examinates sight killed and eaten, as afore∣said. And shee further saith, That shee knoweth the names of sixe of the said Witches, viz. the wife of Hugh Hargraues vnder Pendle, Christopher Howgate of Pendle, vnckle to this Examinate, and Elizabeth his wife, and Dicke Miles his wife of the Rough-Lee; Christopher Iackes of Thorny-holme, and his wife: and the names
of the residue shee this Examinate doth not know, sa∣uing that this Examinates mother and brother were both there. And lastly, she this Examinate confesseth and saith, That her mother hath taught her two pray∣ers: the one to cure the bewitched, and the other to get drinke; both which particularly appeare. The Examination and Euidence of IAMES DEVICE, sonne of the said ELIZABETH DEVICE, late wife of IOHN DEVICE, of the Forrest of Pendle, in the Countie of Lancaster. Against ELIZABETH DEVICE, his Mother, prisoner at the Barre, vpon her Arraignement and Triall, viz. THe said Iames Deuice saith, That on Good-Friday last, about twelue of the clocke in the day time, there dined in this Examinates said mothers house, at Malking-Tower, a number of persons, whereof three were men, with this Examinate, and the rest women; and that they met there for three causes following (as this Examinates said mother told this Examinate) The first was, for the naming of the Spirit, which Alizon Deuice, now prisoner at Lancaster, had: But did not, name him, because shee was not there. The second was, for the deliuerie of his said Grandmother, olde Dembdike; this Examinates said sister Allizon; the said
Anne Chattox, and her daughter Redferne; killing the Gaoler at Lancaster; and before the next Assises to blow vp the Castle there: and to that end the afore∣said prisoners might by that time make an escape, and get away. All which this Examinate then heard them conferre of. And he also sayth, That the names of the said Wit∣ches as were on Good-Friday at this Examinates said Grandmothers house, and now this Examinates owne mothers, for so many of them as hee did know, were these, viz. The wife of Hugh Hargreiues of Burley; the wife of Christopher Bulcock, of the Mosse end, and Iohn her sonne; the mother of Myles Nutter; Eliza∣beth, the wife of Christopher Hargreiues, of Thurni∣holme; Christopher Howgate, and Elizabeth, his wife; Alice Graye of Coulne, and one Mould-heeles wife, of the same: and this Examinate, and his Mother. And this Examinate further sayth, That all the Witches went out of the said House in their owne shapes and likenesses. And they all, by that they were forth of the dores, gotten on Horsebacke, like vnto Foales, some of one colour, some of another; and Prestons wife was the last: and when shee got on Horsebacke, they all presently vanished out of this Examinates sight. And before their said parting a∣way,Executed at Yorke the last Assises. they all appointed to meete at the said Prestons wiues house that day twelue-moneths; at which time the said Prestons wife promised to make them a great Feast. And if they had occasion to meete in the meane time, then should warning be giuen, that they all should meete vpon Romleyes Moore.
And here they parted, with resolution to execute their deuillish and bloudie practices, for the deliue∣rance of their friends, vntill they came to meete here, where their power and strength was gone. And now finding her Meanes was gone, shee cryed out for Mer∣cie. Whereupon shee being taken away, the next in order was her sonne Iames Deuice, whom shee and her Mother, old Demb∣dike, brought to act his part in this wofull Tra∣gedie.
THE ARRAIGNMENT and Triall of IAMES DEVICE, Sonne of ELIZABETH DEVICE, of the Forrest of Pendle, within the Countie of Lancaster aforesaid, Labo∣rer, for Witchcraft; Vpon Tuesday the eighteenth of Au∣gust, at the Assises and generall Gaole-Deliuerie holden at Lancaster Before Sir EDVVARD BROMLEY Knight, one of his Ma∣iesties Iustices of Assise at Lancaster. James Deuice. THis wicked and miserable Wretch, whe∣ther by practise, or meanes, to bring himselfe to some vntimely death, and thereby to auoide his Tryall by his Countrey, and iust iudgement of the Law; or ashamed to bee openly charged with so ma∣ny deuillish practises, and so much innocent bloud as hee had spilt; or by reason of his Imprisonment so long time before his Tryall (which was with more fauour, commiseration, and reliefe then hee deser∣ued) I know not: But being brought forth to the
Barre, to receiue his Triall before this worthie Iudge, and so Honourable and Worshipfull an Assembly of Iustices for this seruice, was so insensible, weake, and vnable in all thinges, as he could neither speake, heare, or stand, but was holden vp when hee was brought to the place of his Arraignement, to receiue his triall. This Iames Deuice of the Forrest of Pendle, being brought to the Barre, was there according to the forme, order, and course, Indicted and Arraigned; for that hee Felloniously had practised, vsed, and exercised diuers wicked and deuillish Arts, called Witch-crafts, Inchaunt∣ments, Charmes, and Sorceries, in, and vpon one Anne Towneley, wife of Henrie Towneley of the Carre, in the Countie of Lancaster Gentleman, and her by force of the same, felloniously had killed. Contra pacem, &c. The said Iames Deuice was the second time Indicted and Arraigned in the same manner and forme, for the death of Iohn Duckworth, by witch-craft. Contra pa∣cem, &c. To these two seuerall Indictments vpon his Arraign∣ment, he pleaded not guiltie, and for the triall of his life put himselfe vpon God and his Countrie. So as now the Gentlemen of the Iurie of life & death stand charged to finde, whether he be guiltie of these, or either of them. Whereupon Master Nowel humbly prayed Master Towneley might be called, who attended to prosecute and giue euidence against him for the Kings Majestie, and that the particular Examinations taken before him and others, might be openly published & read in Court, in the hearing of the Prisoner.
But because it were infinite to bring him to his parti∣cular Triall for euery offence, which hee hath commit∣ted in his time, and euery practice wherein he hath had his hand: I shall proceede in order with the Euidence remayning vpon Record against him, amongst the Re∣cords of the Crowne; both how, and in what sort hee came to be a witch: and shew you what apparant proofe there is to charge him with the death of these two seue∣rall persons, for the which hee now standeth vpon his triall for al the rest of his deuillish practises, incantations, murders, charmes, sorceries, meetings to consult with Witches, to execute mischiefe (take them as they are a∣gainst him vpon Record:) Enough, I doubt not. For these with the course of his life will serue his turne to deliuer you from the danger of him that neuer tooke felicitie in any things, but in reuenge, bloud, & mischiefe with crying out vnto God for vengeance; which hath now at the length brought him to the place where hee standes to receiue his Triall with more honor, fauour, and respect, then such a Monster in Nature doth de∣serue; And I doubt not, but in due time by the Iustice of the Law, to an vntimely and shamefull death.
The Examination of IAMES DEVICE, sonne of ELIZABETH DEVICE, of the Forrest of Pendle, in the Countie of Lancaster, Labourer. Taken the seuen and twentieth day of Aprill, Anno{que}, Reg. Regis IACOBI, Angliae, &c. xo. & Scotiae Quadragesimo quinto Before ROGER NOWEL, and NICHOLAS BANNE∣STER, Esquires: two of his Maiesties Iustices of Peace within the said Countie. HE saith, that vpon Sheare Thursday was two yeares, his Grand-Mother Elizabeth Sothernes, alias Dembdike, did bid him this Examinate goe to the church to receiue the Communion (the next day after being Good Friday) and then not to eate the Bread the Mini∣ster gaue him, but to bring it and deliuer it to such a thing as should meet him in his way homewards: Not∣withstanding her perswasions, this Examinate did eate the Bread: and so in his comming, homeward some for∣tie roodes off the said Church, there met him a thing in the shape of a Hare, who spoke vnto this Examinate, and asked him whether hee had brought the Bread that his Grand-mother had bidden him, or no? whereupon this Examinate answered, hee had not: and thereupon the said thing threatned to pull this Examinate in pee∣ces, and so this Examinate thereupon marked himselfe to God, and so the said thing vanished out of this Exa∣minates sight. And within some foure daies after that, there appeared in this Examinates sight, hard by the new Church in Pendle, a thing like vnto a browne
Dogge, who asked this Examinate to giue him his Soule, and he should be reuenged of any whom hee would: whereunto this Examinate answered, that his Soule was not his to giue, but was his Sauiour Iesus Christs, but as much as was in him this Examinate to giue, he was contented he should haue it. And within two or three daies after, this Examinate went to the Carre-Hall, and vpon some speeches be∣twixt Mistris Towneley and this Examinate; Shee char∣ging this Examinate and his said mother, to haue stolne some Turues of hers, badde him packe the doores: and withall as he went forth of the doore, the said Mi∣stris Towneley gaue him a knock betweene the shoulders: and about a day or two after that, there appeared vnto this Examinate in his way, a thing like vnto a black dog, who put this Examinate in minde of the said Mistris Towneleyes falling out with him this Examinate; who bad this Examinate make a Picture of Clay, like vnto the said Mistris Towneley: and that this Examinate with the helpe of his Spirit (who then euer after bidde this Examinate to call it Dandy) would kill or destroy the said Mistris Towneley: and so the said dogge vanished out of this Examinates sight. And the next morning af∣ter, this Examinate tooke Clay, and made a Picture of the said Mistris Towneley, and dried it the same night by the fire: and within a day after, hee, this Exami∣nate began to crumble the said Picture, euery day some, for the space of a weeke: and within two daies after all was crumbled away; the said Mistris Towneley died. And hee further saith, That in Lent last one Iohn Duckworth of the Lawnde, promised this Examinate an old shirt: and within a fortnight after, this Examinate
went to the said Duckworthes house, and demanded the said old shirt; but the said Duckworth denied him there∣of. And going out of the said house, the said Spirit Dan∣dy appeared vnto this Examinate, and said, Thou didst touch the said Duckworth; whereunto this Examinate answered, he did not touch him: yes (said the Spirit a∣gaine) thou didst touch him, and therfore I haue power of him: whereupon this Examinate ioyned with the said Spirit, and then wished the said Spirit to kill the said Duckworth: and within one weeke, then next after, Duckworth died. This voluntary Confession and Examination of his owne, containing in itselfe matter sufficient in Law to charge him, and to proue his offences, contained in the two seuerall Indictments, was sufficient to satisfie the Gentlemen of the Iury of Life and Death, that he is guiltie of them, and either of them: yet my Lord Brom∣ley commanded, for their better satisfaction, that the Witnesses present in Court against any of the Prisoners, should be examined openly, viua voce, that the Prisoner might both heare and answere to euery particular point of their Euidence; notwithstanding any of their Exa∣minations taken before any of his Maiesties Iustices of Peace within the same Countie. Herein do but obserue the wonderfull work of God; to raise vp a yong Infant, the very sister of the Prisonr, Iennet Deuice, to discouer, iustifie and proue these things against him at the time of his Arraignement and Triall, as hereafter followeth. viz.
The Examination and Euidence of IEN∣NET DEVICE daughter of ELIZABETH DEVICE, late wife of IOHN DEVICE of of the Forrest of Pen∣dle, in the Countie of Lancaster. Against IAMES DEVICE, Prisoner at the Barre, vpon his Ar∣raignement and Triall. viz. BEing examined in open Court, she saith, That her brother Iames Deuice, the Prisoner at the Barre, hath beene a Witch for the space of three yeares: about the beginning of which time, there appeared vnto him, in this Examinates mothers house, a Black-Dogge, which her said brother called Dandy.Dandy. And further, this Exa∣minate confesseth, & saith: That her said brother about a twelue month since, in the presence of this Examinate, and in the house aforesaid, called for the said Dandy, who thereupon appeared; asking this Examinates bro∣ther what he would haue him to doe. This Examinates brother then said, he would haue him to helpe him to kill old Mistris Towneley of the Carre: whereunto the said Dandy answered, and said, That her said brother should haue his best helpe for the doing of the same; and that her said brother, and the said Dandy, did both in this Examinates hearing, say, they would make away the said Mistris Towneley. And about a weeke after, this Examinate comming to the Carre-Hall, saw the said Mistris Towneley in the Kitchin there, nothing well: whereupon it came into this Examinates minde, that her said brother, by the help of Dandy, had brought the said Mistris Towneley into the state she then was in.
Which Examinat, although she were but very yong, yet it was wonderfull to the Court, in so great a Presence and Audience, with what modestie, gouernement, and vnderstanding, shee deliuered this Euidence against the Prisoner at the Barre, being her owne naturall brother, which he himselfe could not deny, but there acknow∣ledged in euery particular to be iust and true. But behold a little further, for here this bloudy Mon∣ster did not stay his hands: for besides his wicked and diuellish Spels, practises, meetings to consult of murder and mischiefe, which (by Gods grace) hereafter shall follow in order against him; there is yet more bloud to be laid vnto his charge. For although he were but yong, and in the beginning of his Time, yet was he carefull to obserue his Instructions from Old Demdike his Grand∣mother, and Elizabeth Deuice his mother, in so much that no time should passe since his first entrance into that damnable Arte and exercise of Witchcrafts, Inchant∣ments, Charmes and Sorceries, without mischiefe or murder. Neither should any man vpon the least occasi∣on of offence giuen vnto him, escape his hands, without some danger. For these particulars were no sooner giuen in Euidence against him, when he was againe Indicted and Arraigned for the murder of these two. viz. Iames Deuice of the Forrest of Pendle aforesaid, in the Countie of Lancaster, Labourer, the third time Indi∣cted and Arraigned for the death of Iohn Hargraues of Gould-shey-booth, in the Countie of Lancaster, by Witchcraft, as aforesaid. Contra &c. To this Inditement vpon his Arraignement, he plea∣ded thereunto not guiltie: and for his Triall put him∣selfe vpon God and his Countrey, &c.
Iames Deuice of the Forrest of Pendle aforesaid, in the County of Lancaster, Labourer, the fourth time Indi∣cted and Arraigned for the death of Blaze Hargreues of Higham, in the Countie of Lancaster, by Witchcraft, as aforesaid. Contra Pacem, &c. To this Indictment vpon his Arraignement, he plea∣ded thereunto not guiltie; and for the Triall of his life, put himselfe vpon God and the Countrey, &c. Hereupon Iennet Deuice produced, sworne and exa∣mined, as a witnesse on his Maiesties behalfe, against the said Iames Deuice, was examined in open Court, as fol∣loweth. viz. The Examination and Euidence of IEN∣NET DEVICE aforesaid. Against IAMES DEVICE, her brother, Prisoner at the Barre, vpon his Arraignement and Triall. viz. BEing sworne and examined in open Court, she saith, That her brother Iames Deuice hath beene a Witch for the space of three yeares: about the beginning of which time, there appeared vnto him, in this Exami∣nates mothers house, a Blacke-Dogge, which her said brother called Dandy, which Dandy did aske her said bro∣ther what he would haue him to doe, whereunto he an∣swered, hee would haue him to kill Iohn Hargreiues, of Gold-shey-booth: whereunto Dandy answered that he would doe it; since which time the said Iohn is dead.
And at another time this Examinate confesseth and saith, That her said brother did call the said Dandy: who thereupon appeared in the said house, asking this Examinates brother what hee would haue him to doe: whereupon this Examinates said brother said, he would haue him to kill Blaze Hargreiues of Higham: whereupon Dandy answered, hee should haue his best helpe, and so vanished away: and shee saith, that since that time the said Hargreiues is dead; but how long after, this Examinate doth not now re∣member. All which things, when he heard his sister vpon her Oath affirme, knowing them in his conscience to bee iust and true, slenderly denyed them, and thereupon insisted. To this Examination were diuerse witnesses exami∣ned in open Court vina voce, concerning the death of the parties, in such manner and forme, and at such time as the said Iennet Deuice in her Euidence hath formerly declared to the Court. Which is all, and I doubt not but matter suffi∣cient in Law to charge him with, for the death of these parties. For the proofe of his Practises, Charmes, Meetings at Malking-Tower, to consult with Witches to execute mischiefe, Master Nowel humbly prayed; his owne Examination, taken and certified, might openly be read; and the rest in order, as they remaine vpon Record a∣mongst the Records of the Crowne at Lancaster: as hereafter followeth▪ viz.
The Examination of IAMES DE∣VICE, Sonne of ELIZABETH DEVICE, of the For∣rest of Pendle: Taken the seuen and twentieth day of Aprill aforesaid, Before ROGER NOVVEL and NICHOLAS BANESTER Esquires, two of his Maiesties Iustices of Peace within the said Countie, viz. ANd being examined, he further saith, That vpon Sheare-Thursday last, in the euening, he this Exa∣minate stole a Wether from Iohn Robinson of Barley, and brought it to his Grand-mothers house, old Demb∣dike, and there killed it: and that vpon the day follow∣ing, being Good-Friday, about twelue of the clocke in the day time, there dined in this Examinates mothers house a number of persons, whereof three were men, with this Examinate, and the rest women; and that they met there for three Causes following, as this Exami∣nates said Mother told this Examinate. 1. The first was, for the naming of the Spirit which Alizon Deuice, now prisoner at Lancaster, had, but did not name him, because she was not there. 2. The second Cause was, for the deliuerie of his said Grand-mother; this Examinates said sister Alizon; the said Anne Chattox, and her daughter, Redfernes; killing the Gaoler at Lancaster; and before the next Assises to blow vp the Castle there, to the end the aforesaid per∣sons might by that meanes make an escape & get away: all which this Examinate then heard them conferre of. 3. And the third Cause was, for that there was a wo∣man
dwelling in Gisborne Parish, who came into this Examinates said Grandmothers house, who there came and craued assistance of the rest of them that were then there, for the killing of Master Lister of Westby, because (as shee then said) he had borne malice vnto her, and had thought to haue put her away at the last Assises at Yorke, but could not and this Examinate heard the said woman say, That her power was not strong ynough to doe it her selfe, being now lesse then before time it had beene. And also, that the said Iennet Preston had a Spirit with her like vnto a white Foale, with a blacke spot in the for∣head. And he also saith, That the names of the said Witches as were on Good-Friday at this Examinates said Grand∣mothers house, & now this Examinates owne mothers, for so many of them as he did know, were these, viz. the wife of Hugh Hargreiues of Barley; the wife of Christopher Bulcock of the Mosse end, and Iohn her sonne; the mother of Myles Nutter; Elizabeth, the wife of Christopher Har∣greiues, of Thurniholme; Christopher Howgate, and Eli∣zabeth his wife; Alice Graye of Coulne, and one Mould∣heeles wife, of the same: and this Examinate, and his Mother. And this Examinate further saith, That all the said Witches went out of the said House in their owne shapes and likenesses. And they all, by that they were forth of the dores, were gotten on Horsebacke, like vnto Foales, some of one colour, some of another; and Prestons wife was the last; and when shee got on Horsebacke, they all presently vanished out of this Examinates sight. And before their said parting a∣way, they all appointed to meete at the said Prestons
wiues house that day twelue-moneths; at which time the said Prestons wife promised to make them a great Feast. And if they had occasion to meete in the meane time, then should warning be giuen, that they all should meete vpon Romleyes Moore. The Examination and Euidence of IENNET DEVICE. Against IAMES DEVICE her said Brother, Prisoner at the Barre, vpon his Arraignement and Triall: Taken before ROGER NOWEL, and NICHOLAS BANNE∣STER, Esquires: two of his Maiesties Iustices of Peace within the said Countie. viz. SHee saith, that vpon Good-Friday last there was a∣bout twentie persons, whereof only two were men, to this Examinates remembrance, at her said Grand∣mothers house, called Malking-Tower aforesaid, about twelue of the clock: all which persons this Examinates said Mother told her were Witches, and that they came to giue a name to Alizon Deuice Spirit or Familiar, Sister to this Examinate, and now Prisoner, in the Castle of Lancaster: And also this Examinate saith, that the per∣sons aforesaid had to their Dinnors, Beefe, Bacon, and rosted Mutton, which Mutton, as this Examinates said brother said, was of a Weather of Robinsons of Barley: which Weather was brought in the night before into this Examinates mothers house, by the said Iames Deuice
this Examinates said brother, and in this Examinates sight killed, and eaten, as aforesaid: And shee further saith, that shee knoweth the names of sixe of the said Witches, viz. the wife of the said Hugh Hargreiues, vn∣der Pendle: Christopher Howget, of Pendle, Vncle to this Examinate: and Dick Miles wife, of the Rough-Lee: Christopher Iacks, of Thorne-holme, and his Wife: and the names of the residue shee this Examinate doth not know, sauing that this Examinates Mother and Brother were both there. The Examination of ELIZABETH DEVICE, Mother of the said IAMES DEVICE, of the Forrest of Pendle: taken the seuen and twentieth day of Aprill aforesaid. Before ROGER NOWEL, and NICHOLAS BANNE∣STER, Esquires; as aforesaid. viz. BEing examined, the said Elizabeth saith and confes∣seth, that vpon Good-Friday last there dined at this Examinates house, those which she hath said to be Wit∣ches, and doth verily thinke them to bee Witches, and their names are those, whom Iames Deuice hath former∣ly spoken of to be there. And shee also confesseth in all things touching the Christning of her Spirit, and the killing of Master Lister of Westby, as the said Iames  confesseth. But de∣nieth that any talke was amongst  the said Witches, to her now remembrance, at the said meeting together,
touching the killing of the Gaoler at Lancaster; blow∣ing vp of the Castle▪ thereby to deliuer old Dembdike her Mother; Alizon Deuice her Daughter, and other Priso∣ners, committed to the said Castle for Witchcraft. After all these things opened, and deliuered in eui∣dence against him; Master Couil, who hath the custodie of the Gaole at Lancaster, hauing taken great paines with him during the time of his im∣prisonment, to procure him to discouer his pra∣ctizes, and such other Witches as he knew to bee dangerous▪ Humbly prayed the fauour of the Court, that this voluntarie confession to M. Ander∣ton, M. Sands the Major of Lancaster, M. Couel, and others, might openly bee published and declared in Court. The voluntarie confession and declara∣tion of IAMES DEVICE, Prisoner in the Castle at Lan∣caster. Before WILLIAM SANDS, Maior of Lancaster, IAMES ANDERTON, Esquire, one of his Maiesties Iustices of Peace within the Countie of Lancaster: And THOMAS COVEL, Gentleman, one of his Maiesties Coroners in the same Countie. viz. IAMES Deuice, Prisoner in the Castle at Lancaster, saith; That his said Spirit Dandie, being very earnest with
him to giue him his soule. He answered, he would giue him that part thereof that was his owne to giue: and thereupon the said Spirit said, hee was aboue CHRIST IESVS, and therefore hee must absolutely giue him his Soule: and that done, hee would giue him power to re∣uenge himselfe against any whom he disliked. And he further saith, that the said Spirit did appeare vnto him after sundrie times, in the likenesse of a Dogge, and at euery time most earnestly perswaded him to giue him his Soule absolutely: who answered as before, that he would giue him his owne part and no further. And hee saith, that at the last time that the said Spirit was with him, which was the Tuesday next before his ap∣prehension, when as hee could not preuaile with him to haue his Soule absolutely granted vnto him, as afore∣said; the said Spirit departed from him, then giuing a most fearefull crie and yell, and withall caused a great flash of fire to shew about him: which said Spirit did neuer after trouble this Examinate. William Sands, James Anderton. Tho. Couel, Coroner. The said Iennet Deuice, his Sister, in the very end of her Examination against the said Iames Deuice, confes∣seth and saith, that her Mother taught her two Prayers: the one to get drinke, which was this. viz. Crucifixus hoc signum vitam Eternam. Amen.
And shee further saith, That her Brother Iames De∣uice, the Prisoner at the Barre, hath confessed to her this Examinate, that he by this Prayer hath gotten drinke: and that within an houre after the saying the said Pray∣er, drinke hath come into the house after a very strange manner. And the other Prayer, the said Iames Deuice affirmed, would cure one bewitched, which shee reci∣ted as followeth. viz. A Charme. Vpon Good-Friday, I will fast while I may Vntill I heare them knell Our Lords owne Bell, Lord in his messe With his twelue Apostles good, What hath he in his hand Ligh in leath wand: What hath he in his other hand? Heauens doore key, Open, open Heauen doore keyes, Steck, steck hell doore. Let Crizum child Goe to it Mother mild, What is yonder that casts a light so farrandly, Mine owne deare Sonne that's naild to the Tree. He is naild sore by the heart and hand, And holy barne Panne, Well is that man That Fryday spell can, His Childe to learne; A Crosse of Blew, and another of Red,
As good Lord was to the Roode. Gabriel laid him downe to sleepe Vpon the ground of holy weepe: Good Lord came walking by, Sleep'st thou, wak'st thou Gabriel, No Lord I am sted with sticke and stake, That I can neither sleepe nor wake: Rise vp Gabriel and goe with me, The stick nor the stake shall neuer deere thee. Sweete Iesus our Lord, Amen. Iames Deuice. What can be said more of this painfull Steward▪ that was so carefull to prouide Mutton against this Feast and solemne meeting at Malking-Tower, of these hellish and diuellish band of Witches, (the like whereof hath not been heard of) then hath been openly published and declared against him at the Barre, vpon his Arraigne∣ment and Triall: wherein it pleased God to raise vp Witnesses beyond expectation to conuince him; besides his owne particular Examinations, which being shewed and read vnto him; he acknowledged to be iust and true. And what I promised to set forth against him, in the be∣ginning of his Arraignment and Triall, I doubt nor but therein I haue satisfied your expectation at large, wherein I haue beene very sparing to charge him with anything, but with sufficient matter of Record and E∣uidence, able to satisfie the consciences of the Gentle∣men of the Iury of Life and Death; to whose good con∣sideration I leaue him, with the perpetuall Badge and Brand of as dangerous and malicious a Witch, as euer liued in these parts of Lancashire, of his time: and spot∣ted
with as much Innocent bloud, as euer any Witch of his yeares. After all these proceedings, by direction of his Lord∣ship, were their seuerall Examinations, subscribed by e∣uery one of them in particular, shewed vnto them at the time of their Triall, & acknowledged by thē to be true, deliuered to the gentlemen of the Iury of Life & Death, for the better satisfaction of their consciences: after due consideration of which said seuerall examinations, con∣fessions, and voluntary declarations, as well of them∣selues as of their children, friends and confederates, The Gentlemen deliuered vp their Verdict against the Priso∣ners, as followeth. viz. The Verdict of Life and Death. WHo found Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, Elizabeth Deuice, and Iames Deuice, guiltie of the seuerall murthers by Witchcraft, contained in the Indictments against them, and euery of them.
THE WITCHES OF SALMESBVRY. The Arraignement and Triall of IEN∣NET BIERLEY ELLEN BIERLEY, and IANE SOVTHVVORTH of Salmesbury, in the County of Lancaster; for Witchcraft vpon the bodie of GRACE SOVVER BVTTS, vpon Wednesday the nineteenth of August: At the Assises and generall Gaole-deliuery, holden at Lancaster. Before Sir EDVVARD BROMLEY Knight, one of his Ma∣iestices Iustices of Assize at Lancaster: as hereafter fol∣loweth. viz. Iennet Bierley. Ellen Bierley. Iane Southworth. THus haue we for a time left the Graund Witches of the Forrest of Pendle, to the good consideration of a verie sufficient Iury of worthy Gentlemen of their Coū∣trey. We are now come to the famous Witches of Salmesbury, as the Countrey called them,
who by such a subtill practise and conspiracie of a Se∣minarie Priest, or, as the best in this Honorable Assem∣bly thinke, a Iesuite, whereof this Countie of Lancaster hath good store, who by reason of the generall enter∣tainement they find, and great maintenance they haue, resort hither, being farre from the Eye of Iustice, and therefore, Procul a fulmine; are now brought to the Barre, to receiue their Triall, and such a young witnesse prepared and instructed to giue Euidence against them, that it must be the Act of GOD that must be the means to discouer their Practises and Murthers, and by an in∣fant: but how and in what sort Almightie GOD deli∣uered them from the stroake of Death, when the Axe was layd to the Tree, and made frustrate the practise of this bloudie Butcher, it shall appeare vnto you vpon their Arraignement and Triall, whereunto they are now come. Master Thomas Couel, who hath the charge of the pri∣soners in the Castle at Lancaster, was commaunded to bring forth the said Jennet Bierley, Ellen Bierley, Jane Southworth, to the Barre to receiue their Triall. Indictment. THe said Iennet Bierley, Ellen Bierly, and Iane South∣worth of Salmesbury, in the Countie of Lancaster,
being indicted, for that they and euery of them felloni∣ously had practised, exercised, and vsed diuerse deuillish and wicked Arts, called Witchcrafts, Inchauntments, Charmes, and Sorceries, in and vpon one Grace Sowerbuts: so that by meanes thereof her bodie wasted and consu∣med, Contra formam Statuti &c. Et Contra Pacem dicti Domini Regis Coronam & dignitatem &c. To this Indictment vpon their Arraignement, they pleaded Not-Guiltie; and for the Triall of their liues put themselues vpon GOD and their Countrey. Whereupon Master Sheriffe of the Countie of Lan∣caster, by direction of the Court, made returne of a very sufficient Iurie to passe betweene the Kings Maiestie and them, vpon their liues and deaths, with such others as follow in order. The Prisoners being now at the Barre vpon their Triall, Grace Sowerbutts, the daughter of Thomas Sower∣butts, about the age of foureteene yeares, was produ∣ced to giue Euidence for the Kings Maiestie against them: who standing vp, she was commaun∣ded to point out the Prisoners, which shee did, and said as fol∣loweth, viz. {inverted ⁂}
The Examination and Euidence of GRACE SOVVERBVTTS, daughter of THOMAS SOVVERBVTTS, of Salmesbury, in the Countie of Lancaster Husband-man, vpon her Oath, Against IENNET BIERLEY, ELLEN BIERLEY, and IANE SOVTHVVORTH, prisoners at the Barre, vpon their Arraignement and Triall, viz. THe said Grace Sowerbutts vpon her oath saith, That for the space of some yeares now last past shee hath beene haunted and vexed with some women, who haue vsed to come to her: which women, shee sayth, were Iennet Bierley, this Informers Grand-mother; Ellen Bier∣ley, wife to Henry Bierley; Iane Southworth, late the wife of Iohn Southworth, and one Old Doewife, all of Salmes∣burie aforesaid. And shee saith, That now lately those foure women did violently draw her by the haire of the head, and layd her on the toppe of a Hay-mowe, in the said Henry Bierleyes Barne. And shee saith further, That not long after the said Iennet Bierley did meete this Examinate neere vnto the place where shee dwel∣leth, and first appeared in her owne likenesse, and after that in the likenesse of a blacke Dogge, and as this Exa∣minate did goe ouer a Style, shee picked her off: how∣beit shee saith shee had no hurt then, but rose againe, and went to her Aunts in Osbaldeston, and returned backe againe to her Fathers house the same night, be∣ing fetched home by her father. And she saith, That in her way home-wards shee did then tell her Father,
how shee had beene dealt withall both then and at sun∣dry times before that; and before that time she neuer told any bodie thereof: and being examined why she did not, she sayth, she could not speake thereof, though she desired so to doe. And she further sayth, That vp∣on Saterday, being the fourth of this instant Aprill, shee this Examinate going towards Salmesbury bote, to meete her mother, comming from Preston, shee saw the said Iennet Bierley, who met this Examinate at a place called the Two Brigges, first in her owne shape, and afterwards in the likenesse of a blacke Dogge, with two legges, which Dogge went close by the left side of this Examinate, till they came to a Pitte of Water, and then the said Dogge spake, and persuaded this Exami∣nate to drowne her selfe there, saying, it was a faire and an easie death: Whereupon this Examinate thought there came one to her in a white sheete, and carried her away from the said Pitte, vpon the comming whereof the said blacke Dogge departed away; and shortly after the said white thing departed also: And after this Examinate had gone further on her way, a∣bout the length of two or three Fields, the said blacke Dogge did meete her againe, and going on her left side, as aforesaid, did carrie her into a Barne of one Hugh Walshmans, neere there by, and layed her vpon the Barne-floore, and couered this Examinate with Straw on her bodie, and Haye on her head, and the Dogge it selfe lay on the toppe of the said Straw, but how long the said Dogge lay there, this Examinate cannot tell, nor how long her selfe lay there: for shee sayth, That vpon her lying downe there, as aforesaid, her Speech and Senses were taken from her: and the first
time shee knew where shee was, shee was layed vpon a bedde in the said Walshmans house, which (as shee hath since beene told) was vpon the Monday at night fol∣lowing: and shee was also told, That shee was found and taken from the place where shee first lay, by some of her friends, and carried into the said Walshmans house, within a few houres after shee was layed in the Barne, as aforesaid. And shee further sayth, That vpon the day following, being Tuesday, neere night of the same day, shee this Examinate was fetched by her Fa∣ther and Mother from the said Walshmans house to her Fathers house. And shee saith, That at the place be∣fore specified, called the Two Brigges, the said Iennet Bierley and Ellen Bierley did appeare vnto her in their owne shapes: whereupon this Examinate fell downe, and after that was not able to speake, or goe, till the Fri∣day following: during which time, as she lay in her Fa∣thers house, the said Iennet Bierley and Ellen Bierley did once appeare vnto her in their owne shapes, but they did nothing vnto her then, neither did shee euer see them since. And shee further sayth, That a good while before all this, this Examinate did goe with the said Iennet Bierley, her Grand-mother, and the said Ellen Bierley her Aunt, at the bidding of her said Grand-mother, to the house of one Thomas Walsh∣man, in Salmesbury aforesaid. And comming thi∣ther in the night, when all the house-hold was a∣bed, the doores being shut, the said Iennet Bierley did open them, but this Examinate knoweth not how: and beeing come into the said house, this Examinate and the said Ellen Bierley stayed there, and the said Iennet Bierley went into the Chamber
where the said Walshman and his wife lay, & from thence brought a little child, which this Examinate thinketh was in bed with it Father and Mother: and after the said Iennet Bierley had set her downe by the fire, with the said child, shee did thrust a naile into the nauell of the said child: and afterwards did take a pen and put it in at the said place, and did suck there a good space, and af∣terwards laid the child in bed againe: and then the said Iennet and the said Ellen returned to their owne houses, and this Examinate with them. And shee thinketh that neither the said Thomas Walshman, nor his wife knew that the said child was taken out of the bed from them. And shee saith also, that the said child did not crie when it was hurt, as aforesaid: But she saith, that shee thinketh that the said child did thenceforth languish, and not long after dyed. And after the death of the said child; the next night after the buriall thereof, the said Iennet Bierley & Ellen Bierley, taking this Examinate with them, went to Salmesburie Church, and there did take vp the said child, and the said Iennet did carrie it out of the Church-yard in her armes, and then did put it in her lap and carryed it home to her owne house, and hauing it there did boile some therof in a Pot, and some did broile on the coales, of both which the said Iennet and Ellen did eate, and would haue had this Examinate and one Grace Bierley, Daughter of the said Ellen, to haue eaten with them, but they refused so to doe: And afterwards the said Iennet & Ellen did seethe the bones of the said child in a pot, & with the Fat that came out of the said bones, they said they would annoint themselues, that thereby they might sometimes change themselues into other shapes. And after all this being done, they said they
would lay the bones againe in the graue the next night following, but whether they did so or not, this Exami∣nate knoweth not: Neither doth shee know how they got it out of the graue at the first taking of it vp. And be∣ing further sworne and examined, she deposeth & saith, that about halfe a yeare agoe, the said Iennet Bierley, Ellen Bierley, Iane Southworth, and this Examinate (who went by the appointment of the said Iennet her Grand mo∣ther) did meete at a place called Red banck, vpon the North-side of the water of Ribble, euery Thursday and Sonday at night by the space of a fortnight, and at the water side there came vnto them, as they went thether, foure black things, going vpright, and yet not like men in the face: which oure did carrie the said three women and this Examinate ouer the Water, and when they came to the said Red Banck they found some thing there which they did eate. But this Examinate saith, shee ne∣uer saw such meate; and therefore shee durst not eate thereof, although her said Grand mother did bidde her eate. And after they had eaten, the said three Women and this Examinate danced, euery one of them with one of the black things aforesaid, and after their dancing the said black things did pull downe the said three Women, and did abuse their bodies, as this Examinate thinketh, for shee saith, that the black thing that was with her, did abuse her bodie. The said Examinate further saith vpon her Oth, That about ten dayes after her Examination taken at Black∣borne, shee this Examinate being then come to her Fa∣thers house againe, after shee had beene certaine dayes at her Vnckles house in Houghton: Iane Southworth wi∣dow, did meet this Examinate at her Fathers house dore
and did carrie her into the loft, and there did lay her vp∣on the floore, where shee was shortly found by her Fa∣ther and brought downe, and laid in a bed, as afterwards shee was told: for shee saith, that from the first meeting of the said Iane Southworth, shee this Examinate had her speech and senses taken from her. But the next day shee saith, shee came somewhat to her selfe, and then the said Widow Southworth came againe to this Examinate to her bed-side, and tooke her out of bed, and said to this Examinate, that shee did her no harme the other time, in respect of that shee now would after doe to her, and thereupon put her vpon a hey-stack, standing some three or foure yards high from the earth, where shee was found after great search made, by a neighbours Wife neare dwelling, and then laid in her bed againe, where she remained speechlesse and senselesse as before, by the space of two or three daies: And being recouered, with∣in a weeke after shee saith, that the said Iane Southworth did come againe to this Examinate at her fathers house and did take her away, and laid her in a ditch neare to the house vpon her face, and left her there, where shee was found shortly after, and laid vpon a bedde, but had not her senses againe of a day & a night, or thereabouts. And shee further saith, that vpon Tuesday last before the taking of this her Examination, the said Iane South∣worth, came to this Examinates Fathers house, and fin∣ding this Examinate without the doore, tooke her and carried her into the Barne, and thrust her head amongst a companie of boords that were there standing, where shee was shortly after found and laid in a bedde, and re∣mained in her old fit till the Thursday at night follow∣ing.
And being further examined touching her being at Red-bancke, shee saith, That the three women, by her before named, were carried backe againe ouer Ribble, by the same blacke things that carried them thither; and saith that at their said meeting in the Red-bancke, there did come also diuers other women, and did meete them there, some old, some young, which this Examinate thin∣keth did dwell vpon the North-side of Ribble, because she saw them not come ouer the Water: but this Exa∣minate knew none of them, neither did she see them eat or dance, or doe any thing else that the rest did, sauing that they were there and looked on. These particular points of Euidence being thus vr∣ged against the Prisoners: the father of this Grace Sower∣butts prayed that Thomas Walshman, whose childe they are charged to murther, might be examined as a witnes vpon his oath, for the Kings Maiestie, against the Priso∣ners at the Barre: who vpon this strange deuised accusa∣tion, deliuered by this impudent wench, were in opini∣on of many of that great Audience guilty of this blou∣die murther, and more worthy to die then any of these Witches.
The Examination and Euidence of THOMAS WALSHMAN, of Salmesbury, in the Countie of Lancaster, Yeoman. Against IENNET BIERLEY, ELLEN BIERLEY, and IANE SOVTHVVORTH, Prisoners at the Barre, vp∣on their Arraignement and Triall, as followeth. viz. THe said Examinate, Thomas Walshman, vpon his oath saith, That hee had a childe died about Lent was twelue-month, who had beene sicke by the space of a fortnight or three weekes, and was afterwards buried in Salmesburie Church: which childe when it died was a∣bout a yeare old; But how it came to the death of it this Examinate knoweth not. And he further saith, that a∣bout the fifteenth of Aprill last, or thereabouts, the said Grace Sowerbutts was found in this Examinates fa∣thers Barne, laid vnder a little hay and straw, and from thence was carried into this Examinates house, and there laid till the Monday at night fol∣lowing: during which time shee did not speak, but lay as if she had beene dead.
The Examination of IOHN SINGLE∣TON: Taken at Salmesbury, in the Countie of Lancaster, the seuenth day of August: Anno Reg. Regis IACOBI Angliae, Franciae, & Hiberniae, Fidei Defensor. &c. Decimo & Scotiae, xlvj. Before ROBERT HOVLDEN, Esquire, one of his Maiesties Iustices of Peace in the County of Lancaster. Against. IENNET BIERLEY, ELLEN BIERLEY, and IANE SOVTHVVORTH, which hereafter followeth. THe said Examinate vpon his oath saith, That hee hath often heard his old Master, Sir Iohn Southworth Knight, now deceased, say, touching the late wife of Iohn Southworth, now in the Gaole, for suspition of Witchcraft: That the said wife was as he thought an euill woman, and a Witch: and he said that he was sor∣ry for her husband, that was his kinsman, for he thought she would kill him. And this Examinate further saith, That the said Sir Iohn Southworth in his comming or going betweene his owne house at Salmesbury, and the Towne of Preston, did for the most part forbeare to passe by the house, where the said wife dwelled, though it was his nearest and best way; and rode another way, only for feare of the said wife, as this Examinate verily thinketh.
The Examination of WILLIAM ALKER of Salmesbury, in the Countie of Lancaster, Yeoman: Taken the fifteenth day of Aprill, Anno Reg. Regis IACOBI, Angliae, Franciae, & Hiberniae, Deci∣mo & Scotiae, quadragesimo quinto. Before ROBERT HOVLDEN, one of his Maiesties Iustices of Peace in the County of Lancaster: Against IENNET BIERLEY, ELLEN BIERLEY, and IANE BIER∣LEY, which hereafter followeth. viz. THe said Examinate vpon his oath saith, That hee hath seene the said Sir Iohn Southworth shunne to meet the said wife of Iohn Southworth, now Prisoner in the Gaole, when he came neere where she was. And hath heard the said Sir Iohn Southworth say, that he liked her not, and that he doubted she would bewitch him. Here was likewise Thomas Sowerbutts, father of Grace Sowerbutts, examined vpon his oath, and many other witnesses to little purpose: who being examined by the Court, could depose little against them: But the finding of the wench vpon the hay in her counterfeit fits: wher∣fore I leaue to trouble you with the particular declara∣tion of their Euidence against the Prisoners, In respect there was not any one witnes able to charge them with one direct matter of Withcraft; nor proue any thing for the murther of the childe. Herein, before we come to the particular declaration of that wicked and damnable practise of this Iesuite or Seminary. I shall commend vnto your examination and iudgement some points of her Euidence, wherein you
shal see what impossibilities are in this accusatiō brought to this perfection, by the great care and paines of this officious Doctor, Master Tompson or Southworth, who commonly worketh vpon the Feminine disposition, being more Passiue then Actiue. The particular points of the Euidence of GRACE SOVVERBVTTS, viz. Euidence. THat for the space of some yeares she hath been haunted and vexed with some women, who haue vsed to come to her. The Iesuite forgot to instruct his Scholler how long it is since she was tormented: it seemes it is long since he read the old Badge of a Lyer, Oportet mendacem esse me∣morem. He knowes not how long it is since they came to church, after which time they began to practise Witch∣craft. It is a likely thing the Torment and Panges of Witchcraft can be forgotten; and therefore no time can be set downe. Shee saith that now lately these foure women did violently draw her by the haire of the head, and lay her on the top of a Hay-mow. Heere they vse great violence to her, whome in ano∣ther place they make choise to be of their counsell, to go with them to the house of Walshman to murther the childe. This courtesie deserues no discouery of so foule a Fact.
Not long after, the said Iennet Bierley did meet this Examinate neere vnto the place where she dwelled, and first appeared in her owne likenesse, and after that in the likenesse of a blacke Dogge. Vno & eodem tempore, shee transformed her selfe into a Dogge. I would know by what meanes any Priest can maintaine this point of Euidence. And as shee went ouer a Style, shee picked her ouer, but had no hurt. This is as likely to be true as the rest, to throw a child downe from the toppe of a House, and neuer hurt her great toe. She rose againe; had no hurt, went to her Aunt, and returned backe againe to her Fathers house, being fetched home. I pray you obserue these contrarieties, in order as they are placed, to accuse the Prisoners. Saterday the fourth of this instant Aprill. Which was about the very day the Witches of the Forrest of Pendle were sent to Lancaster. Now was the time for the Seminarie to instruct, accuse, and call into question these poore women: for the wrinckles of an old wiues face is good euidence to the Iurie against a Witch. And how often will the common people say (Her eyes are sunke in her head, GOD blesse vs from her.) But old Chattox had Faencie, besides her withered face, to accuse her.
This Examinate did goe with the said Iennet Bier∣ley her Grand-mother, and Ellen Bierley her Aunt, to the house of Walshman, in the night∣time, to murther a Child in a strange manner. This of all the rest is impossible, to make her of their counsell, to doe murther, whome so cruelly and barba∣rously they pursue from day to day, and torment her. The Witches of the Forrest of Pendle were neuer so cruell nor barbarous. And she also saith, the Child cried not when it was hurt. All this time the Child was asleepe, or the Child was of an extraordinarie patience, ô inauditum facinus! After they had eaten, the said three women and this Examinate daunced euery one of them with one of the Blacke things: and after, the Blacke things a∣bused the said women. Here is good Euidence to take away their liues. This is more proper for the Legend of Lyes, then the Eui∣dence of a witnesse vpon Oath, before a reuerend and learned Iudge, able to conceiue this Villanie, and finde out the practise. Here is the Religious act of a Priest, but behold the euent of it. Shee describes the foure Blacke things to goe vpright, but not like Men in the face. The Seminarie mistakes the face for the feete. For Chattox and all her fellow Witches agree, the Deuill is clouen-footed: but Fancie had a very good face, and was a very proper Man.
About tenne dayes after her Examination taken at Black-borne, then she was tormented. Still he pursues his Proiect: for hearing his Scholler had done well, he laboured she might doe more in this nature. But notwithstanding, many things are layd to be in the times when they were Papists: yet the Priest neuer tooke paines to discouer them, nor instruct his Scholler, vntill they came to Church. Then all this was the Act of GOD, to raise a child to open all things, and then to discouer his plotted Tragedie. Yet in this great discouerie, the Seminarie forgot to deuise a Spirit for them. And for Thomas Walshman, vpon his Oath he sayth, That his Child had beene sicke by the space of a fort∣night, or three weekes, before it died. And Grace Sower∣butts saith, they tooke it out of the bedde, strucke a nayle into the Nauell, sucked bloud, layd it downe againe; and after, tooke it out of the Graue, with all the rest, as you haue heard. How these two agree, you may, vpon view of their Euidence, the better conceiue, and be able to judge. How well this proiect, to take away the liues of three innocent poore creatures by practise and villanie; to in∣duce a young Scholler to commit periurie, to accuse her owne Grand-mother, Aunt, &c agrees either with the Title of a Iesuite, or the dutie of a Religious Priest, who should rather professe Sinceritie and Innocencie, then practise Trecherie: But this was lawfull; for they are Heretikes accursed, to leaue the companie of Priests; to frequent Churches, heare the word of GOD preached, and professe Religion sincerely.
But by the course of Times and Accidents, wise men obserue, that very seldome hath any mischieuous at∣tempt beene vnder-taken without the direction or assi∣stance of a Iesuit, or Seminarie Priest. Who did not condemne these Women vpon this eui∣dence, and hold them guiltie of this so foule and horri∣ble murder? But Almightie God, who in his prouidence had prouided meanes for their deliuerance, although the Priest by the helpe of the Deuill, had prouided false witnesses to accuse them; yet GOD had prepared and placed in the Seate of Iustice, an vpright Iudge to sit in Iudgement vpon their liues, who after he had heard all the euidence at large against the Prisoners for the Kings Majestie, demanded of them what answere they could make. They humbly vpon their knees with weeping teares, desired him for Gods cause to examine Grace Sowerbuts, who set her on, or by whose meanes this ac∣cusation came against them. Immediately the countenance of this Grace Sowerbuts changed: The witnesses being behinde, began to quar∣rell and accuse one an other. In the end his Lordship examined the Girle, who could not for her life make a∣ny direct answere, but strangely amazed, told him, shee was put to a Master to learne, but he told her nothing of this. But here as his Lordships care and paines was great to discouer the practises of these odious Witches of the Forrest of Pendle, and other places, now vpon their tri∣all before him: So was he desirous to discouer this dam∣nable practise, to accuse these poore Women, and bring their liues in danger, and thereby to deliuer the inno∣cent.
And as he openly deliuered it vpon the Bench, in the hearing of this great Audience: That if a Priest or Iesuit had a hand in one end of it, there would appeare to bee knauerie, and practise in the other end of it. And that it might the better appeare to the whole World, exami∣ned Thomas Sowerbuts, what Master taught his daughter: in generall termes, he denyed all. The Wench had nothing to say, but her Master told her nothing of this. In the end, some that were present told his Lordship the truth, and the Prisoners informed him how shee went to learne with one Thompson a Se∣minarie Priest, who had instructed and taught her this accusation against them, because they were once obsti∣nate Papists, and now came to Church. Here is the dis∣couerie of this Priest, and of his whole practise. Still this fire encreased more and more, and one witnesse accu∣sing an other, all things were laid open at large. In the end his Lordship tooke away the Girle from her Father, and committed her to M. Leigh, a very reli∣gious Preacher, and M. Chisnal, two Iustices of the Peace, to be carefully examined. Who tooke great paines to examine her of euery particular point: In the end they came into the Court, and there deliuered this Examination as followeth. ∴
The Examination of GRACE SOWER∣BVTS, of Salmesburie, in the Countie of Lancaster, Spin∣ster: Taken vpon Wednesday the 19. of August 1612. Anno{que} Reg. Regis, IACOBI Angliae, Franciae, & Hi∣berniae, Fidei Defensoris, &c. decimo & Scotiae, xlvi. Before WILLIAM LEICH, and EDWARD CHISNAL, Esquires; two of his Maiesties Iustices of Peace in the same Countie: At the Assizes and generall Gaole deliuerie, hol∣den at Lancaster. By Direction of Sir EDWARD BROMLEY Knight, one of his Maiesties Iustices of Assize at Lancaster. BEing demanded whether the accusation shee laid vp∣pon her Grand-mother, Iennet Bierley, Ellen Bierley, and Iane Southworth, of Witchcraft, viz. of the killing of the child of Thomas Walshman, with a naile in the Nauell, the boyling, eating, and oyling, thereby to transforme themselues into diuers shapes, was true; shee doth vt∣terly denie the same; or that euer shee saw any such pra∣ctises done by them. Shee further saith, that one Master Thompson, which she taketh to be Master Christopher Southworth, to whom shee was sent to learne her prayers, did perswade, coun∣sell, and aduise her, to deale as formerly hath beene said against her said Grand-mother, Aunt, and Southworths wife.
And further shee confesseth and saith, that shee ne∣uer did know, or saw any Deuils, nor any other Visi∣ons, as formerly by her hath beene alleaged and infor∣med. Also shee confesseth and saith, That shee was not throwne or cast vpon the Henne-ruffe, and Hay-mow in the Barne, but that shee went vp vpon the Mow her selfe by the wall side. Being further demanded whether shee euer was at the Church, shee saith, shee was not, but pro∣mised her after to goe to the Church, and that very wil∣lingly. Signum, ✚ Grace Sowerbuts. William Leigh. Edward Chisnal.
The Examination of IENNET BIER∣LEY, ELLEN BIERLEY, and IANE SOVTH∣WORTH, of Salmesburie, in the Countie of Lancaster, Taken vpon Wednesday the nineteenth of August 1612. Anno{que} Reg. Regis, IACOBI Angliae, Franciae, & Hi∣berniae, Fidei Defensoris, &c. decimo & Scotiae, xlvi. Before WILLIAM LEIGH, and EDWARD CHISNAL, Esquires; two of his Maiesties Iustices of Peace in the same Countie: At the Assizes and generall Gaole deliuerie, hol∣den at Lancaster. By Direction of Sir EDWARD BROMLEY Knight, one of his Maiesties Iustices of Assize at Lancaster. IEnnet Bierley being demanded what shee knoweth, or hath heard, how Grace Sowerbuts was brought to Chri∣stopher Southworth, Priest; shee answereth, that shee was brought to M. Singletons house by her owne Mother, where the said Priest was, and that shee further heard her said Mother say, after her Daughter had been in her fit, that shee should be brought vnto her Master, mea∣ning the said Priest. And shee further saith, that shee thinketh it was by and through the Counsell of the said M. Thomson, alias Southworth, Priest, That Grace Sowerbuts her Grand∣child accused her of Witchcraft, and of such practises as shee is accused of: And thinketh further, the cause why the said Thompson, alias Southworth Priest, should practise with the Wench to doe it was for that shee went to the Church.
Iane Southworth saith shee saw Master Thompson, alias Southworth, the Priest, a month or sixe weekes before she was committed to the Gaole; and had conference with him in a place called Barne-hey-lane, where and when shee challenged him for slandering her to bee a Witch: wherunto he answered, that what he had heard thereof, he heard from her mother and her Aunt: yet she, this Examinate, thinketh in her heart it was by his procurement, and is moued so to thinke, for that shee would not be disswaded from the Church. Ellen Bierley saith, Shee saw Master Thompson, alias Southworth, sixe or eight weeks before she was commit∣ted, and thinketh the said Priest was the practiser with Grace Sowerbutts, to accuse her of Witchcraft, and know∣eth no cause why he should so doe, but because she go∣eth to the Church. Signum, ✚ Iennet Bierley. Signum, £ Iane Southworth. Signum, Θ Ellen Bierley. William Leigh. Edward Chisnall.
These Examinations being taken, they were brought into the Court, and there openly in the presence of this great Audience published, and declared to the Iurie of Life and Death; and thereupon the Gentlemen of their Iury required to consider of them. For although they stood vpon their Triall, for matter of Fact of Witch∣craft, Murther, and much more of the like nature: yet in respect all their Accusations did appeare to bee pra∣ctise: they were now to consider of them, and to acquit them. Thus were these poore Innocent creatures, by the great care and paines of this honorable Iudge, deli∣uered from the danger of this conspiracie; this bloudie practise of the Priest laid open: of whose fact I may law∣fully say; Etiam si ego tacuero clamabunt lapides. These are but ordinary with Priests and Iesuites: no respect of Bloud, kindred, or friendship, can moue them to forbeare their Conspiracies: for when he had labou∣red treacherously to seduce and conuert them, and yet could doe no good; then deuised he this meanes. God of his great mercie deliuer vs all from them and their damnable conspiracies: and when any of his Maiesties sub∣iects, so free and innocent as these, shall come in question grant them as honorable a Triall as Reuerend and worthy a Iudge to sit in Iudgement vpon them; and in the end as speedie a deliuerance. And for that which I haue heard of them; seene with my eyes, and taken paines to Reade of them: My humble prayer shall be to God Almightie. Vt Conuertan∣tur ne pereant. Aut consundantur ne noceant. To conclude, because the discourse of these three women of Salmesbury hath beene long and trouble∣some
to you; it is heere placed amongst the Witches, by special order and commandement, to set forth to the World the practise and conspiracie of this bloudy But∣cher. And because I haue presented to your view a Ka∣lender in the Frontispice of this Booke, of twen∣tie notorious Witches: I shall shew you their deliuerance in order, as they came to their Arraignement and Triall e∣uery day, and as the Gentle∣men of euery Iury for life and death stood charged with them.
THE ARRAIGNMENT and Triall of ANNE REDFERNE, Daughter of ANNE WHITTLE, alias CHATTOX, of the Forrest of Pendle, in the Countie of Lancaster, for Witchcraft; vpon Wednesday the nineteenth of August, at the Assises and Generall Gaole-deliuerie, holden at Lancaster, Before Sir EDVVARD BROMLEY Knight, one of his Ma∣iesties Iustices of Assise at Lancaster. Anne Redferne. SVch is the horror of Murther, and the cry∣ing sinne of Bloud, that it will neuer bee satisfied but with Bloud. So fell it out with this miserable creature, Anne Red∣ferne, the daughter of Anne Whittle, alias Chattox: who, as shee was her Mother, and brought her into the World, so was she the meanes to bring her into this danger, and in the end to her Execution, for much Bloud spilt, and many other mischiefes done. For vpon Tuesday night (although you heare little of her at the Arraignement and Triall of old Chattox, her Mother) yet was shee arraigned for the murther of
Robert Nutter, and others: and by the fauour and mer∣cifull consideration of the Iurie, the Euidence being not very pregnant against her, she was acquited, and found Not guiltie. Such was her condition and course of life, as had she liued, she would haue beene very dangerous: for in ma∣king pictures of Clay, she was more cunning then any: But the innocent bloud yet vnsatisfied, and crying out vnto GOD for satisfaction and reuenge; the crie of his people (to deliuer them from the danger of such horri∣ble and bloudie executioners, and from her wicked and damnable practises) hath now againe brought her to a second Triall, where you shall heare what wee haue vp∣on Record against her. This Anne Redferne, prisoner in the Castle at Lanca∣ster, being brought to the Barre, before the great Seat of Iustice, was there, according to the former order and course, indicted and arraigned, for that she felloniously had practised, exercised, and vsed her deuillish and wic∣ked Arts, called Witchcrafts, Inchauntments, Charmes, and Sorceries, in and vpon one Christopher Nutter, and him the said Christopher Nutter, by force of the same Witchcrafts, felloniously did kill and murther, Contra formam Sta∣tuti &c. Et Contra Pacem &c. Vpon her Arraignement to this Indictment, she plea∣ded Not-Guiltie; and for the triall of her life put her selfe vpon GOD and the Countrey. So as now the Gentlemen of the Iurie of Life and Death stand charged with her as with others. The Euidence against Anne Redferne, Prisoner at the Barre.
The Examination of ELIZABETH SOTHERNES, alias OLD DEMBDIKE, taken at the Fence, in the Forrest of Pendle, in the Countie of Lancaster, the second day of Aprill, Anno Reg. Regis IACOBI, Angliae, &c. decimo, & Scotiae xlv. Against ANNE REDFERNE (the daughter of ANNE WHIT∣TLE, alias CHATTOX) Prisoner at the Barre: Before ROGER NOVVEL of Reade, Esquire, one of his Maie∣sties Iustices of Peace within the said Countie. THis Examinate saith, That about halfe a yeare be∣fore Robert Nutter died, as this Examinate thinketh, this Examinate went to the house of Thomas Redferne, which was about Midsummer, as shee this Examinate now remembreth it: and there, within three yards of the East end of the said house, shee saw the said Anne Whittle and Anne Redferne, wife of the said Thomas Red∣ferne, and daughter of the said Anne Whittle, the one on the one side of a Ditch, and the other on the other side, and two pictures of Clay or Marle lying by them, and the third picture the said Anne Whittle was making. And the said Anne Redferne, her said daughter, wrought her Clay or Marle to make the third picture withall. And this Examinate passing by them, a Spirit, called Tibbe, in the shape of a blacke Cat, appeared vnto her this Exa∣minate▪ and said, Turne backe againe, and doe as they doe. To whom this Examinate said, What are they do∣ing?
Whereunto the said Spirit said, They are making three pictures: whereupon shee asked, whose pictures they were? whereunto the said Spirit said, They are the pictures of Christopher Nutter, Robert Nutter, and Mary, wife of the said Robert Nutter. But this Examinate deny∣ing to goe backe to helpe them to make the pictures a∣foresaid, the said Spirit seeming to be angrie therefore, shot or pushed this Examinate into the Ditch; and so shedde the milke which this Examinate had in a Kanne, or Kitt: and so thereupon the Spirit at that time vani∣shed out of this Examinates sight. But presently after that, the said Spirit appeared vnto this Examinate again in the shape of a Hare, and so went with her about a quarter of a myle, but said nothing vnto her this Exa∣minate, nor shee to it. The Examination of MARGARET CROOKE Against the said ANNE REDFERNE: Taken the day and yeare aforesaid, Before ROGER NOVVEL aforesaid, Esquire, one of his Ma∣iesties Iustices of the Peace in the Countie of Lancaster. THis Examinate, sworne & examined vpon her oath, sayth, That about eighteene or nineteene yeares a∣goe, this Examinates brother, called Robert Nutter, about Whitsontide the same yeare, meeting with the said Anne Redferne, vpon some speeches betweene them they fell
out, as this Examinats said brother told this Examinat: and within some weeke, or fort-night, then next after, this Examinats said brother fell sicke, and so languished vntill about Candlemas then next after, and then died. In which time of his sicknesse, he did a hundred times at the least say, That the said Anne Redferne and her as∣sociates had bewitched him to death. And this Exami∣nate further saith, That this Examinates Father, called Christopher Nutter, about Maudlintde next after fol∣lowing fell sicke, and so languished, vntill Michaelmas then next after, and then died: during which time of his sicknesse, hee did sundry times say, That hee was bewit∣ched; but named no bodie that should doe the same. The Examination of IOHN NVT∣TER, of Higham Booth, in the Forrest of Pendle, in the Countie of Lancaster, yeoman, Against the said ANNE REDFERNE: Taken the day and yeare aforesaid, Before ROGER NOVVEL Esquire, one of his Maiesties Iusti∣ces of Peace in the Countie of Lancaster. THis Examinate, sworne & examined vpon his oath, sayth, That in or about Christmas, some eighteene or nineteene yeares agoe, this Examinat comming from Burnley with Christopher Nutter and Robert Nutter, this Examinates Father and Brother, this Examinate heard
his said Brother then say vnto his said Father these words, or to this effect. Father, I am sure I am bewitched by the Chattox, Anne Chattox, and Anne Redferne her daughter, I pray you cause them to bee layed in Lancaster Castle: Whereunto this Examinates Father answe∣red, Thou art a foolish Ladde, it is not so, it is thy miscarriage. Then this Examinates Brother wee∣ping, said; nay, I am sure that I am bewitched by them, and if euer I come againe (for hee was readie to goe to Sir Richard Shuttleworths, then his Master) I will procure them to bee laid where they shall be glad to bite Lice in two with their teeth. Hereupon Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, her Mother, was brought forth to bee examined, who confessed the making of the pictures of Clay, and in the end cried out very heartily to God to forgiue her sinnes, and vpon her knees intreated for this Redferne, her daughter. Here was likewise many witnesses examined vpon oth Viua voce, who charged her with many strange pra∣ctises, and declared the death of the parties, all in such sort, and about the time in the Examinations formerly mentioned. All men that knew her affirmed, shee was more dan∣gerous then her Mother, for shee made all or most of the Pictures of Clay, that were made or found at any time. Wherefore I leaue her to make good vse of the lit∣tle time she hath to repent in: but no meanes could moue her to repentance, for as shee liued, so shee dyed.
The Examination of IAMES DEVICE, taken the day and yeare afore-said. Before ROGER NOWEL, and NICHOLAS BANNE∣STER, Esquires: two of his Maiesties Iustices of Peace within the said Countie of Lancaster. viz. THe said Examinate vpon his oath saith, That about two yeares agoe, hee this Examinate saw three Pi∣ctures of Clay, of halfe a yard long, at the end of Red∣fernes house, which Redferne had one of the Pictures in his hand, Marie his Daughter had another in her hand, and the said Redfernes wife,Anne Redferne the Witch. now prisoner at Lancaster, had an other Picture in her hand, which Picture she the said Redfernes wife, was then crumbling, but whose Pi∣ctures they were, this Examinate cannot tell. And at his returning back againe, some ten Roods off them there appeared vnto him this Examinate a thing like a Hare, which spit fire at him this Exami∣nate.
THE ARRAIGNMENT and Triall of ALICE NVTTER, of the Forrest of Pendle, in the Countie of Lancaster, for Witch-craft; vpon Wednesday the nineteenth of August, at the Assizes and generall Gaole deliuerie, holden at Lan∣caster. Before Sir EDWARD BROMLEY Knight, one of his Maiesties Iustices of Assize, at Lancaster. Alice Nutter. THe two degrees of persons which chiefly practise Witch-craft, are such, as are in great miserie and pouertie, for such the Deuil allures to follow him, by promising great riches, and worldly commoditie; Others, though rich, yet burne in a desperate desire of Reuenge; Hee allures them by promises, to get their turne satisfied to their hearts contentment, as in the whole proceedings against old Chattox: the examina∣tions of old Dembdike; and her children, there was not one of them, but haue declared the like, when the Deuill first assaulted them.
But to attempt this woman in that sort, the Diuel had small meanes: For it is certaine she was a rich woman; had a great estate, and children of good hope: in the common opinion of the world, of good temper, free from enuy or malice; yet whether by the meanes of the rest of the Witches, or some vnfortunate occasion, shee was drawne to fall to this wicked course of life, I know not: but hither shee is now come to receiue her Triall, both for Murder, and many other vilde and damnable practises. Great was the care and paines of his Lordship, to make triall of the Innocencie of this woman, as shall ap∣peare vnto you vpon the Examination of Iennet Deuice, in open Court, at the time of her Arraignement and Triall; by an extraordinary meanes of Triall, to marke her out from the rest. It is very certaine she was of the Grand-counsell at Malking-Tower vpon Good-Friday, and was there pre∣sent, which was a very great argument to condemne her. This Alice Nutter, Prisoner in the Castle at Lanca∣ster: Being brought to the Barre before the Great Seat of Iustice; was there according to the former order and course Indicted and Arraigned, for that she felloniously had practised, exercised, and vsed her diuellish and wic∣ked Arts, called Witchcrafts, Inchantments, Charmes and Sorceries, in and vpon Henry Mitton: and him the said Henry Mitton, by force of the same Witchcrafts, felloni∣ously did kill and murther. Contra formam Statuti, &c. Et Contra Pacem, &c. Vpon her Arraignement, to this Indictment shee pleaded not guiltie; and for the triall of her life, put
her selfe vpon God and the Countrey. So as now the Gentlemen of the Iury of life and death stand charged with her, as with others. The Euidence against Alice Nutter Pri∣soner at the Barre. The Examination of IAMES DEVICE sonne of ELIZABETH DEVICE: Taken the seuen and twentieth day of Aprill: Anno Reg. Regis IACOBI Angliae, Franciae, & Hiberniae, Fidei Defensor. &c. Decimo & Scotiae, xlvj. Before ROGER NOVVEL and NICHOLAS BANE∣STER, two of his Maiesties Iustices of Peace in the Coun∣tie of Lancaster. Against Alice Nutter. THe said Examinate saith vpon his oath, That hee heard his Grand-mother say, about a yeare ago, that his mother, called Elizabeth Deuice, and his Grand-mo∣ther, and the wife of Richard Nutter,Alice Nutter the Prisoner. of the Rough-Lee aforesaid, had killed one Henry Mitton, of the Rough-Lee aforesaid, by Witchcraft. The reason wherefore he was so killed, was for that this Examinats said Grand-mother had asked the said Mitton a penny: and hee de∣nying her thereof; thereupon shee procured his death as aforesaid.
The Examination of ELIZABETH DEVICE, mother of the said IAMES DEVICE. Against ALICE NVTTER, wife of RICHARD NVT∣TER, Prisoner at the Barre, vpon her Arraignement and Triall. Before ROGER NOVVEL and NICHOLAS BANE∣TER, Esquires, the day and yeare aforesaid. THis Examinate vpon her oath confesseth, and saith, That she, with the wife of Richard Nutter, called A∣lice Nutter, Prisoner at the Barre; and this Examinates said mother, Elizabeth Sotherne, alias Old Demdike; ioy∣ned altogether, and bewitched the said Henry Mitton to death. This Examinate further saith, That vpon Good-fri∣day last, there dined at this examinats house two women of Burneley Parish, whose names the said Richard Nut∣ters wife, Alice Nutter, now Prisoner at the Barre, doth know.
The Examination of IAMES DE∣VICE aforesaid, Against The said ALICE NVTTER, the day and yeare a∣foresaid. THe said Examinate vpon his oath saith, That vpon Good-Friday about twelue of the clocke in the day time, there dined in this Examinats said mothers house, a number of persons, whereof three were men, with this Examinate, and the rest women: and that they mette there for these three causes following, as this Examinats said mother told this Examinate. The first was for the naming of the Spirit, which A∣lizon Deuice, now Prisoner at Lancaster, had, but did not name him, because she was not there. The second cause was, for the deliuerie of his said Grand-mother; this Examinates said sister, Alizon; the said Anne Chattox, and her daughter Redferne; killing the Gaoler at Lancaster, and before the next Assizes to blow vp the Castle there; to the end that the foresaid Prisoners might by that meanes make an escape, and get away: all which this Examinate then heard them conferre of. And he also saith, The names of such Witches as were on Good-Friday at this Examinats said Grand mothers house, and now this Examinates owne mothers, for so many of them as he doth know, were amongst others, Alice Nutter, mother of Myles Nutter, now Prisoner at the Barre. And this Examinate further saith, That all the said Witches went out of the said house in their
owne shapes and likenesses; and they all, by that time they were forth of the doores, were gotten on horse-backe, like vnto Foales, some of one colour, and some of another; and Prestons wife was the last: and when shee got on horse-back, they all presently vanished out of this Examinates sight: and before their said parting away, they all appointed to meete at the said Prestons wifes house that day twelue month, at which time the said Prestons wife promised to make them a great feast: and if they had occasion to meete in the meane time, then should warning be giuen to meet vpō Romleys Moore. The Examination and Euidence of IENNET DEVICE, daughter of ELIZABETH DEVICE. Against ALICE NVTTER, Prisoner at the Barre. THe said Examinate saith, That on Good-Friday last, there was about 20. persons, whereof only two were men (to this Examinates remembrance) at her said Grand-mothers house at Malking-Tower, about twelue of the clock; all which persons, this Examinats said mo∣ther tould her, were Witches. And she further saith, she knoweth the names of six of them, viz. the wife of Hugh Hargreiues vnder Pendle, Christopher Howgate of Pendle, Vncle to this Examinat and Elizabeth his wife; and Dick Myles wife of the Rough-Lee, Christopher Iacks of Thor∣niholme, and his wife; and the names of the residue, she this Examinate doth not know.
AFter these Examinations were openly read, his Lordship being very suspitious of the accusation of this yong wench Iennet Deuice, commanded one to take her away into the vpper Hall, intending in the meane time to make Triall of her Euidence, and the Accusati∣on especially against this woman, who is charged to haue beene at Malking-Tower, at this great meeting. Master Couel was commanded to set all his Prisoners by them∣selues, and betwixt euery Witch another Prisoner, and some other strange women amongst them, so as no man could iudge the one from the other: and these being set in order before the Court from the prisoners, then was the Wench Iennet Deuice commaunded to be brought into the Court: and being set before my Lord, he tooke great paines to examine her of euery particular Point, What women were at Malking-Tower vpon Good-Friday? How she knew them? What were the names of any of them? And how she knew them to be such as she named? In the end being examined by my Lord, Whether she knew them that were there by their faces, if she saw them? she told my Lord she should: whereupon in the presence of this great Audience, in open Court, she went and tooke Alice Nutter, this prisoner, by the hand, and accused her to be one: and told her in what place shee sat at the Feast at Malking-Tower, at the great assembly of the Witches, and who sat next her: what conference they had, and all the rest of their proceedings at large, without any manner of contrarietie. Being demaunded further by his Lordship, Whether she knew Iohan a Style? she alledged, she knew no such womā to be there, neither did she euer heare her name.
This could be no forged or false Accusation, but the very Act of GOD to discouer her. Thus was no meanes left to doe her all indifferent fa∣uour, but it was vsed to saue her life; and to this shee could giue no answere. But nothing would serue: for old Dembdike, old Chat∣tox, and others, had charged her with innocent bloud, which cries out for Reuenge, and will be satisfied. And therefore Almightie GOD, in his Iustice, hath cut her off. And here I leaue her, vntill shee come to her Execu∣tion, where you shall heare shee died very impenitent; insomuch as her owne children were neuer able to moue her to confesse any particular offence, or de∣clare anything, euen in Articulo Mortis: which was a very fearefull thing to all that were present, who knew shee was guiltie.
THE ARRAIGNMENT and Triall of KATHERINE HEVVIT, Wife of IOHN HEVVIT, alias MOVLD-HEELES, of Coulne, in the Countie of Lancaster Clothier, for Witchcraft; vpon Wednesday the nineteenth of August, at the Assises and Generall Gaole-deliuerie, holden at Lancaster, Before Sir EDVVARD BROMLEY Knight, one of his Ma∣iesties Iustices of Assise at Lancaster. Katherine Hewit. WHo but Witches can be proofes, and so witnesses of the doings of Witches? since all their Meetings, Conspiracies, Practises, and Murthers, are the workes of Darke∣nesse: But to discouer this wicked Furie, GOD hath not onely raised meanes beyond expecta∣tion, by the voluntarie Confession and Accusation of all that are gone before, to accuse this Witch (be∣ing Witches, and thereby witnesses of her doings) but after they were committed, by meanes of a Child, to discouer her to be one, and a Principall in that wic∣ked assembly at Malking-Tower, to deuise such a dam∣nable course for the deliuerance of their friends at
Lancaster, as to kill the Gaoler, and blow vp the Castle, wherein the Deuill did but labour to assemble them to∣gether, and so being knowne to send them all one way: And herein I shall commend vnto your good conside∣ration the wonderfull meanes to condemne these par∣ties, that liued in the world, free from suspition of any such offences, as are proued against them: And thereby the more dangerous, that in the successe wee may law∣fully say, the very Finger of God did point thē out. And she that neuer saw them, but in that meeting, did accuse them, and by their faces discouer them. This Katherine Hewyt, Prisoner in the Castle at Lan∣caster, being brought to the Barre before the great Seate of Iustice, was there according to the former order and course Indicted and Arraigned, for that she felloniously had practized, exercised, and vsed her Deuillish and wic∣ked Arts, called Witch-crafts, Inchantments, Charmes, and Sorceries, in, and vpon Anne Foulds; and the same Anne Foulds, by force of the same witch-craft, felloniously did kill and murder. Contra formam Statuti, &c. Et contra Pacem dicti Domini Regis, &c. Vpon her Arraignement to this Indictment, shee pleaded not guiltie; And for the triall of her life put her selfe vpon God and her Countrie. So as now the Gentlemen of the Iurie of life and death, stand charged with her as with others. The Euidence against Katherine Hewyt, Prisoner at the Barre.
The Examination of IAMES DEVICE, Sonne of ELIZABETH DEVICE, taken the seuen and twentieth day of Aprill, Anno Reg. Regis IACOBI, An∣gliae, Franciae, & Hiberniae, decimo, & Scotiae quadra∣gesimo quarto. Before ROGER NOWEL, and NICHOLAS BANNE∣STER, Esquires; two of his Maiesties Iustices of Peace, in the Countie of Lancaster. Against KATHERINE HEWYT, alias MOVLD-HEELES of Colne. viz. THis Examinate saith, that vpon Good-Friday last, about twelue of the Clock in the day time, there di∣ned at this Examinates Mothers house a number of per∣sons: And hee also saith, that they were Witches; and that the names of the said Witches, that were there, for so many of them as he did know, were amongst others Katherine Hewyt, wife of Iohn Hewyt, alias Mould-heeles, of Colne, in the Countie of Lancaster Clothier; And that the said Witch, called Katherine Hewyt, alias Mould-heeles, and one Alice Gray, did confesse amongst the said Witches at their meeting at Malkin-Tower aforesaid, that they had killed Foulds wifes child, called Anne Foulds, of Colne: And also said, that they had then in hanck a child of Michael Hartleys of Colne. And this Examinate further saith, that all the said Witches went out of the said house in their own shapes and likenesses, and by that time they were gotten forth
of the doores, they were gotten on Horse-back like vn∣to foales, some of one colour, some of an other, and the said Prestons wife was the last: And when shee got on Horse-back, they all presently vanished out of this Exa∣minates sight. And before their said parting away they all appointed to meete at the said Prestons wifes house that day twelue Moneths: at which time the said Pre∣stons wife promised to make them a great feast, and if they had occasion to meete in the meane time, then should warning be giuen that they all should meet vpon Romlesmoore. The Examination and Euidence of ELIZABETH DEVICE, Mother of the said IAMES DEVICE, Against KATHERINE HEWYT, alias MOVLD-HEELES, Prisoner at the Barre vpon her Arraignement and Triall, taken the day and yeare aforesaid. viz. THis Examinate vpon her oath confesseth, that vpon Good-Friday last there dyned at this Examinates house, which she hath said are Witches, and verily thin∣keth to bee Witches, such as the said Iames Deuice hath formerly spoken of; amongst which was Katherine He∣wyt, alias Mould-heeles, now Prisoner at the Barre: and shee also saith, that at their meeting on Good-Friday at Malkin-Tower aforesaid, the said Katherine Hewyt, alias Mould-heeles, and Alice Gray, did confesse, they had kil∣led
a child of Foulds of Colne, called Anne Foulds, and had gotten hold of an other. And shee further saith, the said Katherine Hewyt with all the rest, there gaue her consent with the said Prestons wife for the murder of Master Lister. The Examination and Euidence of IENNET DEVICE, Against KATHERINE HEWYT, alias MOVLD-HEELES, Prisoner at the Barre. THe said Examinate saith, That vpon Good-Friday last, there was about twentie persons, where of two were men to this Examinates remembrance, at her said Grand-mothers house, called Malkin-Tower aforesaid, about twelue of the clock: All which persons this Exa∣minates said mother told her were Witches, and that shee knoweth the names of sixe of the said Witches. Then was the said Iennet Deuice commanded by his Lordship, to finde and point out the said Katherine He∣wyt, alias Mould-heeles, amongst all the rest of the said Women, whereupon shee went and tooke the said Ka∣therine Hewyt by the hand: Accused her to bee one, and told her in what place shee sate at the feast at Malkin-Tower, at the great Assembly of the Witches, and who sate next her; what conference they had, and all the rest of their proceedings at large, without any manner of contrarietie: Being demanded further by his Lord∣ship,
whether Ioane a Downe were at that Feast, and mee∣ting, or no? shee alleaged shee knew no such woman to be there, neither did shee euer heare her name. If this were not an Honorable meanes to trie the ac∣cusation against them, let all the World vpon due exa∣mination giue iudgement of it. And here I leaue her the last of this companie, to the Verdict of the Gentle∣men of the Iurie of life and death, as hereafter shall ap¦peare. Heere the Iurie of Life and Death, hauing spent the most part of the day, in due consideration of their of∣fences; Returned into the Court to deliuer vp their Ver∣dict against them, as followeth. The Ʋerdict of Life and Death. WHo vpon their Oathes found Iennet Bierley, Ellen Bierley, and Iane Southworth, not guiltie of the offence of Witch-craft▪ conteyned in the Indictment a∣gainst them. Anne Redferne, guiltie of the fellonie & murder, con∣teyned in the Indictment against her. Alice Nutter, guiltie of the fellonie and murder con∣teyned in the Indictment against her. And Katherine Hewyt, guiltie of the fellonie & murder con∣teyned in the Indictment against her.
Whereupon Master Couell was commanded by the Court to take away the Prisoners Conuicted, and to bring forth Iohn Bulcocke, Iane Bulcocke his mother, and Alizon Deuice, Prisoners in the Castle at Lancaster, to receiue their Trialls. Who were brought to their Arraignement and Tri∣all as hereafter followeth.
THE ARRAIGNMENT and Triall of IOHN BVLCOCK and IANE BVLCOCK his mother, wife of CI∣STOPHER BVLCOCK, of the Mosse-end, in the Coun∣tie of Lancaster, for Witch-craft: vpon Wednesday in the after-noone, the nineteenth of August, 1612. At the As∣sizes and generall Gaole deliuery, holden at Lancaster. Before Sir EDVVARD BROMLEY, Knight, one of his Ma∣iesties Iustices of Assizes at Lancaster. John Bulcock, and Jane Bulcock his mother. IF there were nothing to charge these Pri∣soners withall, whom now you may be∣hold vpon their Arraignement and Tri∣all but their poasting in haste to the great Assembly at Malking-Tower, there to aduise and consult amongst the Witches, what were to bee done to set at liberty the Witches in the Castle at Lancaster: Ioyne with Iennet Preston for the murder of Master Lister; and such like wicked & diuellish practises:
It were sufficient to accuse them for Witches, & to bring their liues to a lawfull Triall. But amongst all the Wit∣ches in this company, there is not a more fearefull and diuellish Act committed, and voluntarily confessed by any of them, comparable to this, vnder the degree of Murder▪ which impudently now (at the Barre hauing formerly confessed;) they forsweare, swearing they were neuer at the great assembly at Malking Tower; al∣though the very Witches that were present in that acti∣on with them, iustifie, maintaine, and sweare the same to be true against them: Crying out in very violent & out∣ragious manner, euen to the gallowes, where they died impenitent for any thing we know, because they died si∣lent in the particulars. These of all others were the most desperate wretches (void of all feare or grace) in all this Packe; Their offences not much inferiour to Murther: for which you shall heare what matter of Record wee haue against them; and whether they be worthie to con∣tinue, we leaue it to the good consideration of the Iury. The said Iohn Bulcock, and Iane Bulcock his mother, Pri∣soners in the Castle at Lancaster, being brought to the Barre before the great Seat of Iustice: were there accor∣ding to the former order and course Indicted and Ar∣raigned, for that they felloniously had practised, exerci∣sed and vsed their diuellish & wicked Arts, called Witch∣crafts, Inchantments, Charmes and Sorceries, in and vpon the body of Iennet Deane: so as the body of the said Ien∣net Deane, by force of the said Witchcrafts, wasted and consumed; and after she, the said Iennet, became madde. Contra formam Statuti, &c. Et Contra Pacem, &c. Vpon their Arraignement, to this Indictment they pleaded not guiltie; and for the triall of their liues put
themselues vpon God and their Countrey. So as now the Gentlemen of the Iurie of Life and Death stand charged with them as with others. The Euidence against Iohn Bulcock, and Iane Bulcock his mother, Prisoners at the Barre. The Examination of IAMES DEVICE taken the seuen and twentieth day of Aprill aforesaid. Before ROGER NOVVEL and NICHOLAS BANE∣STER, Esquires, two of his Maiesties Iustices of Peace in the Countie of Lancaster. Against IOHN BVLCOCK and IANE BVLCOCK his mo∣ther. THis Examinate saith, That vpon Good-Friday, a∣bout twelue of the clocke in the day time, there di∣ned in this Examinates said Mothers house a number of persons, whereof three were men with this Examinate and the rest women, and that they met there for these three causes following, as this Examinates said mother told this Examinate. The first was, for the naming of the Spirit which Allison Deuice, now prisoner at Lanca∣ster had, but did not name him, because shee was not there. The second cause was, for the deliuerie of his said Grand-mother; this Examinates said sister Allison; the said Anne Chattox, and her daughter Redferne, killing
the Gaoler at Lancaster, and before the next Assises to blow vp the Castle there, to that end the aforesaid priso∣ners might by that meanes make an escape, and get a∣way: All which this Examinate then heard them conferre of. And he also sayth, That the names of such said Wit∣ches as were on Good-Friday at this Examinates said Grand-mothers house, and now this Examinates owne mothers, for so many of them as hee did know, were these, viz. Iane Bulcock, wife of Christopher Bulcock, of the Mosse end, and Iohn her sonne amongst others, &c. And this Examinate further saith, That all the said Witches went out of the said house in their own shapes and likenesses: and they all, by that they were forth of the dores, were gotten on horse-backe, like vnto Foales, some of one colour, and some of another, and Prestons wife was the last: and when shee got on horse-backe, they all presently vanished out of this Examinates sight. And further he saith, That the said Iohn Bulcock and Iane his said Mother, did confesse vpon Good-Friday last, at the said Malking-Tower, in the hearing of this Examinate, That they had bewitched, at the new-field Edge in Yorkeshire, a woman called Iennet, wife of Iohn Deyne, besides, her Reason; and the said Womans name so bewitched, he did not heare them speake of▪ And this Examinate further saith, That at the said Feast at Malking-Tower this Examinate heard them all giue their consents to put the said Master Thomas Lister of Westby to death. And after Master Lister should be made away by Witch-craft, then all the said Witches gaue their consents to ioyne all together, to hanck Ma∣ster
Leonard Lister, when he should come to dwell at the Cow-gill, and so put him to death. The Examination of ELIZABETH DEVICE, Taken the day and yeare aforesaid, Before ROGER NOVVEL and NICHOLAS BANE∣STER, Esquires, two of his Maiesties Iustices of Peace in the Countie of Lancaster, Against IOHN BVLCOCK, and IANE BVLCOCK, his mother. THis Examinate saith vpon her oath, That she doth verily thinke, that the said Bulcockes wife doth know of some Witches to bee about Padyham and Burn∣ley. And shee further saith, That at the said meeting at Malking-Tower, as aforesaid, Katherine Hewit and Iohn Bulcock, with all the rest then there, gaue their consents, with the said Prestons wife, for the killing of the said Master Lister.
The Examination and Euidence of IENNET DEVICE Against IOHN BVLCOCKE and IANE his mother, prisoners at the Barre. THe said Examinate saith, That vpon Good-Friday last there was about twentie persons, whereof two were men, to this Examinates remembrance, at her said Grand-mothers house, called Malking-Tower afore∣said: all which persons, this Examinates said mother told her were Witches, and that she knoweth the names of sixe of the said Witches. Then was the said Iennet Deuice commaunded by his Lordship to finde and point out the said Iohn Bulcock and Iane Bulcock amongst all the rest: whereupon shee went and tooke Iane Bulcock by the hand, accused her to be one, and told her in what place shee sat at the Feast at Malking-Tower, at the great Assembly of the Wit∣ches; and who sat next her: and accused the said Iohn Bulcock to turne the Spitt there; what conference they had, and all the rest of their proceedings at large, with∣out any manner of contrarietie. Shee further told his Lordship, there was a woman that came out of Craven to that Great Feast at Mal∣king-Tower, but shee could not finde her out amongst all those women.
¶ The names of the Witches at the Great Assembly and Feast at Malking-Tower, viz. vpon Good-Friday last, 1612. Elizabeth Deuice. Alice Nutter. Katherine Hewit, alias Mould-heeles. John Bulcock. Jane Bulcock. Alice Graie. Jennet Hargraues. Elizabeth Hargraues. Christopher Howgate, Sonne to old Dembdike. Christopher Hargraues.
Grace Hay, of Padiham. Anne Crunckshey, of Marchden. Elizabeth Howgate. Jennet Preston, Executed at Yorke for the Murder of Master Lister. With many more, which being bound ouer to ap∣peare at the last Assizes, are since that time fled to saue themselues.
THE ARRAIGNMENT and Triall of ALIZON DEVICE, Daughter of ELIZABETH DEVICE, within the For∣rest of Pendle, in the Countie of Lancaster aforesaid, for Witch-craft. Alizon Deuice. BEhold, aboue all the rest, this lamentable spectacle of a poore distressed Pedler; how miserably hee was tormented, and what punishment hee endured for a small of∣fence, by the wicked and damnable pra∣ctise of this odious Witch, first instructed therein by old Dembdike her Grand-mother, of whose life and death with her good conditions, I haue written at large before in the beginning of this worke, out of her owne Exami∣nations and other Records, now remayning with the Clarke of the Crowne at Lancaster: And by her Mother brought vp in this detestable course of life; wherein I pray you obserue but the manner and course of it in or∣der, euen to the last period at her Execution, for this horrible fact, able to terrifie and astonish any man li∣uing. This Alizon Deuice, Prisoner in the Castle of Lanca∣ster,
being brought to the Barre before the great Seat of Iustice, was there according to the former order and course indicted and arraigned, for that shee felloniously had practised, exercised, and vsed her Deuillish and wic∣ked Arts, called Witch-crafs, Inchantments, Charmes, and Sorceries, in, and vpon one Iohn Law, a Petti-chapman, and him had lamed, so that his bodie wasted and con∣sumed, &c. Contra formam Statuti, &c. Et contra pacem dicti Domini Regis, Coronam & Dignitatem, &c. Vpon the Arraignement, The poore Pedler, by name Iohn Law, being in the Castle about the Moot-hall, atten∣ding to be called, not well able to goe or stand, being led thether by his poore sonne Abraham Law: My Lord Ger∣rard moued the Court to call the poore Pedler, who was there readie, and had attended all the Assizes, to giue e∣uidence for the Kings Majestie, against the said Alizon Deuice, Prisoner at the Barre, euen now vpon her Triall. The Prisoner being at the Barre, & now beholding the Pedler, deformed by her Witch-craft, and transformed beyond the course of Nature, appeared to giue euidence against her; hauing not yet pleaded to her Indictment, saw it was in vaine to denie it, or stand vpon her justifi∣cation: Shee humbly vpon her knees at the Barre with weeping teares, prayed the Court to heare her. Whereupon my Lord Bromley commanded shee should bee brought out from the Prisoners neare vnto the Court, and there on her knees, shee humbly asked forgiuenesse for her offence: And being required to make an open declaration or confession of her offence: Shee confessed as followeth. viz.
The Confession of ALIZON DE∣VICE, Prisoner at the Barre: published and declared at time of her Arraignement and Triall in open Court. SHe saith, That about two yeares agone, her Grand-mother, called Elizabeth Sothernes, alias Dembdike, did (sundry times in going or walking together, as they went begging) perswade and aduise this Examinate to let a Diuell or a Familiar appeare to her, and that shee, this Examinate would let him suck at some part of her; and she might haue and doe what shee would. And so not long after these perswasions, this Examinate being walking towards the Rough-Lee, in a Close of one Iohn Robinsons, there appeared vnto her a thing like vnto a Blacke Dogge: speaking vnto her, this Examinate, and desiring her to giue him her Soule, and he would giue her power to doe any thing she would: whereupon this Examinate being therewithall inticed, and setting her downe; the said Blacke-Dogge did with his mouth (as this Examinate then thought) sucke at her breast, a little below her Paps, which place did remaine blew halfe a yeare next after: which said Blacke-Dogge did not ap∣peare to this Examinate, vntill the eighteenth day of March last: at which time this Examinate met with a Pedler on the high-way, called Colne-field, neere vnto Colne: and this Examinate demanded of the said Ped∣ler to buy some pinnes of him; but the said Pedler stur∣dily answered this Examinate that he would not loose his Packe; and so this Examinate parting with him: pre∣sently there appeared to this Examinate the Blacke-Dogge, which appeared vnto her as before: which Black
Dogge spake vnto this Examinate in English, saying; What wouldst thou haue me to do vnto yonder man? to whom this Examinate said, What canst thou do at him? and the Dogge answered againe, I can lame him: where∣upon this Examinat answered, and said to the said Black Dogge, Lame him: and before the Pedler was gone for∣tic Roddes further, he fell downe Lame: and this Exa∣minate then went after the said Pedler; and in a house about the distance aforesaid, he was lying Lame: and so this Examinate went begging in Trawden Forrest that day, and came home at night: and about fiue daies next after, the said Black-Dogge did appeare to this Exami∣nate, as she was going a begging, in a Cloase neere the New-Church in Pendle, and spake againe to her, saying; Stay and speake with me; but this Examinate would not: Sithence which time this Examinat neuer saw him. Which agreeth verbatim with her owne Exami∣nation taken at Reade, in the Countie of Lancaster, the thirtieth day of March, be∣fore Master Nowel, when she was apprehen∣ded and taken. MY Lord Bromley, and all the whole Court not a little wondering, as they had good cause, at this liberall and voluntarie confession of the Witch; which is not ordinary with people of their condition and quali∣tie: and beholding also the poore distressed Pedler, stan∣ding by, commanded him vpon his oath to declare the manner how, and in what sort he was handled; how he came to be lame, and so to be deformed; who deposed vpon his oath, as followeth.
The Euidence of IOHN LAVV, Pettie Chapman, vpon his oath: Against ALIZON DEVICE, Prisoner at the Barre. HE deposeth and saith, That about the eighteenth of March last past, hee being a Pedler, went with his Packe of wares at his backe thorow Colne-field: where vnluckily he met with Alizon Deuice, now Prisoner at the Barre, who was very earnest with him for pinnes, but he would giue her none: whereupon she seemed to be very angry; and when hee was past her, hee fell downe lame in great extremitie; and afterwards by meanes got into an Ale-house in Colne, neere vnto the place where hee was first bewitched: and as hee lay there in great paine, not able to stirre either hand or foote; he saw a great Black-Dogge stand by him, with very fearefull fi∣rie eyes, great teeth, and a terrible countenance, looking him in the face; whereat he was very sore afraid: and immediately after came in the said Alizon Deuice, who staid not long there, but looked on him, and went away. After which time hee was tormented both day and night with the said Alizon Deuice; and so continued lame, not able to trauell or take paines euer since that time: which with weeping teares in great passion tur∣ned to the Prisoner; in the hearing of all the Court hee said to her, This thou knowest to be too true: and thereup∣on she humblie acknowledged the same, and cried out to God to forgiue her; and vpon her knees with wee∣ping teares, humbly prayed him to forgiue her that wic∣ked offence; which he very freely and voluntarily did.
Hereupon Master Nowel standing vp, humbly prayed the fauour of the Court, in respect this Fact of Witch∣craft was more eminent and apparant then the rest, that for the better satisfaction of the Audience, the Exami∣nation of Abraham Law might be read in Court. The Examination of ABRAHAM LAVV, of Hallifax, in the Countie of Yorke, Cloth-dier, taken vpon oath the thirtieth day of March, 1612. Before ROGER NOVVEL, Esquire, aforesaid. BEing sworne and examined, saith, That vpon Satur∣day last saue one, being the one and twentieth day of this instant March, he, this Examinate was sent for, by a letter that came from his father, that he should come to his father, Iohn Law, who then lay in Colne speechlesse, and had the left-side lamed all saue his eye: and when this Examinate came to his father, his said fa∣ther had something recouered his speech, and did com∣plaine that hee was pricked with Kniues, Elsons and Sickles and that the same hurt was done vnto him at Colne-field, presently after that Alizon Deuice had offe∣red to buy some pinnes of him, and she had no money to pay for them withall; but as this Examinates father told this Examinate, he gaue her some pinnes. And this Examinate further saith, That he heard his said father say▪ that the hurt he had in his lamenesse was done vnto him by the said Alizon Deuice, by Witchcraft. And this
Examinate further saith, that hee heard his said Father further say, that the said Alizon Deuice did lie vpon him and trouble him. And this Examinate seeing his said Father so tormented with the said Alizon and with one other olde woman, whome this Examinates Father did not know as it seemed: This Examinate made search after the said Alizon, and hauing found her, brought her to his said Father yesterday being the nine & twenteth of this instant March: whose said Father in the hearing of this Examinate and diuers others did charge the said Alizon to haue bewitched him, which the said Alizon confessing did aske this Examinates said Father for∣giuenesse vpon her knees for the same; whereupon this Examinaes Father accordingly did forgiue her. Which Examination in open Court vpon his oath hee iustified to be true. Whereupon it was there affirmed to the Court that this Iohn Law the Pedler, before his vnfortunate mee∣ting with this Witch, was a verie able sufficient stout man of Bodie, and a goodly man of Stature. But by this Deuilish art of Witch-craft his head is drawne awrie, his Eyes and face deformed, His speech not well to bee vnderstood; his Thighes and Legges starcke lame: his Armes lame especially the left side, his handes lame and turned out of their course, his Bodie able to indure no trauell: and thus remaineth at this present time. The Prisoner being examined by the Court whe∣ther shee could helpe the poore Pedler to his former strength and health▪ she answered she could not, and so did many of the rest of the Witches: But shee, with others, affirmed, That if old Dembdike had liued, shee could and would haue helped him out of that great mi∣serie,
which so long he hath endured for so small an of∣fence, as you haue heard. These things being thus openly published against her, and she knowing her selfe to be guiltie of euery particu∣lar, humbly acknowledged the Indictment against her to be true, and that she was guiltie of the offence there∣in contained, and that she had iustly deserued death for that and many other such like: whereupon she was car∣ried away, vntill she should come to the Barre to receiue her judgement of death. Oh, who was present at this lamentable spectacle, that was not moued with pitie to behold it! Hereupon my Lord Gerard, Sir Richard Houghton, and others, who much pitied the poore Pedler, At the en∣treatie of my Lord Bromley the Iudge, promised some present course should be taken for his reliefe and main∣tenance; being now discharged and sent away. But here I may not let her passe; for that I find some∣thing more vpon Record to charge her withall: for al∣though she were but a young Witch, of a yeares stan∣ding, and thereunto induced by Dembdike her Grand-mother, as you haue formerly heard, yet she was spot∣ted with innocent bloud among the rest: for in one part of the Examination of Iames Deuice, her brother, he de∣poseth as followeth, viz.
The Examination of IAMES DE∣VICE, brother to the said ALIZON DEVICE, Taken vpon Oath Before ROGER NOVVEL Esquire, aforesaid, the thirtieth day of March, 1612. IAmes Deuice, of the Forrest of Pendle, in the Countie of Lancaster, Labourer, sworne and examined, sayth, That about Saint Peters day last one Henry Bulcock came to the house of Elizabeth Sothernes, alias Dembdike, Grand-mother to this Examinate, and said, That the said Alizon Deuice had bewitched a Child of his, and de∣sired her, that shee would goe with him to his house: which accordingly shee did: and thereupon shee the said Alizon fell downe on her knees, and asked the said Bulcock forgiuenesse; and confessed to him▪ that she had bewitched the said Child, as this Examinate heard his said sister confesse vnto him this Examinate. And although shee were neuer indicted for this of∣fence, yet being matter vpon Record▪ I thought it con∣uenient to joyne it vnto her former Fact. HEre the Iurie of Life and Death hauing spent the most part of the day in due consideration of their offences, returned into the Court to deliuer vp their Verdict against them, as followeth.
The Ʋerdict of Life and Death. WHo vpon their Oathes found Iohn Bulcock and Iane Bulcock his mother, not guiltie of the Felo∣nie by Witch-craft, contained in the Indictment a∣gainst them. Alizon Deuice conuicted vpon her owne Con∣fession. Whereupon Master Couel was commaunded by the Court to take away the Prisoners conuicted, and to bring forth Margaret Pearson, and Isabell Robey, Pri∣soners in the Castle at Lancaster, to receiue their Triall. Who were brought to their Arraignement and Tri∣alls, as hereafter followeth, viz.
THE ARRAIGNMENT and Triall of MARGARET PEAR∣SON of Paddiham, in the Countie of Lancaster, for Witchcraft; the nineteenth of August 1612, at the Assises and Generall Gaole-deliuerie, holden at Lan∣caster, Before Sir EDVVARD BROMLEY Knight, one of his Ma∣iesties Iustices of Assise at Lancaster. Margaret Pearson. THus farre haue I proceeded in hope your patience will endure the end of this dis∣course, which craues time, and were bet∣ter not begunne at all, then not perfected. This Margaret Pearson was the wife of Edward Pearson of Paddiham, in the Countie of Lanca∣ster; little inferiour in her wicked and malicious course of life to any that hath gone before her: A very dange∣rous Witch of long continuance, generally suspected and feared in all parts of the Countrie, and of all good people neare her, and not without great cause: For who∣soeuer gaue her any iust occasion of offence, shee tor∣mented
with great miserie, or cut off their children, goods, or friends. This wicked and vngodly Witch reuenged her furie vpon goods, so that euery one neare her sustained great losse. I place her in the end of these notorious Witches, by reason her iudgement is of an other Nature, accor∣ding to her offence; yet had not the fauour and mercie of the Iurie beene more then her desert, you had found her next to old Dembdike; for this is the third time shee is come to receiue her Triall; one time for murder by Witch-craft; an other time for bewitching a Neigh∣bour; now for goods. How long shee hath beene a Witch, the Deuill and shee knowes best. The Accusations, Depositions, and particular Exa∣minations vpon Record against her are infinite, and were able to fill a large Volume; But since shee is now only to receiue her Triall for this last offence. I shall proceede against her in order, and set forth what matter we haue vpon Record, to charge her withall. This Margaret Pearson, Prisoner in the Castle at Lan∣caster: Being brought to the Barre before the great Seat of Iustice; was there according to the course and order of the Law Indicted and Arraigned, for that shee had practised, exercised, and vsed her diuellish and wic∣ked Arts, called Witchcrafts, Inchantments, Charmes and Sorceries, and one Horse or Mare of the goods and Chat∣tels of one Dodgeson of Padiham, in the Countie of Lan∣caster, wickedly, maliciously, and voluntarily did kill. Contra formam Statuti, &c. Et contra Pacem dicti Domini Regis. &c.
Vpon her Arraignement to this Indictment, shee pleaded not guiltie; And for the triall of her life put her selfe vpon God and her Countrie. So as now the Gentlemen of the Iurie of her offence and death, stand charged with her as with others. The Euidence against Margaret Pearson, Prisoner at the Barre. The Examination and Euidence of ANNE WHITTLE, alias CHATTOX. Against MARGARET PEARSON, Prisoner at the Barre. THe said Anne Chattox being examined saith, That the wife of one Pearson of Paddiham, is a very euill Woman, and confessed to this Examinate, that shee is a Witch, and hath a Spirit which came to her the first time in likenesse of a Man, and clouen footed, and that shee the said Pearsons wife hath done very much harme to one Dodgesons goods, who came in at a loope-hole in∣to the said Dodgesons Stable, and shee and her Spirit to∣gether did sit vpon his Horse or Mare, vntill the said Horse or Mare died. And likewise, that shee the said Pearsons wife did confesse vnto her this Examinate, that shee bewitched vnto death one Childers wife, and her Daughter, and that shee the said Pearsons wife is as ill as shee.
The Examination of IENNET BOOTH, of Paddiham, in the Countie of Lancaster, the ninth day of August 1612. Before NICHOLAS BANNESTER, Esquire; one of his Maiesties Iustices of Peace in the Countie of Lancaster. IEnnet, the wife of Iames Booth, of Paddiham, vpon her oath saith, That the Friday next after, the said Pear∣sons wife, was committed to the Gaole at Lancaster, this Examinate was carding in the said Pearsons house, hauing a little child with her, and willed the said Mar∣gerie to giue her a little Milke, to make her said child a little meat, who fetcht this Examinate some, and put it in a pan; this examinat meaning to set it on the fire, found the said fire very ill, and taking vp a stick that lay by her, and brake it in three or foure peeces, and laid vpon the coales to kindle the same, then set the pan and milke on the fire: and when the milke was boild to this Exami∣nates content, she tooke the pan wherein the milke was, off the said fire, and with all, vnder the bottome of the same, there came a Toade, or a thing very like a Toade, and to this Examinates thinking came out of the fire, together with the said Pan, and vnder the bottome of the same, and that the said Margerie did carrie the said Toade out of the said house in a paire of tonges; But what shee the said Margerie did therewith, this Exami∣nate knoweth not. After this were diuers witnesses examined against her in open Court, viua voce, to proue the death of the Mare,
and diuers other vild and odious practises by her com∣mitted, who vpon their Examinations made it so appa∣rant to the Iurie as there was no question▪ But because the fact is of no great importance, in respect her life is not in question by this Indictment, and the Depositions and examinations are many, I leaue to trouble you with any more of them, for being found guiltie of this of∣fence, the penaltie of the Law is as much as her good▪ Neighbours doe require, which is to be deli∣uered from the companie of such a dangerous, wicked, and mali∣cious Witch. ∴
THE ARRAIGNMENT and Triall of ISABEL ROBEY in the Countie of Lancaster, for Witch-craft: vpon Wednesday the nineteenth of August, 1612. At the Assizes and generall Gaole-deliuery, holden at Lancaster. Before Sir EDVVARD BROMLEY, Knight, one of his Ma∣iesties Iustices of Assizes at Lancaster. Isabel Robey. THus at one time may you behold Wit∣ches of all sorts from many places in this Countie of Lancaster which now may lawfully bee said to abound asmuch in Witches of diuers kindes as Seminaries, Iesuites, and Papists. Here then is the last that came to act her part in this lamentable and wofull Tragedie, wherein in his Maiestie hath lost somany Subjects, Mo∣thers their Children, Fathers their Friends, and Kins∣folkes the like whereof of hath not beene set forth in any age. What hath the Kings Maiestie written and publi∣shed in his Daemonologie, by way of premonition and preuention, which hath not here by the first or last
beene executed, put in practise or discouered? What Witches haue euer vpon their Arraignement and Trial made such open liberall and voluntarie declarations of their liues, and such confessions of their offences: The manner of their attempts and their bloudie practises, their meetings, consultations and what not? There∣fore I shall now conclude with this Isabel Robey who is now come to her triall. This Isabel Robey Prisoner in the Castle at Lancaster being brought to the Barre before the great Seat of Iu∣stice was there according to the former order and course Indicted and Arraigned, for that shee Felloniously had practised, exercised and vsed her Deuilish and wic∣ked Artes called Witchcrafts, Inchantmnnts, Charmes and Sorceries. Vpon her Arraignment to this Indictment she plea∣ded not guiltie, and for the triall of her life, put her selfe vpon God and her Countrie. So as now the Gentlemen of the Iurie of life and death stand charged with her as with others. The Euidence against Isabel Robey Prisoner at the Barre.
The Examination of PETER CHAD∣DOCK of Windle, in the Countie of Lancaster: Taken at Windle aforesaid, the 12. day of Iuly 1612. Anno Reg. Regis IACOBI, Angliae, &c. decimo▪ & Scotiae xlv. Before Sir THOMAS GERRARD Knight, and Barronet. One of his Maiesties Iustices of the Peace within the said Countie. THe said Examinate vpon his Oath saith, That be∣fore his Marriage hee heard say that the said Isabel Robey was not pleased that hee should marrie his now wife: whereupon this Examinate called the said Isabel Witch, and said that hee did not care for her. Then within two dayes next after this Examinate was sore pained in his bones: And this Examinate hauing occasi∣on to meete Master Iohn Hawarden at Peaseley Crosse, wished one Thomas Lyon to goe thither with him, which they both did so; but as they came home-wards, they both were in euill case. But within a short time af∣ter, this Examinate and the said Thomas Lyon were both very well amended. And this Examinate further saith, that about foure yeares last past, his now wife was angrie with the said Isabel, shee then being in his house, and his said Wife thereupon went out of the house, and presently after that the said Isabel went likewise out of the house not well pleased, as this Examinate then did thinke, and pre∣sently after vpon the same day, this Examinate with his said wife working in the Hay, a paine and a starknesse fell into the necke of this Examinat which grieued him very
whereupon this Examinate sent to one Iames a Glouer, which then dwelt in Windle, and desired him to pray for him, and within foure or fiue dayes next after this Examinate did mend very well. Neuerthelesse this Examinate during the same time was very sore pained, and so thirstie withall, and hot within his body, that hee would haue giuen any thing hee had, to haue slaked his thirst, hauing drinke enough in the house, and yet could not drinke vntill the time that the said Iames the Glouer came to him, and this Examinate then said before the said Glouer, I would to God that I could drinke, where upon the said Glouer said to this Examinate, take that drinke, and in the name of the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost, drinke it, saying; The Deuill and Witches are not able to preuaile against GOD and his Word, whereupon this Examinate then tooke the glasse of drinke, and did drinke it all, and afterwards mended ve∣ry well, and so did continue in good health, vntill our Ladie day in Lent was twelue moneth or thereabouts, since which time this Examinate saith, that hee hath beene sore pained with great warch in his bones, and all his limmes, and so yet continueth, and this Examinate further saith, that his said warch and paine came to him rather by meanes of the said Isabel Robey, then other∣wise, as he verily thinketh.
The Examination of IANE WILKIN∣SON, Wife of FRANCIS WILKINSON, of Windle a∣foresaid: Taken before the said Sir THOMAS GER∣RARD, Knight and Barronet, the day and place aforesaid. Against the said ISABEL ROBEY. THe said Examinate vpon her oath saith, that vpon a time the said Isabel Robey asked her milke, and shee denied to giue her any: And afterwards shee met the said Isabel, whereupon this Examinate waxed afraid of her, and was then presently sick, and so pained that shee could not stand, and the next day after this Examinate going to Warrington, was suddenly pinched on her Thigh as shee thought, with foure fingers & a Thumbe twice together, and thereupon was sicke, in so much as shee could not get home but on horse-backe, yet soone after shee did mend. The Examination of MARGARET LYON wife of THOMAS LYON the yonger, of Windle aforesaid: Taken before the said Sir THOMAS GERRARD, Knight and Barronet, the day and place a∣foresaid. Against the said ISABEL ROBEY. THe said Margaret Lyon vpon her Oath saith, that vpon a time Isabel Robey came into her house and said that Peter Chaddock should neuer mend vntill he had asked her forgiuenesse; and that shee knew hee would neuer doe: whereupon this Examinate said, how doe
you know that, for he is a true Christian, and hee would aske all the world forgiuenesse? then the said Isabel said, that is all one, for hee will neuer aske me forgiuenesse, therefore hee shall neuer mend; And this Examinate further saith, that shee being in the house of the said Pe∣ter▪ Chaddock, the wife of the said Peter, who is God-Daughter of the said Isabel, and hath in times past vsed her companie much, did affirme, that the said Peter was now satisfied, that the said Isabel Robey was no Witch, by sending to one Halseworths, which they call a wise∣man, and the wife of the said Peter then said, to abide vpon it, I thinke that my Husband will neuer mend vntill hee haue asked her forgiuenesse, choose him whether hee will bee angrie or pleased, for this is my opinion: to which he answered, when he did need to aske her forgiuenesse, he would, but hee thought hee did not need, for any thing hee knew: and yet this Examinate further saith, That the said Peter Chaddock had very often told her, that he was very afraid that the said Isabel had done him much hurt; and that he being fearefull to meete her, he hath turned backe at such time as he did meet her alone, which the said Isabel hath since then affirmed to be true, saying, that hee the said Peter did turne againe when he met her in the Lane.
The Examination of MARGARET PARRE wife of HVGH PARRE of Windle aforesaid. Taken before the said Sir THOMAS GERARD Knight and Baronet, the day and place aforesaid. Against the said ISABEL ROBEY. THE said Examinate vpon her oath saith, that vpon a time, the said Isabel Robey came to her house, and this Examinate asked her how Peter Chaddock did, And the said Isabel answered shee knew not, for shee went not to see, and then this Examinate asked her how Iane Wilkinson did, for that she had beene lately sicke and suspected to haue beene bewitched: then the said Isabel said twice together, I haue bewitched her too: and then this Examinate said that shee trusted shee could blesse her selfe from all Witches and defied them; and then the said Isabel said twice together, would you defie me? & afterwards the said Isabel went away not well pleased. Here the Gentlemen of the last Iurie of Life and Death hauing taken great paines, the time being farre spent, and the number of the Prisoners great, returned into the Court to deliuer vp their Verdict against them as followeth. viz. The Ʋerdict of Life and Death. WHo vpon their Oathes found the said Isabel Ro∣bey guiltie of the Fellonie by Witch-craft, con∣tained
in the Indictment against her. And Margaret Pearson guiltie of the offence by Witch-craft, contained in the Indictment against her. Whereupon Master Couell was commaunded by the Court in the afternoone to bring forth all the Prisoners that stood Conuicted, to receiue their Iudgment of Life and Death. For his Lordship now intended to proceed to a finall dispatch of the Pleas of the Crowne. And heere endeth the Arraignement and Triall of the Witches at Lan∣caster. THus at the length haue we brought to perfection this intended Discouery of Witches, with the Ar∣raignement and Triall of euery one of them in order, by the helpe of Almightie God, and this Reuerend Iudge; the Lanterne from whom I haue receiued light to direct me in this course to the end. And as in the be∣ginning, I presented vnto their view a Kalender contai∣ning the names of all the witches: So now, I shall pre∣sent vnto you in the conclusion and end, such as stand conuicted, and come to the Barre to receiue the iudge∣ment of the Law for their offences, and the proceedings of the Court against such as were acquitted, and found not guiltie: with the religious Exhortation of this Ho∣norable Iudge, as eminent in gifts and graces as in place and preeminence, which I may lawfully affirme with∣out base flattery (the canker of all honest and worthie minds) drew the eyes and reuerend respect of all that great Audience present, to heare their Iudgement, and the end of these proceedings.
The Prisoners being brought to the Barre. THe Court commanded three solemne Proclamati∣ons for silence, vntill Iudgement for Life and Death were giuen. Whereupon I presented to his Lordship the names of the Prisoners in order, which were now to receiue their Iudgement. {inverted ⁂}
¶ The names of the Prisoners at the Barre to receiue their Judgement of Life and Death. Anne Whittle, alias Chattox. Elizabeth Deuice. James Deuice. Anne Redferne. Alice Nutter. Katherine Hewet. John Bulcock. Jane Bulcock. Alizon Deuice. Isabel Robey.
THE IVDGEMENT OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir EDVVARD BROMLEY, Knight, one of his Maiesties Iustices of Assize at Lan∣caster vpon the Witches conuicted, as followeth. THere is no man aliue more vnwilling to pro∣nounce this wofull and heauy Iudgement a∣gainst you, then my selfe: and if it were possi∣ble, I would to God this cup might passe from me. But since it is otherwise prouided, that af∣ter all proceedings of the Law, there must be a Iudgement; and the Execution of that Iudgement must succeed and fol∣low in due time: I pray you haue patience to receiue that which the Law doth lay vpon you. You of all people haue the least cause to complaine: since in the Triall of your liues there hath beene great care and paines taken, and much time spent: and very few or none of you, but stand conuicted vpon your owne voluntarie confessions and Examinations, Ex ore proprio: Few Witnesses examined against you, but such as were pre∣sent, and parties in your Assemblies. Nay I may further affirme, What persons of your nature and condition, euer were Arraigned and Tried with more solemnitie, had more libertie giuen to pleade or answere to euerie particular point of Euidence against you? In conclusion such hath beene the
generall care of all, that had to deale with you, that you haue neither cause to be offended in the proceedings of the Iustices, that first tooke paines in these businesses, nor with the Court that hath had great care to giue nothing in euidence against you, but matter of fact; Sufficient matter vpon Record, and not to induce, or leade the Iurie to finde any one of you guiltie vpon mâtter of suspition or presumption, nor with the wit∣nesses who haue beene tried, as it were in the fire: Nay, you cannot denie but must confesse what extraordinarie meanes hath beene vsed to make triall of their euidence, and to discouer the least intended practice in any one of them, to touch your liues vniustly. As you stand simply (your offences and bloudie practises not considered) your fall would rather moue compassion, then exasperate any man. For whom would not the ruine of so many poore creatures at one time, touch, as in apparance simple, and of little vnderstanding? But the bloud of those innocent children, and others his Maiesties Subiects, whom cruelly and barbarously you haue murdered, and cut off, with all the rest of your offences, hath cryed out vnto the Lord against you, and sollicited for satisfa∣ction and reuenge, and that hath brought this heauie iudge∣ment vpon you at this time. It is therefore now time no longer wilfully to striue, both against the prouidence of God, and the Iustice of the Land: the more you labour to acquit your selues, the more euident and apparant you make your offences to the World. And vn∣possible it is that they shall either prosper or continue in this World, or receiue reward in the next, that are stained with so much innocent bloud. The worst then I wish to you, standing at the Barre con∣uicted, to receiue your Iudgement, is, Remorse, and true Re∣pentance,
for the safegard of your Soules, and after▪ an hum∣ble, penitent, and heartie acknowledgement of your grie∣uous sinnes and offences committed both against GOD and Man. First, yeeld humble and heartie thankes to Almightie GOD for taking hold of you in your beginning, and making stay of your intended bloudie practises (although GOD knowes there is too much done alreadie) which would in time haue cast so great a weight of Iudgement vpon your Soules. Then praise GOD that it pleased him not to surprize or strike you suddenly, euen in the execution of your bloudie Murthers, and in the middest of your wicked practises, but hath giuen you time, and takes you away by a iudiciall course and triall of the Law. Last of all, craue pardon of the World, and especially of all such as you haue iustly offended, either by tormenting them∣selues, children, or friends, murder of their kinsfolks, or losse of any their goods. And for leauing to future times the president of so many barbarous and bloudie murders, with such meetings, practises, consultations, and meanes to execute reuenge, being the grea∣test part of your comfort in all your actions, which may instruct others to hold the like course, or fall in the like sort: It only remaines I pronounce the Iudgement of the Court against you by the Kings authoritie, which is; You shall all goe from hence to the Castle, from whence you came; from thence you shall bee carried to the place of Execu∣tion for this Countie: where your bodies shall bee han∣ged vntill you be dead; And GOD HAVE MERCIE VPON YOVR SOVLES: For your comfort in this world I shall commend a learned and worthie Preacher
to instruct you, and prepare you for an other World: All I can doe for you is to pray for your Repentance in this World, for the satisfaction of many; And forgiue∣nesse in the next world, for sauing of your Soules. And God graunt you may make good vse of the time you haue in this World, to his glorie and your owne com∣fort. Margaret Pearson. THe Iudgement of the Court against you, is, You shall stand vpon the Pillarie in open Market, at Cli∣theroe, Paddiham, Whalley, and Lancaster, foure Market dayes, with a Paper vpon your head, in great Letters, declaring your offence, and there you shall confesse your offence, and after to remaine in Prison for one yeare without Baile, and after to be bound with good Suerties, to be of the good behauiour.
To the Prisoners found not guiltie by the IVRIES. Elizabeth Astley. John Ramsden. Alice Gray. Isabel Sidegraues. Lawrence Hay. TO you that are found not guiltie, and are by the Law to bee acquited, presume no further of your Innocencie then you haue iust cause: for although it pleased God out of his Mercie, to spare you at this time, yet without question there are amongst you, that are as deepe in this Action, as any of them that are condemned to die for their offences: The time is now for you to forsake the Deuill: Remember how, and in what sort hee hath dealt with all of you: make good vse of this great mercie and fa∣uour: and pray vnto God you fall not againe: For great is your happinesse to haue time in this World, to prepare your selues against the day when you shall appeare before the Great Iudge of all. Notwithstanding, the iudgement of the Court, is, You shall all enter Recognizances with good sufficient Suer∣ties, to appeare at the next Assizes at Lancaster, and in the meane time to be of the good behauiour. All I can say to you:
Jennet Bierley, Ellen Bierley, Jane Southworth, is, That GOD hath deliuered you beyond expectation, I pray GOD you may vse this mercie and fauour well; and take heed you fall not hereafter: And so the Court doth order you shall be deliuered. What more can bee written or published of the pro∣ceedings of this honorable Court: but to conclude with the Execution of the Witches, who were executed the next day following at the common place of Execution, neare vnto Lancaster. Yet in the end giue mee leaue to intreate some fauour that haue beene afraid to speake vntill my worke were finished. If I haue omitted any thing materiall, or published any thing imperfect, ex∣cuse me for that I haue done: It was a worke imposed vpon me by the Iudges in respect I was so wel instructed in euery particular. In hast I haue vndertaken to finish it in a busie Tearme amongst my other imploiments. My charge was to publish the proceedings of Iustice, and matter of Fact, wherein I wanted libertie to write what I would, and am limited to set forth nothing a∣gainst them, but matter vpon Record, euen in their owne Countrie tearmes, which may seeme strange. And this I hope will giue good satisfaction to such as vnder∣stand how to iudge of a businesse of this nature. Such as haue no other imploiment but to question other mens Actions, I leaue them to censure what they please, It is no part of my profession to publish any thing in
print, neither can I paint in extraordinarie tearmes. But if this discouerie may serue for your instruction, I shall thinke my selfe very happie in this Seruice, and so leaue it to your generall censure. Da ueniam Ignoto non displicuisse meretur, Festinat studijs qui placuisse tibi.
THE ARRAIGNEMENT AND TRIALL OF IENNET PRESTON, OF GISBORNE IN CRAVEN, in the Countie of Yorke. At the Assises and Generall Gaole▪ Deliuerie holden at the Castle of Yorke in the Countie of Yorke, the xxvij. day of Iuly last past, Anno Regni Regis IACOBI Angliae, &c. Decimo, & Scotiae quadragesimo quinto. Before Sir IAMES ALTHAM Knight, one of the Barons of his Maiesties Court of Exchequer; and Sir EDVVARD BROMLEY Knight, another of the Barons of his Maiesties Court of Exchequer; his Maiesties Iustices of Assise, Oyer and Terminer, and generall Gaole-Deliuerie, in the Circuit of the North-parts. LONDON, Printed by W. STANSBY for IOHN BARNES, and are to be sold at his Shoppe neere Hol∣borne Conduit, 1612.
THE ARRAIGNMENT and Triall of IENNET PRES∣TON of Gisborne in Crauen, in the Countie of Yorke, at the Assises and Generall Gaole-deliuerie, holden at the Castle of Yorke, in the Countie of Yorke, the seuen and twentieth day of Iuly last past. Anno Regni Regis Ia∣cobi Angliae &c. Decimo & Scotiae xlvj. Jennet Preston. MANY haue vndertaken to write great discourses of Witches and many more dispute and speake of them. And it were not much if as many wrote of them as could write at al, to set forth to the world the particular Rites and Secrets of their vnlawfull Artes, with their in∣finite and wonderfull practises which many men little feare till they seaze vpon them. As by this late won∣derfull discouerie of Witches in the Countie of Lanca∣ster may appeare, wherein I find such apparant matter to satisfie the World, how dangerous and malitious a
Witch this Iennet Preston was, How vnfit to liue, ha∣uing once so great mercie extended to her: And againe to reuiue her practises, and returne to her former course of life, that I thinke it necessarie not to let the memo∣rie of her life and death die with her; But to place her next to her fellowes and to set forth the Arraignement Triall and Conuiction of her, with her offences for which she was condemned and executed. And a though shee died for her offence before the rest, I yet can afford her no better place then in the end of this Booke in respect the proceedings was in an other Countie; You that were husband to this Iennet Preston; her friends and kinsfolkes, who haue not beene sparing to deuise so scandalous a slander out of the malice of your hearts, as that shee was maliciously prosecuted by Master Lister and others; Her life vniustly taken away by practise; and that (euen at the Gallowes where shee died impenitent and void of all feare or grace) she died an Innocent woman, because she would confesse no∣thing: You I say may not hold it strange, though at this time, being not only moued in conscience, but di∣rected, for example sake, with that which I haue to re∣port of her, I suffer you not to wander any further; but with this short discourse oppose your idle conceipts a∣ble to seduce others: And by Charmes of Imputations and slander, laid vpon the Iustice of the Land, to cleare her that was iustly condemned and executed for her of∣fence; That this Iennet Preston was for many yeares well thought of and esteemed by Master Lister who afterwardes died for it Had free accesse to his house, kind respect and entertainment; nothing denied her she
stood in need of. Which of you that dwelleth neare them in Crauen but can and will witnesse it? which might haue incouraged a Woman of any good condi∣tion to haue runne a better course. The fauour and goodnesse of this Gentleman Ma∣ster Lister now liuing, at his first entrance after the death of his Father extended towards her, and the reliefe she had at all times, with many other fauours that succee∣ded from time to time, are so palpable and euident to all men as no man can denie them. These were suffici∣ent motiues to haue perswaded her from the murder of so good a friend. But such was her execrable Ingratitude, as euen this grace and goodnesse was the cause of his miserable and vntimely death. And euen in the beginning of his greatest fauours extended to her, began shee to worke this mischiefe, according to the course of all Witches. This Iennet Preston, whose Arraignment and Triall, with the particular Euidence against her I am now to set forth vnto you, one that liued at Gisborne in Crauen, in the Countie of Yorke, neare Master Lister of West∣bie, against whom she practised much mischiefe; for ha∣uing cut off Thomas Lister Esquire, father to this gentle∣man now liuing, shee reuenged her selfe vpon his sonne: who in short time receiued great losse in his goods and cattell by her meanes. These things in time did beget suspition, and at the Assizes and Generall Gaole deliuerie holden at the Ca∣stle of Yorke in Lent last past, before my Lord Bromley, shee was Indicted and Arraigned for the murder of a Child of one Dodg-sonnes, but by the fauour and merci∣full consideration of the Iurie thereof acquited.
But this fauour and mercie was no sooner extended towardes her, and shee set at libertie, But shee began to practise the vtter ruine and ouerthrow of the name and bloud of this Gentleman. And the better to execute her mischiefe and wicked intent, within foure dayes after her deliuerance out of the Castle at Yorke, went to the great Assembly of Witches at Malking-Tower vpon Good-friday last: to pray aide and helpe, for the murder of Master Lister, in respect he had prosecuted against her at the same Assi∣zes. Which it pleased God in his mercie to discouer, and in the end, howsoeuer he had blinded her, as he did the King of Aegypt and his Instruments, for the brighter euidence of his own powerfull glory; Yet by a Iudiciall course and triall of the Law, cut her off, and so deliue∣red his people from the danger of her Deuilish and wic∣ked practises: which you shall heare against her, at her Arraignement and Triall, which I shall now set forth to you in order as it was performed, with the wonder∣full signes and tokens of GOD, to satisfie the Iurie to finde her guiltie of this bloudie murther, committed foure yeares since.
Indictment. THis Iennet Preston being Prisoner in the Castle at Yorke, and indicted, for that shee felloniously had practised, vsed, and exercised diuerse wicked and deuil∣lish Arts, called Witchcrafts, Inchauntments, Charmes, and Sorceries, in and vpon one Thomas Lister of Westby in Crauen, in the Countie of Yorke Esquire, and by force of the same Witchcraft felloniously the said Tho∣mas Lister had killed, Contra Pacem &c. beeing at the Barre, was arraigned. To this Indictment vpon her Arraignement, shee pleaded not guiltie, and for the Triall of her life put her selfe vpon GOD and her Countrey. Whereupon my Lord Altham commaunded Master Sheriffe of the Countie of Yorke, in open Court to re∣turne a Iurie of sufficient Gentlemen of vnderstanding, to passe betweene our Soueraigne Lord the Kings Ma∣jestie and her, and others the Prisoners, vpon their liues and deaths; who were afterwards sworne, according to the forme and order of the Court, the prisoner being admitted to her lawfull challenge. Which being done, and the Prisoner at the Barre to receiue her Tryall, Master Heyber, one of his Maiesties Iustices of Peace in the same County, hauing taken great paines in the proceedings against her; and being best in∣structed of any man of all the particular points of Eui∣dence against her, humbly prayed, the witnesses hereaf∣ter following might be examined against her, and the se∣uerall Examinations, taken before Master Nowel, and cer∣tified, might openly bee published against her; which hereafter follow in order, viz.
The Euidence for the Kings Maiestie Against IENNET PRESTON, Prisoner at the Barre. HEreupon were diuerse Examinations taken and read openly against her, to induce and satisfie the Gentlemen of the Iurie of Life and Death, to finde she was a Witch; and many other circumstances for the death of M. Lister. In the end Anne Robinson and others were both examined, who vpon their Oathes declared against her, That M. Lister lying in great extremitie, vpon his death-bedde, cried out vnto them that stood about him; that Iennet Preston was in the house, looke where shee is, take hold of her: for Gods sake shut the doores, and take her, shee cannot escape away. Looke about for her, and lay hold on her, for shee is in the house: and so cryed very often in his great paines, to them that came to visit him during his sicknesse. Anne Robinson, and Thomas Lister Being examined further, they both gaue this in eui∣dence against her, That when Master Lister lay vpon his death-bedde, hee cryed out in great extremitie; Iennet Preston lyes heauie vpon me, Prestons wife lyes heauie vpon me; helpe me, helpe me: and so departed, crying out against her.
These, with many other witnesses, were further exa∣mined, and deposed, That Iennet Preston, the Prisoner at the Barre, being brought to M. Lister after hee was dead, & layd out to be wound vp in his winding-sheet, the said Iennet Preston comming to touch the dead corpes, they bled fresh bloud presently, in the presence of all that were there present: Which hath euer beene held a great argument to induce a Iurie to hold him guiltie that shall be accused of Murther, and hath sel∣dome, or neuer, fayled in the Tryall. But these were not alone: for this wicked and bloud-thirstie Witch was no sooner deliuered at the Assises holden at Yorke in Lent last past, being indicted, arraig∣ned, and by the fauor and mercie of the Iurie found not guiltie, for the murther of a Child by Witch-craft: but vpon the Friday following, beeing Good-Friday, shee rode in hast to the great meeting at Malking-Tower, and there prayed aide for the murther of M. Thomas Lister: as at large shall appeare, by the seuerall Exami∣nations hereafter following; sent to these Assises from Master Nowel and other his Majesties Iustices of Peace in the Countie of Lancaster, to be giuen in euidence a∣gainst her, vpon her Triall, viz.
The Examination and Euidence of IAMES DEVICE, of the Forrest of Pendle, in the Coun∣tie of Lancaster, Labourer, taken at the house of IAMES WILSEY, of the Forrest of Pendle in the Countie of Lancaster, the seuen and twentieth day of Aprill, Anno Reg. Regis IACOBI Angliae, &c. Decimo ac Scotiae quadragesimo quinto. Before ROGER NOVVEL, and NICHOLAS BANE∣STER, Esquires, two of his Maiesties Iustices of the Peace within the Countie of Lancaster, viz. THis Examinate saith, That vpon Good-Friday last about twelue of the clocke in the day-time, there dined in this Examinates said mothers house a number of persons, whereof three were men, with this Exami∣nate, and the rest women: and that they met there for these three causes following (as this Examinates said mother told this Examinate): First was for the naming of the Spirit, which Alizon Deuice, now Prisoner at Lancaster, had, but did not name him, because shee was not there. The second cause was for the deliuery of his said Grand-mother, this Examinates said sister Alizon, the said Anne Chattox, and her daughter Red∣ferne: Killing the Gaoler at Lancaster; and before the next Assizes to blow vp the Castle there; to that end the aforesaid Prisoners might by that meanes make an escape and get away. All which this Examinate then heard them conferre of. And the third cause was, for that there was a woman dwelling in Gisburne Parish, who came into this Examinates said Grand-mothers
house, who there came, and craued assistance of the rest of them that were then there, for the killing of Master Lister of Westby: because, as she then said, he had borne malice vnto her, and had thought to haue put her away at the last Assizes at Yorke; but could not. And then this Examinat heard the said woman say, that her power was not strong enough to doe it her selfe, being now lesse then before-time it had beene. And he also further saith, That the said Prestons wife had a Spirit with her like vnto a white Foale, with a blacke-spot in the forehead. And further, this Examinat saith, That since the said meeting, as aforesaid, this Exa∣minate hath beene brought to the wife of one Preston in Gisburne Parish aforesaid, by Henry Hargreiues of Gold∣shey to see whether shee was the woman that came a∣mongst the said Witches, on the said last Good-Friday, to craue their aide and assistance for the killing of the said Master Lister: and hauing had full view of her; hee this Examinate confesseth, That she was the selfe-same woman which came amongst the said Witches on the said last Good-Friday, for their aide for the killing of the said Master Lister; and that brought the Spirit with her, in the shape of a White Foale, as aforesaid. And this Examinate further saith, That all the said Witches went out of the said house in their owne shapes and likenesses, and they all, by that they were forth of the doores, were gotten on horse-backe like vn∣to Foales, some of one colour, some of another, and Prestons wife was the last; and when she got on horse∣backe, they all presently vanished out of this Examinats sight: and before their said parting away, they all ap∣pointed to meete at the said Prestons wifes house that
day twelue-month; at which time the said Prestons wife promised to make them a great feast; and if they had oc∣casion to meet in the meane time, then should warning bee giuen that they all should meete vpon Romles-Moore. And this Examinate further saith, That at the said feast at Malking-Tower, this Examinat heard them all giue their consents to put the said Master Thomas Li∣ster of Westby to death: and after Master Lister should be made away by Witchcraft, then al the said Witches gaue their consents to ioyne altogether to hancke Ma∣ster Leonard Lister, when he should come to dwell at the Sowgill, and so put him to death. The Examination of HENRIE HAR∣GREIVES of Goldshey-booth, in the Forrest of Pendle, in the Countie of Lancaster Yeoman, taken the fifth day of May, Anno Reg. Regis IACOBI Angliae, &c. Decimo, ac Scociae quadragesimo quinto. Before ROGER NOVVEL, NICHOLAS BANNESTER, and ROBERT HOLDEN, Esquires; three of his Maiesties Iustices of Peace within the said Countie. THis Examinat vpon his oath saith, That Anne Whit∣tle, alias Chattox, confessed vnto him, that she know∣eth one Prestons wife neere Gisburne, and that the said Prestons wife should haue beene at the said feast, vpon the said Good-Friday, and that shee was an ill woman, and had done Master Lister of Westby great hurt.
The Examination of ELIZABETH DEVICE, mother of IAMES DEVICE, taken before ROGER NOVVELL and NICHOLAS BANESTER, Esquires, the day and yeare aforesaid, viz. THe said Elizabeth Deuice vpon her Examination con∣fesseth. That vpon Good-Friday last, there dined at this Examinats house, which she hath said are Witches, and doth verily thinke them to be Witches; and their names are those whom Iames Deuice hath formerly spo∣ken of to be there. She also confesseth in all things touching the killing of Master Lister of Westby, as the said Iames Deuice hath before confessed. And the said Elizabeth Deuice also further saith, That at the said meeting at Malking-Tower, as aforesaid, the said Katherine Hewyt and Iohn Bulcock, with all the rest then there, gaue their consents, with the said Prestons wife, for the killing of the said Master Lister. And for the killing of the said Master Leonard Lister, she this Ex∣aminate saith in all things, as the said Iames Deuice hath before confessed in his Examination.
The Examination of IENNET DE∣VICE, daughter of ELIZABETH late wife of IOHN DEVICE, of the Forrest of Pendle, in the Countie of Lan∣caster, about the age of nine yeares or thereabouts, taken the day and yeare aboue-said: Before ROGER NOVVEL and NICHOLAS BANE∣STER, Esquires, two of his Maiesties Iustices of Peace in the Countie of Lancaster. THe said Examinate vpon her Examination saith, that vpon Good-friday last there was about twenty persons, whereof only two were men, to this Examinats remembrance, at her said Grand▪mothers house, called Malking-Tower aforesaid, about twelue of the clocke: all which persons, this Examinates said mother told her were Witches, and that she know∣eth the names of diuers of the said Witches.
AFter all these Examinations, Confessions, and Euidence, deliuered in open Court against her, His Lordship commanded the Iurie to ob∣serue the particular circumstances; first, Master Lister in his great extremitie, to complaine hee saw her, and requested them that were by him to lay hold on her. After he cried out shee lay heauie vpon him, euen at the time of his death. But the Conclusion is of more consequence then all the rest, that Iennet Preston being brought to the dead corps, they bled freshly, And after her deliuerance in Lent, it is proued shee rode vpon a white Foale, and was present in the great assembly at Malkin Tower with the Witches, to intreat and pray for aide of them, to kill Master Lister, now liuing, for that he had prosequuted against her. And against these people you may not expect such direct euidence, since all their workes are the workes of darkenesse, no witnesses are present to accuse them, therefore I pray God direct your consciences. After the Gentlemen of the Iurie of Life and Death had spent the most part of the day, in consideration of the euidence against her, they returned into the Court and deliuered vp their Verdict of Life and Death. ∴
The Ʋerdict of Life and Death. WHo found Iennet Preston guiltie of the fellonie and murder by Witch-craft of Thomas Lister, Esquire; conteyned in the Indictment against her, &c. Afterwards, according to the course and order of the Lawes, his Lordship pronounced Iudgement against her to bee hanged for her offence. And so the Court a∣rose. HEre was the wonderfull discouerie of this Ien∣net Preston, who for so many yeares had liued at Gisborne in Crauen, neare Master Lister: one thing more I shall adde to all these par∣ticular Examinations, and euidence of witnesses, which I saw, and was present in the Court at Lancaster, when it was done at the Assizes holden in August following. My Lord Bromley being very suspicious of the accu∣sation of Iennet Deuice, the little Wench, commanded her to looke vpon the Prisoners that were present, and declare which of them were present at Malkin Tower, at the great assembly of Witches vpon Good-Friday last: shee looked vpon and tooke many by the handes, and accused them to be there, and when shee had accu∣sed all that were there present, shee told his Lordship there was a Woman that came out of Crauen that was
amongst the Witches at that Feast, but shee saw her not amongst the Prisoners at the Barre. What a singular note was this of a Child, amongst many to misse her, that before that time was hanged for her offence, which shee would neuer confesse or declare at her death? here was present old Preston her husband, who then cried out and went away: being fully satisfied his wife had Iustice, and was worthie of death. To conclude then this present discourse, I heartilie desire you, my louing Friends and Countrie-men, for whose particular instructions this is added to the former of the wonderfull discouerie of Witches in the Countie of Lancaster: And for whose particular satisfaction this is published; Awake in time, and suffer not your selues to be thus assaulted. Consider how barbarously this Gentleman hath been dealt withall; and especially you that hereafter shall passe vpon any Iuries of Life and Death, let not your conniuence, or rather foolish pittie, spare such as these, to exequute farther mischiefe. Remember that shee was no sooner set at libertie, but shee plotted the ruine and ouerthrow of this Gentle∣man, and his whole Familie. Expect not, as this reuerend and learned Iudge saith, such apparent proofe against them, as against others, since all their workes, are the workes of darkenesse: and vnlesse it please Almightie God to raise witnesses to ac∣cuse them, who is able to condemne them? Forget not the bloud that cries out vnto God for re∣uenge, bring it not vpon your owne heads. Neither doe I vrge this any farther, then with this, that I would alwaies intreat you to remember, that it is
as great a crime (as Salomon sayth, Prov. 17) to con∣demne the innocent, as to let the guiltie escape free. Looke not vpon things strangely alledged, but iudici∣ously consider what is justly proued against them. And that as well all you that were witnesses, present at the Arraignement and Triall of her, as all other stran∣gers, to whome this Discourse shall come, may take ex∣ample by this Gentleman to prosecute these hellish Furies to their end: labor to root them out of the Com∣monwealth, for the common good of your Countrey. The greatest mercie extended to them, is soone for∣gotten. GOD graunt vs the long and prosperous continu∣ance of these Honorable and Reuerend Iudges, vnder whose Gouernment we liue in these North parts: for we may say, that GOD Almightie hath singled them out, and set them on his Seat, for the defence of Iu∣stice. And for this great deliuerance, let vs all pray to GOD Almightie, that the memorie of these worthie Iudges may bee blessed to all Poste∣rities. FINIS.
