20832A 99839205 3607
Mephibosheths HEARTS-IOY Vpon his SOVERAIGNES SAFETIE. To be imitated by the Sub∣jects of this Land vpon the hap∣py Returne of our Prince CHARLES. Deliuered in a Sermon in the Church of Great Yarmouth in Norfolke, the 19. day of October. 1623. By THO: REEVE Preacher of Gods Word there. LONDON Printed by Aug: Math: for Robert Milbourne and are to be sold at his Shop at the great South doore of Saint Paules. 1624.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL THOMAS THOMSON and LEONARD HOAMES Bailiffes of Great Yarmouth. AND TO THE ALDER∣men and the rest of the Com∣mons, of that worthy INCORPO∣RATION.
MEPHIBOSETH'S Hearts-Ioy vpon his So∣ueraignes Safetie. Text. 2 SAM. 19.30. Yea let him take all, seeing my Lord the King is come home in Peace. OH how ioyfull was the safetie of Israels Worthy! Dauids danger being great, his deli∣uery gracious, En quanta ex∣ultatio, quanta congratulatio! Behold how great exultation, how great congratulation was there for it! His Subiects come to behold him like the Dar∣ling of Heauen, the Delight of the Earth; for where the Finger of God had wrought so won∣derfull a Preseruation, oh how are the peoples hearts set on fire to come and admire it! their feete are like Hindes feet to set forward vnto
it, and their eyes are like the Lions, but halfe-sleeping, till they haue enioyed a sight of it. What is our King past this perill? Is Dauid that was giuen ouer for dead yet aliue? Cur in Tentorijs? Why stay we still in our Tents? Let vs out, and salute him, that so wee may make the world to ring with our Ioy, and the Skye to resound with our gladsome melody, singing in songs, and warbling foorth with the lowdest, loftiest streynes. En Gaudium Cordium Oculis Reuisum! En Gloriam Israelis, Gloria spirantem! En Regem A Rege Regum Protectum! Behold the Ioy of our Hearts re∣turned to the sight of our Eyes! Behold the Glory of Israel breathing yet in Glory! Be∣hold our King by the King of Kings prote∣cted! For this end yee may see the GRAN∣DIES, Peeres, and all sorts of People issuing foorth, Vt Apes▪ Praesepibus, like a swarme of Bees out of their Hiues, to see and solemnize so miraculous and memorable an accident. Israel spurring on one another why they should be soVerse 10 slow;Verse 15 Iudah comming downe to Gil∣gall to meet the King and conduct him ouer Ior∣dan. Nay not so much but that dead Dogge Shimei that before had rayled and reuiled vp∣on Dauid and cast stonesVerse 16 hasted, and came downe; yea and as if he had thought it vnfiting to come alone, he gathers vp the people of the Countrey, and appeares Magna stipante caterua
With a great traine at his heeles, for hee brought aVerse 17 Thousand men of Beniamin with him. And is heere all? No, Zibah seruant of the House of Saul is there with no small reti∣new, but hath hisVerse 17 fifteene Sonnes, and twenty seruants with him: Nay, behold a man ready to goe dwell with the Wormes, creeping forth to see this sight, one that was capularis senex, a man as mellow for the Graue, as the Summer Apple for the Pomary, which for very pure Age had neitherVerse 3 taste of his meate, and drinke, nor could heare the voyce of Singing men and Sing∣ing women, yet he cannot keepe in; forVerse  Bar∣zillai the Gileadite came downe from Rogelim, and went ouer Jordan with the King, to conduct him ouer Iordan. Oh gratious DELIVE∣RANCE magnificently selebrated! Oh HAPPY FAVOVR of GOD ac∣companied with WORTHY OBSER∣VANCE from men! Oh but amongst all these loyall Subiects full of such ardent expres∣sions of Ioy. Ʋbi MEPHIBOSHETH filius Jonathae? Where is MEPHIBO∣SHETH the Sonne of Ionathan? What doth he not remember the ancient loue and strict couenant that was betweene his Father Iona∣than and Dauid?2 Sam 17. Ionathan loued Dauid as his owne Soule, and a vowe was made that there should be firme loue1 Sam 42. betweene them and their seed for euer, and when Jonathan was dead Da∣uid wept and mourned for him,2 Sam 26. Woe is me for
thee my brother Ionathan: very kinde hast thou been to me, thy loue to mee was wonderfull, passing the loue of women. How are the mighty ouer∣throwne, and the weapons of Warre destroyed? Now then, Ʋbi MEPHIBOSHETH filius Jonathae? Where is MEPHIBOSHETH the Sonne of Jonathan?Prouerb. Thy Fathers friend shalt thou not forsake, saith Salomon. But what are all sparkes of olde loue extinct? Are all kind∣ly affections perished? Are there no remnants of the former amitie and vnitie? Ʋbi ME∣PHIBOSHETH filius Ionathae? Where is MEPHIBOSHETH the Sonne of Jona∣than? Quid cogitas? Quid moliris? What plots, and deuises hast thou in thy head? What art thou casting about for the Kingdome? So Zi∣bah indeed inform that MEPHIBOSHETH stayed at Ierusalem, hoping that the2 Sam. 3. House of Israel would restore to him the Kingdome of his Father: but they were but in blandae menda∣cia linguae, the whisperings of a false tongue. Zibah played the Foxe-part; for MEPHI∣BOS: was an honest man, and here is found in the middst of this Chapter full of the com∣mendablest devoyre, as the Sonne is in the middst of the Planets full of Radiant splendor: Now because MEPHIBOSHETH is the party vpon whom I must fixe my chiefe dis∣course; Let vs make his Description in this Chapter as the entrance to the rest, as Salo∣mons Temple had a Beautifull Gate before the going in.
Three things are remarkeable in him. First, His mournefull behauiour till the  Kings returne; forVerse 24▪ He had neither washed his feet, nor dressed his beard, nor washed his cloathes, from the time that the King departed vntill hee re∣turned in peace. Oh rare spectacle of prime fi∣delitie! What is he else but a MIRROVR of a True-hearted Subiect? How could a man expresse more passionate respect vnto his Prince? Secondly, His innocencie from the least  taint of that calumny, and reproach, that was craftily and maliciously cast vpon him by Zi∣bah; For, he stay at Ierusalem for the reuolu∣tion of the Scepter vnto Sauls stock in his per∣son? No, Absit, Farre be it from him, his innocent heart neuer harboured such a wretch∣ed thought. There was laid to his charge a thing that he knew not; for he counted him∣selfe bound for euer to Dauid for his life, and meanes, that out of mercie hee had vouchsafed vnto him: ForVerse 2 All my Fathers house were but dead men before my Lord the King, yet didst thou set thy Seruant among them, that did eate at thine owne Table. Siccine igitur rependam? What therefore for such gracious fauours shall I re∣turne such blacke requitall? No, if it please the King to vnderstand the truth, there was one went betweene me and home, that Sycophant Zibah dealt perfidiously, and fraudulently with me, for I spake to him (being my seruant) to
saddle mine Asse that I might at the first haue gone with thee,Verse 26 and drunke of the same cuppe, but he went and tooke the beast for himselfe, and left mee at home, through lamenesse, not being able to follow; and thus what with his presents, and glozing speeches hath hee raysed vp an euill report against me; But, oh King, thou hast wisdome enough to see his subdo∣lousnesse, my vprightnesse; to thee therefore doe I referre it,Verse 27 My Lord the King is as an Angell of God, doe therefore thy pleasure. Thus MEPHIBOSHETH assoyle and acquit him selfe from the imputation of that bitter slan∣der, shewing that he stayed not at Ierusalem to stirre vp sedition, nor vpon this occasion of Dauids troubles to worke his owne endes, and aduantages, but was constrayned there to re∣maine, and all the while of the Kings absence continued a peaceable and well-wishing Sub∣iect. Thirdly, His generous answere vpon Da∣uids too too moderate satisfaction; for be∣fore vpon Zibahs smooth tale Dauid had giuen away all MEPHIBOSHTHS Lands to Zi∣bah, Sam. 16 Behold, thine are all that pertained to MEPHIBOSHETH. But now perceiuing MEPHIBOSHETH to be guiltlesse hee thought it vnmeet, vnreasonable, but that some restitution should be made him, therefore ad∣iudge hee,erse 29 Thou and Zibah deuide the Lands: Now though Zibah deserued rather to haue
bene diuided in pieces, then to haue any diui∣sion of the Lands; yet, doth MEPHIBO∣SHETH carry himselfe discontentedly? No, Non frendet, non labrum mordet; He shewes no token of dislike, for see his notable demeanour, nay, heare his resolute and Laudable answere. It is not my goods, saith he, that I care for, but the Kings life, and therefore (that I may ap∣peare to be what I plead for, a well affectionate subiect) My Lord the King being come home in Peace, I am so ouerioyed with it, that I respect no wordly wealth, and that I may manifest it, I submit my selfe to thy determination, that Zibah should haue halfe my meanes, nay, that he should possesse the whole portion. Yea (saith good MEPHIBOSHETH) Let him take all, seeing my Lord the King is come home in Peace. This Alablaster Boxe of MEPHIBO∣SHETHS matchlesse answere doe I pur∣pose to open amongst you, and to powre out the precious Spiknard in the same, that the whole house may bee filled with the sauour of it, and all of vs incited to some semblable ioy∣fulnesse vpon the happy returne of our Illustri∣ous Prince. In the words there are two parts. A wonderfull transporting. A cause of weight importing.
1 The wonderfull transporting, Yea let him take All. 2 The cause of weight importing, Seeing my Lord the King is come home in Peace. First, for the wonderfull Transporting, Yea let him take All. This Transporting seemes to be wonderfull for three respects, of The Person Him, Yea let him The Proffer Take, Yea let him take The Portion All, Yea, &c. First, for the transporting as it seeme won∣derfull in respect of the Person. Him. Let him, Zibah. Had it beene some ancient friend, or entire approued acquaintance, it had beene lesse maruellous, but Let Him. What the trea∣cherousest Miscreant that euer MEPHIBO∣SHETH had against him? He that had bru∣sed his heele, empeached his credit, that dead flye that had made the sweet oyntment of his fame to stincke? That faithlesse wretch who being one of his owne Houshold, had layd a wound vndr his side? What Let him? Yes, Let Him, saith MEPHIBOSHETH: Obserue.Oh, what see we here but a heart offended, relenting, and inclining to peace? Was hee euer grieued against Zibah? Were it so, yet Nescit odisse, he knowes not how to hate: as Dauid will keepe his eyes from looking vpon
vanity; so Mephibosheth his heart from mu∣zing vpon vengeance: He will poure coales of fire vpon his Enemies head for, Let Him. How choise and conspicuous is this Paterne? How many amongst vs can thus hide reproofes in our bosomes? and when our cheekes are nipped, our faces smitten, long furrowes made vpon our backes, not feele the smart of the same? No, it was a true speech ofLaert. lib. 5. cap. 1. Aristotle who being demanded, what was the first, and what was the last thing that waxed olde, an∣swered, Gratia & Jniuria: a good turne first, a bab turne last: because of kindnesses we are so soone forgetfull, but of vnkindnesse, valdè tenaces such long remembrancers.Prou. 19.11. The glory of a man is to passe by an offence, but this glory is esteemed of many the greatest ignominy: for, what forget an indignitie, bury a gree∣uance, oh this were a Dastardly thing indeede? no, wreacke our teene, feede our eyes with the ruine of our Aduersaries, this is manly, this is glorious: — scribunt in marmore laesi. The dust is no fit Register for wrongs, but they write them in Tables of Marble, and til they see due repaiment there is no true con∣tent; an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, we are rather Esaus then Mephibosheths: As it is reported ofHerod. lib. 5. Darius that hauing recei∣ued an abuse from the Athenians, he shot vp an arrow into Heauen, and fell into an ex∣treame
rage, withall commanding one of his seruants that euery Supper time he should say, Here memento Atheniensium, Master remember the Athenians. So fares it with vs vpon the least ill turne, wee fall into furious behauiour, and vse all meanes whereby the memorie of such things might remaine fresh with vs con∣tinually. But oh in the meane while where is the power of diuine grace? Haue wee so lear∣ned Christ? Is this the light that Gods blessed truth instructeth vs in? No, TheIam. 3.17 Wisdome that descend from aboue is peaceable, easie to bee intreated.Prou. 24.29. Say not, I will doe to him as he hath done to me, I will recompence euery man according to his workes.Rom. 12.2 Be not ouercome with euill, but ouercome euill with goodnesse. Away then with those vindictiue and implacable Spirits, which boile with nothing but rancour, and thirst af∣ter the ouerthrowe of their foes, and aduersa∣ries. Oh let Aspes haue these galles, but in the bosomes of Saints let them neuer bee found! Amongst vs let there be rather Jndolentia then Jnuidia, yea so tractable and flexible let vs seeme to be to our deadliest enemies, that wee be ready rather to benefit them, then infest and mischiefe them. See here a renowned exam∣ple, Zibah had grossely, deepely, basely abused Mephibosheth; yet see his sweet nature, to this man will he be courteous, For, Let him take all. Now let vs come to the Proffer. Take. Had
it beene let him enioy a gracious looke, or a good word it had beene much; but let him Take, what see wee heere but a most faire Proffer?Obserue. Would Mephibosheth thus to his ene∣my part with some of his Estate rather then stand, after Dauids iudgement giuen, conten∣ding? Oh, might not this serue to charme our wearisomlesse Law-wormes, which are giuen to interminable Suits, and many of them not (as Mephibosheth might haue stood out heere for) due right, but for such Possessions as haue beene tyrannously gotten, and are violently kept. How many of these are there whom no Iudges mouth can satisfie, nor Iuries equally chosen, and impartially dealing can bring to a cessation of their troublesome Courses? No, there are such, which of their Rights are ne∣uer resolued till their estates begin to bee dis∣solued; the Lions cannot indure to part with spoyles gotten once into their iawes: for let euidence and oath declare neuer so cleerely; yet they see nothing, they yeeld nothing, but bend themselues to another pleading, another tryall: many there are that haue these grie∣uous Vexators continually molesting them, as the Poets feigne Prometheus had a Vulture continually gnawing at his heart, whose lengthened Suites are as famous as Bellum De∣commale Troiae, as the tenne yeares Siege of Troy. Yee may know by some Sergeants and Councellours fat cheekes, if there be not such
a pestilent breed; for who know not these are the Pleaders good Benefactors? Let a Lawyer bee neuer so poore at the first; yet, if hee can but happen vpon such a Booty, a wilfull Rich∣ling, the leane Kine will soone eate vp the fat; the Offerings of Moloch at the seuen Aumbries were neuer more costly and chargeable, (saue that of the liuing Child) then the Lawyers Ob∣lations; as Pharoah made the Israelites gather straw, and make bricke for him; so these make their Clyents to gather and spare, racke, rend & teare to discharge their Writs and Fees. I speake the truth in the Lord, I lye not. Yet let the expences be neuer so great, where there are great Spirits, men will not bee daunted; ma∣ny there are that had rather spend halfe of their meanes vpon such, then to part with a quarter to make restitution for their il-gotten goods: and whereas God hath giuen men wealth to maintaine good Neighbourhood, and to liue comfortably in their owne Fami∣lies, rather then these men will satisfie what conscience requireth, if either their owne power or their Councellors wit can withold it; let Hospitality be neglected, and the whole family eat the bread of carefulnesse. Oh curuae in terris animae & coelestium inanes. But for these endlesse contentions, are not the Pleaders as deep in the guilt, as the gaines? Yes. Who know not that many of them when
they see the cause neuer so cleere against their Clients, and in Conscience they ought to wish them to stirre no further, but to let the honest man haue his due; yet seeing hope of profit comming, they tell them this Demurre may be made, and that Quirke of Law pleaded, which fuell being administred, a great flame soone breakes foorth: therefore as a Pardall meete with a Lion to beget a Leopard; so the Plea∣ders conioyne with their Clyents to breede vniust wearisom Sutes; when the Clients are at their wits end, and their spirits waxe blunt (for want of knowledge of any further scruple to be found and stood vpon) to prosecute fur∣ther quarrell, they goe to these as the1 Sam. 13 20. Israe∣lites went to the Philistimes to sharpen their Mattockes and their Axes: and is it not much for these to disanimate Clients desirous of con∣tention? Yes, it is as hard for Lawyers not to incite men to Sute, as it is for Panders not to entice men to vncleannesse, they know what will come of it, Incidit in Scyllam qui vult vitare Charybdin. Hee that will eschew in this kinde an euill conscience, there will be small custome, little commings in, hee must walke in a thried-bare gowne, and course vp at Termes without bux∣ome Attendants, and this Lawyers feauer com∣monly worse then the clawes of Belzebub. All
this while I trust I am not runne into Scanda∣lum Magnatum, but haue onely endeauoured to break Capita Draconum: I thought it consci∣ence, meeting them thus rightly, to smite them friendly, it may be a meanes to do them more good then to breake their heads with precious balmes, and to iustifie their abominable cour∣ses with theEccl. 7.7. Songs of Fooles, as Salomon calles flattering speeches in a bad cause. Thus yee see how I haue reproued the inde∣fatigable Contender, and the heartening Plea∣der, and can there in this any iniurie be done to either?Horat. No, Arcades ambo— both of them deserue the blacke Coale. Well if this Fire can kindle it may be a means whereby there shall be no long variances, but quicke agreements, though it bee with losse; like to the course of Mephibosheth here, whom Dauid adiudged to diuid the Lands with Zi∣bah; now he being of no proterne refractary disposition, nor hauing no prompting Ploydon at his elbow to tell him hee might make more worke, and bring about againe, yeelded some∣thing, as ye may see already, in this Proffer, for Accipiat, Let him Take. But now let vs come further, and consider the Portion. All. Let him take All. Not Halfe,Obserue. but All: What see we heere but that in∣genuous people, good natures performe more then is required, wheresoeuer this vertue
shines, it is a kinde of a bright Image of God, for he vse to giue more abundantly then wee can aske or craue. As Salomon desired but wis∣dome of him, and not onely that is vouchsafed him, but1 Kin. 3.13. Also (saith the Lord) J haue giuen thee that which thou hast not asked, both Riches and Honour, so that among the Kings there shall be none like vnto thee all the daies of thy life: and this good God good people desire, endeauour to resemble, asRuth. c 2. Booz when Ruth craued leaue to gleane in his Field, not onely granted what she requested but added, that she should haue victuals and sustenance with his Seruants: So2 Sam. 24. Araunath when Dauid desired but to buy the Threshing-floor, yet he offered (though af∣terwards Dauid would not accept any thing but vpon purchase) most freely, Let my Lord the King take and offer what seemeth him good in his eyes, behold the Oxen for the burnt offering and Chariots, and the instruments of the Oxen for wood, and it is said, All these things did Arau∣nath as a King giue vnto the King. In like man∣nerNeh 5. Nehemiah when the people complained that they were oppressed with the Vsury of their brethren, did not onely cause that to bee released, but would not take the bread of the Go∣uernour, and maintained a hundred and fiftie Iewes continually at his Table: so that so prompt are all well deuoted persons that they exceede expectation; and are not their practi∣ses answerable to Christs counsells? Yes,Mat. 5.40.1. If
any man will haue thy coate, let them take thy cloake also, and whosoeuer will compell thee to goe with him a mile, goe twaine. How much are they to be blamed then, who are so farre from doing more then is desired; that they are back∣ward to doe that which is meet and requisite, which satisfie no lawfull desires but slenderly and grudgingly; yea, with a repining, and cheerelesse Spirit doe they stretch out their hand to any good dutie, & were it not happily that shame may moue them, or authority force them, they would turne the All into Nothing. Nabal sent Dauids messengers away with an emptie answere, and Diues will not vouchsafe to Lazarus so much as the crummes: and so indeed if many might haue their owne wills, litle it is that should be giuen to Poore, Church or State, be the occasions of demaunding neuer so forcing, the reasons of requiring neuer so iust. But at last, let such be ashamed of their nigardizing, and endeauour to haue bowells enlarged, so that they may not onely fulfill, but exceede iust motions, let them not be too much set vpon the world like Mephibosheth, there Let him take All. Thus much for the wonderfull Transpor∣ting briefely handled, because I aime not now so much at Explication, as Application. Let vs now come to the cause of weight Im∣porting, wherein there are three things like¦wise
to be considered, The Man Matter Measure The Lord the King is come home In Peace. First for the Man, Since my Lord the King. Was this the inducement that made him so free? no, some good thing that happened to his Lord the King. Then from hence obserue,Obserue. that both the Persons, and blessings of Kings ought to be precious in the peoples eyes, and accounts: for if they be enriched with any sin∣gular fauour, this ought to be to them singu∣lar Ioy. Oh whensoeuer Heauens Power is gracious vnto them, they should euen be rapt and rauished with the same? For a rotten mem∣ber is that that feele no comfort when the HEAD is annoynted with Balme, all should seeme sweetly to participate of the Superiours felicities.2 Sam. 18 3. Thou art worth ten thousand of vs, and therefore whatsoeuer beneficial thing such enioy for glory and dignitie should bee highly esteemed of all them that belong to them. Oh wretched they therefore which haue little minde of their Lords their Kings, either con∣cerning their persons or blessings, they liue in a Common wealth, as in a house ouer which they remember no Master to be set; for let the distillations of Gods loue be neuer so plenti∣full, it workes in them no admiration, no dele∣ctation. But what are such diuided branches?
If not, Why doe they not reioyce in the sappe of their Roote? euery one should stand bles∣sing of himselfe in the happinesse of his Soue∣raigne, as we vse to blesse our selues when wee behold the Sunne rising in brightnesse. Thus fared it with Mephibosheth heere. Let him take all since my Lord the King. But is Dauid heere called Mephibosheths Lord and King? Why so? for two reasons. 1. For Defence. 2. For Command. First, for Defence: For gracious Soue∣raignes must bee the Peoples Lord-Protectors, by their power they must preserue them in safety, as the Cherubims kept the way of the Tree of Life with the blade of a fiery sword shaken. The Lord cryeth out against theZach. 11.17. Idol Shepheard that left the flock; so indeed a miserable thing it is when the Prince hath no care of the welfare of his poore Subiects, they must carry their people in their bosomes, andNumb. 11 12. as a Nurse carryeth a sucking Child; that is very regardfully and tenderly, ready to shel∣ter them from them that seeke to mischiefe them, and to hold them vp in their Princely armes from falling into any dangers: It is not enough to bee knowne to be a Soueraigne as Augustus Caesar was, by taxing his whole Dominions; but chiefly in safe garding the peoples Persons and Estates. Secondly, they are Lords & Kings for com∣mand,
for what are they to bee vsed onely as walles of an House to keepe out dangers, or as Flood-gates to keepe out Inundations, In∣deed so many; too many carry themselues vnto them, they are nimble to dispute what a Soue∣raigne stould doe; but they cannot hit of the veyne to conceiue what he should haue, how he should be respected, how reuerenced, how o∣beyed; for their honours are slightly giuen them, their commands coldly performed, their Tributes murmurringly paid, and all things wherein their Kingly Soueraignty consists, faintly executed. Where is now then that of our Sauiour,Math. 22.21. Giue vnto Caesar that which is Caesars; and that of the Apostle; Admone eos Principibus & Potestaribus subditos esse,Tit. 3.1. Put them in remembrance that they bee subiect to the Principalities and Powers. Famous is the com∣mendations of Mutezumaes Subiects, who durst not looke vpon his face for very reue∣rence, and if he did but send his Ring from his finger to the greatest Commander vnder him (as it appeared in the dismall Story of Qualpo∣poca at the instigation of Cortez) in all the Do∣minions of the Mexicane Empire, though it cost him his life, out of obedience he would not denye to come, and whatsoeuer by way of Tribure hee demanded, or by Edict published, all his people with the greatest alacrity shew∣ed their loyalty. Oh therefore, as we ought to pray vnto God that our Soueraignes with all
care, conscience, compassion may defend vs: So wee ought to beseech God to giue vs grace that in all submission and subiection we may obey them. But are the Lords and Kings for defence of vs and for command ouer vs? then who see not heere the necessity of Royall Authority? for, how should wee euer bee in safety of our liues without their defence? and how would wee euer liue in any vertuous manner▪ with∣out their commands; take away the first, and wee are but like Sheepe without a Shepheard, ready to bee torne in pieces by euery beast of prey; take away the second, and wee are but like wilde Asse-Colts, snuffing vp the wind at our pleasure, prone to doe nothing but that which is good in our owne eyes: Siccine ha∣bet? goeth the matter thus? Let no man think then the Calling of Princes to be onely a mat∣ter of State and Pompe, where they might sit in a Chayre of Magnificence, weare a Crown, shake a Scepter, but of vse and worth.Rom. 13.4. Hee is the Minister of God for thy good, Rom 1.4. Let those meane conceits therefore of the Re∣gall Office bee banished, euer thinke highly of this Ordinance; for yee see it is not so much for Superiority and preheminence, as it is for vtility and emolument. Now let vs come to the matter, is Come home, Since my Lord the King is come home. Quid deinde? What of that? Is that so
great a matter? Yes, with Mephibosheth it was a motiue of great validity.Obserue. From hence then who see not, that the absence of Princes from their people, is a great darkening of their ioy? For, how can they misse them but with as great want as the want of the Sunne out of the Firmament? the Wife without her Husband hath no solace, nor the Kingdome without the King any true comfort; how can the Corner stone be taken from the building, and not great deformity? how can the chiefe string bee wanting from the Instrument, and not faint Musicke? So, how can there bee any hearty delight when the Lord the King is not in the midst of the people?1 Sam 9. Did Saul thinke that if hee were wanting but three dayes, that his father would begin to sorrow for him, and not much more the Subiects euen languish in themselues when their Princes are in remote Parts:Psal. 82. I haue said ye are Gods: Oh, how do the People reioyce in the presence of their Gods, be it but to eye them, and behold such royall Vessels wherein the rich Treasures of their blisse and happinesse are stored vp. So that seeing the presence of Princes is so great a comfort, Mephibosheth heere you see had mat∣ter enough to bee wonderfully affected. For The Lord his King was come home. Now let vs come to the measure, In peace: Seeing my Lord the King is come home in peace.
This word peace I know hath many accep∣tions; but if my iudgement faile mee not, for these three things it is heere put. First, for freedome from former dangers; that wheras before Dauid was in great straits, hee is now escaped out of them, Gods rod and staffe hauing comforted him when hee was al∣most walking through the shadow of death, as the Israelites had many Egyptians pursuing after them, but when they looked backe they were all drowned: So, though this royal Prince had many feares & terrors marching after him; yet now if hee looke backe, they are all swal∣lowed vp, Dauid is now in peace. Secondly, for health of body, That Dauid is not come home to lye on a Couch, or to bee wrung with some pangfull Disease, that hee needs not the Phisitians to prescribe recoue∣ring Receipts, but that hee finde his body in good temper, and himselfe euery way health∣fully disposed. Dauid is thus in peace. Thirdly, for the good liking of his Subiects. That comming into his Territories hee is not enforced to take Castle, nor to enter into con∣ditions of peace for the settling himselfe in his Kingdome, but that all his Subiects as yet are well affected to him, and that Mephibosheth see not a man that lifts vp his head, or threa∣tens future molestation vnto him. Dauid is in peace. But is this the extent of Mephibosheths
weighty cause importing? is this that fill vp the Cup of his delight vnto the brimme? Then who see not that Subiects can neuer haue per∣fection of comfort in their Princes, vnlesse all their dangers bee remoued, if they bee not in peace, how stould the people bee in ioy? It is a prepostrous thing for the Subiects fore∣heads to smile, when the Soueraignes forehead hangs downe; yet how many are there that can bee delightsome and mirthfull enough, in the midst of their Rulers perils, and can tri∣umph in the midst of their troubles? For my owne part, I thinke these know not what it is to haue a Superiour Power ouer them, for then the People with their Kings would like those two famous Twinnes, weepe when they weep, and laugh when they laugh: Mephibosheth I am sure did so, all the while the King was in danger ye heard how disconsolately hee beha∣ued himselfe, as though hee had beene a man carelesse of himselfe; and doth he expresse any ioy, when is it? when hee sees his Lord the King in health and happinesse, safety and secu∣rity. For, Let him take all seeing my Lord the King is come home in Peace. Thus at last haue I runne short descant vpon the celebrious ensigne, notable carriage of Mephibosheth. Oh Mephibosheth, with re∣nowne would I still follow thee, I would I could blow a siluer Trumpet in thy praise, and set a Crowne of immortall honour vpon thy
Head. Floreat, splendeat semper Mephibosheth. Let Mephibosheths esteeme euer flourish, euer flourish, and let it glister like Phosphorus in his brightnesse. Quid vltra, What yet remaineth? To see whether wee haue such ioyfull cause, that so wee may betake our selues to the like ioyfull carriage. Indeed to the Letter wee cannot hold; but wee can come as nigh to it as the Princely Eaglet come to the Kingly Eagle; for not the Lord our King is come home in peace, but the Lord our Prince is come home in peace: As for the Lord our King, hee being old stayed at home, in the middest of his Nobles, wearing the writhen, platted Crowne of Thornes in taking care for the welfare of his People, hea∣ring and answering forraigne Embassages, and consulting how there might bee a speedy con∣cluding of the troublesom affaires of Christen∣dome, and as his chiefest worke fitting him∣selfe for his graue, and preparing his Soule for God. As for the Lord our Prince hee being yet young, and the Scepter being not yet in his hand, he vndertake hard Voyages, and be∣ing accompanied with some few Nobles (yea Ipse vno graditur comitatus Achate) venters to see the fashions of other Countries.Virgil. and the lustres of other Courts. Well then, though the Lord our King went not forth, so that we might reioyce at his comming home, yet it was Filius Domini Regis, Adolescens se∣cundus,
Spes Imperatoris, Jmperij, the neerest to him in bloud, the deerest vnto him in loue, the pleasure of his eye, the stasse of his age, the ioy of his life, he for whom hee sacrificed both morning and euening. So that vpon the person we need not much to stand. But what was the Lord our Prince in any great danger like Dauid? Yes, hee might say with Paul, that he was2 Cor 11. Jn perills often, in perils by Land, in perils by Sea, in perils by Robbers, in perils in the Citie, in perils in the Wildernesse, in wearinesse and painefulnes, &c. Doubtlesse so great were his dangers that there might haue bene but a hand-breath between him, & death; and had not the Lord sent his good Angel with him, as he did Raphael with Tobith hee might haue miscaried betweene Niniueh and Rages. 1. For who know not that his passage ouer was troublesome. 2. His speedy iournying very wearisome. 3. His possibilitie of being dis∣couered in a strange Countrey, something dan∣gerous. 4. His ventring through Dales, For∣rests, solitary Plaines, hazardable. 5. His li∣uing so long in a Kingdome (and that in the scorchingest time of Summer) not agreeable to his Nature, and when (as it is reported) a Plague ouerspread the Land, perilous. 6. And at last (after his sumptuous entertainment, and belike Magnificent welcome) hauing with honour and mutuall respects taken leaue of the Court of Spaine, entring into his Nauy (then
with what more vncertaine Horat.Myrtoum pauidus nauta secat mare) by Windes, Tempests, Rockes, Sands, &c. He might haue miscaried, or wandred along while vpon the Seas, for Virgil.Errabant acti fatis maria omnia circum, was it said of the Trojans. But is there any such sad newes (at which our eares would haue tingled, our eyes drop∣ped out of our heads, our hearts broken within our bosomes, yea, we euen giuen vp the Ghost as Phineas wife did to heare that the Arke of the Lord was taken) to be at this time publi∣shed amongst vs? No: behold better newes, welcommer tidings, for to the ioy of the King, the delight of the Nobles, the comfort of the Clergy, the recreement of the whole Land, the Lord our Prince is come home in Peace. 1 To the ioy of our King. For Omnis in Ascanio charistat cura Parentis: no doubt al the Kings Care was setled vpon the safe returne of his Charles; yea, I doubt not much, whether (after he had sent for him, and his Returne was determined) his Eyes tooke any quiet rest, or the meat that he did eat were sweet vnto him, or the light he did behold plea∣sant, till it pleased God to grant him a sight of him; as Dauid cryed, Oh my Sonne Absolon, Absolon, my Sonne, my Sonne, would to God I had dyed for thee. So, doubtlesse, our King groaned within himselfe, Oh my Sonne Charles, Charles
my Sonne, my Son, would to God I might set mine eye vpon thee. 2 To the delight of the Nobles: For, must not they needs be ioyed to see the Mirrour of  Bloud and Progeny (vpon which they stand so much) and that rare Flowre of the Court pre∣sented againe before their eyes? Doubtlesse, Yes: they cannot but blesse themselues, to liue to that day to see their Lord their Prince, come home in Peace. 3 To the comfort of the Clergy. The whole  Schoole of Shiloh reioyce in it; much mirth and melody is there at Naioth for it, yea euery Priest and Leuite is ready to sing Hosannah in the highest, to heare of it. Hee hath bene, is, and we hope euer will be our Fulcimentum, and therefore he formerly hath bene, now is, and euer shall be our Delectamentam. 4 To the Recreement of the whole Land. For must not the whole Land be much cheered in this his safe Returne? Yes, if they would duely consider the precious woorth that is in him. For, what is he? Euen such a one that if he were to come to his Throne by Election, as he is by Succession; doubtlesse, their votes should be giuen for him: and as the Elders of Israel went and seized Iephtah out of the Land of Tob, and said,Iudg. 11. Come and be our Captaine: So he should be seized out of what place soeuer he remained in, and with the like entreaty, Ve∣ni & esto nobis Rex, Come and be our King. What
Nation would not be glad to haue such a one if it might be to sit in their throne? He beares in him the Image of a Ruler as Zebah and Sal∣manah said of the brethren of Gidion that they looked like the Children of a King.Iudg. 8.18 What can bee desired in him (set aside a freedome from that naturall, humane, hereditary frailty, that we are all borne with, and shall euer bee bur∣thened withall) but in some measure, yea in an eminent degree in him may be espied? First he is true to our God. The Feare of I∣saack is that that he worships, from the God of his Fathers will he not depart. Doubtles of the minde of Ischyrion, Sexcenties potius mori quam quicquā de Religione amittere. That he had rather dye sixe hundred deaths then lose the least syllable of his profession: his praise is in the Gospell, his Fame spread throughout the Christian World for his constancy to the Faith hee hath beene brought vp in, no leagues, nor bonds of Affinitie will make him mutable. Secondly, He begins to be of a valiant dis∣position, continually exercising himselfe in the feates of Armes, and in the times of Peace fit∣ting himselfe for the times of War, shewing in his tender yeares good testimonies of spright∣ly courage and puissant valour, like to be Marte Ferox, & vincinescius armis. Thirdly, He is Prudent. How can it bee o∣therwise, when our Cyrus hath had so many a worthy Zenophon to instruct him, and he him∣selfe
by Nature taking delight scarse in any thing more then in the companie of the Lear∣ned and being of the number of them that doe euen —Impallescere chartis,Persius. by all sort of Learning, endeauouring to adapt himselfe for his Throne, which God in his gratious appoin∣ted time is like to bestow vpon him: and as it was a great helpe to Paul that he was brought vp at the feet of Gamaliel, for his knowledge of the Pharisaicall Profession: So doubtlesse a great helpe for all kind of Knowledge hath it beene to our Prince, to haue bene brought vp at the Feet of so sage and discreet a Parent: for who knowes not, that Jacobus noster Rex & Magus, Rex & Philosophus? Yea the Mirrour of the World concerning Wisdome, either in Church or State Points. Oh who can imagine then that the Father that desires to leaue this Sonne the Successor of his King∣domes and Fame, but he will ouerlay him with the purest gold he can, and as he hath commu∣nicated to him his humane nature: So like∣wise will he endeauour to infuse into him his intellectuall spirit, that he might liue in him when he is dead, and shine in his Sonne when he is gathered to his Fathers. And beside, hath he trauelled so farre onely to see Cities, and to embrace Compeeres? No doubtlesse, that olde Nestor knew well enough what hee did when he parted for a while with his Sonne, he considered that by this Voyage hee should
be much more enabled for Rule and Gouern∣ment by his diligent obseruing and carefull marking of the fashions, and gouernments of other Nations: So that being by nature stu∣dious, by education so well trained vp, and ha∣uing beene thus long amongst the Wits of the World, and the Crafts-masters for all sort of Discipline, and Policie, he cannot but haue Crura thymo plera. Fourthly, he is like to be no sucker of your veines, nor piller of your profits, but to liue so farre as may bee of his owne Royall De∣meanes, accounting that money base (as Ti∣berius was wont to say) that was gotten with the teares and groanes of the people; for hee hath shewne himselfe hither towards of a Princely disposition, and to be no gripple ga∣therer. Fiftly, He is like to be of no hastie humour, ready to quarrel with his neighbor Princes, or in sudden moods and ires to send challenges of defiance to his adioyning friends, which might make the sides of his own Kingdome to bleed, yea the heart-strings of Christendome to ake: but he is of a stayed carriage, which will enter into no quarrels but vpon mature deliberation and well-pondered resolution, —Patrem sequitur sua Proles. Sixtly, He is iust, not being a Protector of Varlets; for when did he euer bowe his knee, or open his mouth to his Father in a wicked
mans cause? No, he hates them all right sore, and hath not dissembled to be their good friend when opportunitie haue bene giuen. And if they haue bene vnder his owne wing, how soone hath he chased them from him? For how many of his Attendants, if hee haue once per∣ceiued them to be of any deperdit debaushed carriage, and in their execrable manners grew incorrigible, how soone hath hee dismissed them. So now then, En Principem, behold your Prince: Oh, how should that people bee euen transported that haue receiued by the mercy of God such a Prince out of danger in safety; me thinkes their hearts should leape for ioy to heare such tidings of him, and they should goe vp and downe their streets, and with the grea∣test melody sound it abroad as their Paean, Prin∣cipem iterum habemus, Principem iterum habe∣mus, Wee haue our Prince againe, Wee haue our Prince againe. The Woods haue not destroyed him, the Floods haue not deuoured him, the Ayre hath not infected him, Principem iterum habemus. Principem iterum habemus. Wee haue our Prince againe, Wee haue our Prince againe. I read vpon happy euents, many people won∣derfully affected, When Abraham had recei∣ued that Diuine Promise, that Sarahs wombe that seemed dead should waxe fruitfull, and that shee should bee the Mother of many Nati∣ons, and that Kings should come of her,Gen. 17.1 Hee
fell on his face and laughed: And was it not thus with Iacob? Yes, when newes was brought him that Ioseph, whom he thought long before to haue beene torne in peices by a wild beast, to bee yet aliue, and by the Chariots that were sent hee plainly perceiued it.Gen. 45.27 21, v.The spirit of Iacob reuiued, and hee said, I haue inough, Io∣seph my sonne is yet aliue. And were not the Iewes in this degree of excessiue gladsomnesse? Yes, for whn Mordecai was exalted, and the cruell Edict of Haman reuersed, and comforta∣ble letters sent in the steadEst. 8. All the City of Shusham reioyced, and there was ioy and glad∣nsse, a Feast and a good day. And shall wee not finde Rhoda, and the Saints of God at Peters miraculous deliuerance out of Prison, iust in this case? Yes, Rhoda hearing him knocke at the doore, and by his voyce knowing it to bee himActs 12.14, 16. Opened not the doore for very gladnesse, and when the Saints saw him, they were astonied. And not only in the Sacred Scriptures, but in Sacred Histories this extraordinary ioy we doe finde vpon extraordinary euents.Euseb. Pp. Hist. lib. 9. c. . Euse∣bius reports, that when Maximius the Easterne Tyrant had sent commandement to his Presi∣dents, that the Christians which were perse∣cutd should be released, that the noble Cham∣pions of godlinesse which before were in the Mine-pits, passed through euery City with valiant and cheerfull courage, with vnspeaka∣ble ioy, and replenished with inexplicable li∣berty
of minde, and that they sung Songs and Psalmes in the midde high-wayes, in the mar∣ket places, and all frequented Assemblies.Euseb. ibid. c. 9. In like manner it is reported that Constantine ha∣uing conquered Maxentius that truculent oppressour comming to Rome, immediately with cheerefull countenance, and from the heart hee was receiued of all both Men, Wo∣men and Children, Senators, and other Noble Personages, & of all the People of Rome with gladsome shouts, and vnspeakable ioy, as a Deliuerer from opppression, and generall Be∣nefactor to all.Socrates Scholast Ecc. Hist. lib. 7. c. 23. So likewise when by the Prayers of Theodosius that vertuous Emperour the vsurping Tyrant Iohn was brought to his end by valiant Aspar, all the people set all at nought, and passed the Theatre, (where before they were celebrating their showes and spec∣tacles in Circo) sounding out thanks-giuing together with the Emperour with one voyce, and straitway went to Church, and spent there the whole day: so that all the City seemed to bee but as one Church. And not onely in sa∣cred Scriptures and in sacred Histories, but among the Heathens vpon occasions of happy betides, much expression of ioy haue beene manifested. It is reported that when the people of Rome heard how Germanicus (whose life and welfare they much feared) was in safe∣ty; as if they had beene ouercome with the newes, they went and rent open their Tem∣ple
dores, and cryed out, Salua Patria, Salua Ci∣uitas, saluus Germanicus. Our Country is safe, our Citty is safe, Germanicus is safe. And of Cicero wee read, that returning from banish∣ment in the Consulships of Pompey and Len∣tulus, that Tanta fuit vrbis laetitia, vt (quasi a∣uulsa sedibus suis Roma) omnis aetas ordos{que} homi∣num obuiam procederet. That there was such re∣ioycing in the City, that Rome was as it were sha∣ken and plucked from her seate, all ages and orders of men going out to meet Cicero. What should I seeke to abound? The drift of my speech is, that as it is naturall to all men with memora∣ble chances to bee delighted, so wee for this late fauour of God vouchsafed vnto vs should bee, supra modum dulcedine laeti. fraught and replenished with ioy beyond mea∣sure, euen fall on our faces and laugh, haue our Spirits reuiued within vs, haue amongst vs a feast and a good day, yea in the highest man∣ner we can expresse our Iubiliation and ex∣ultation? Oh they haue dead hearts that are not now quickened, dumbe mouthes that doe not now sound forth ioyfull out cries: if euer there were a time for the Timbrell and the dance, this is it, the returne of our Prince into the Land should bee like returne of life into a swounding body; wee should haue as much gladnesse for the hauing of him, as wee should haue had sadnesse for the wanting of him; if hee had perished, how should wee haue mour∣ned?
being preserued, and in all sort of peace returned, how should wee triumph? our ioy should be like the ioy of Haruest; yea men that are diuiding spoyles should not bee more cheerefull then wee: Our Sauiour saith in the Gospell If these should hold their peace, the stones would speake; so if wee should not re∣ioyce, the senslesse Starres would teach vs ioy. Our Prince went out with a wonder, and came home with a wonder: out with a won∣der; for the Thames your Channell, many o∣ther places in the Land strangely ebbed and flowed, as if the waters had been out of course, that a Prince of such matchlesse worth should be wafted ere long ouer them to passe through many dangers: came home with a wonder, for being past all his dreads, and arriued again vpon his owne shoares, the fame of his re∣turne being scarse spread throughout all the parts of this Kingdome; yea the very day the tidings came amongst you, the two great Lights of Heauen in an astonishable manner appeared, there being three Moones in the night, three Sunnes in the Morning, to signi∣fie vnto vs that the Heyre apparant (if my coniecture bee not too curious) of three Kingdoms was now in safety rerurned, yea that the Lord our Prince was come home in peace. Therefore as Salomon saith, Goe to the Pismire O thou Sluggard; so goe to the Lights of Hea∣uen
and lighten thee vnto ioy, O thou dull-hearted Subiect. But I must needs confesse I need not bee ouermuch vehement for this duty in this place. Fot as the Woman from the wall com∣mended the City of Abel, that it was a faith∣full and peaceable Daughter in Israel: so for this I may safely commend you, that you haue showne your selues full of ardent loue and sur∣passing ioy; yea, as Jacob said of LuZ in re∣spect of the diuine Vision of the Ladder, which reached vp to the Heauen, and the Angels a∣scended and descended vpon it, that it was no other but the House of God, and the Gate of Heauen: So, hauing beheld the Ladder of your ioy reaching as it were with the excelse and sublime exultations to the height of Heauen, and yourslues ascending and descending vpon it, I cannot but acknowledge, that this is no other but a Port where the King and Prince haue true-hearted & free-hearted obeisants. Who that did but see or shall but heare of the number of people that heere was met once before and now againe, such a maruellous Congregation, as if your Houses were emptyed to fill the House of God, and besides your Church-ioy, your Streets-melody, your Instruments of Musicke, your Banners displayed, your Ordnance roaring, your Bonefires flaming, but must needs confesse that yee haue beene very forward to giue vnto this successfull, prosperous, long-wished for be∣tide
due solemnity? Many Daughters haue done worthily, but thou surmountest all; All, con∣sidering the bignesse or rather smalnesse of the Towne: Many of your aged Fathers, with countenances astonished, and with droppes of ioy trickling along their cheekes, acknowledg∣ing that such triumphing they did neuer behold: Well, your workes shall praise you in the Gates, your egregious acts gaine you Illustrious Fame, they shall make your friends to extoll you, your enemies to admire you, and both friends and enemies in all your wants ready to relieue you. Goe on therefore thus loyally and affectionate∣ly to celebrate the returne of him, who came from Strangers Borders with honour, and who ought to be receiued into our Coasts with ra∣uishment. But wil some say Corda tremunt, Interiora qua∣tiunt, our hearts trēble, our inwards shake with∣in vs, we cannot bee ioyfull as we would, because though our Prince be come home in peace; yet we shal neuer be in long peace vnder him; for a Spanish Match will come, and then the Papists they feare may draw him from his Religion. Curse not the King, no not in thy thoughts; so curse not the Prince in thy priuate conceits, coniectures. Hee hath deserued the best opi∣nion and worthiest estimation of vs. Hath he beene constant to the faith in Spaine, and will hee heere bee a Reed shaken with the winde? Did he there so stoutly stand, and will he heere
so readily fall? No doubtlesse, the heart of our Prince is more confirmed against the Ro∣mish Church then before; the sight of their Abominations haue bred in him greater de∣testation. And howsoeuer the King for some ouertures to vs vndisclosed, may purpose, yea prosecute the Match; yet the heart of the King, as Salomon saith is deepe, wee cannot search it, he hath some high and deepe Proiect in hand; but harmelesse, no doubt, is his inten∣tion to vs; and perswade your selues both King and Prince know the Beast and his Lo∣custs well enough; they will take heed of bowing their necke vnder that heauy vnsup∣portable Yoake, the miserable examples of their Predecessors, their Neighbours, their selues, cannot out of their hearts: therefore though so farre as wee through our darke cre∣uises can discerne, could wish matters might goe otherwise, and we would giue the eyes in our heads to obtaine it; yet because we see but the outside of things, and the inward se∣crets wee cannot ransacke, nor pry into, there being such wise Pilots at the Sterne, let vs commit all vnto them with quietnesse, trusting that they will not suffer the shippe to miscary. And therefore let this stone of offence bee re∣moued, let vs not bee troubled with any feares of great miseries ensuing; wee are like to sit vnder our owne Vines, and our owne Figge-trees in peace, and therefore let vs confidently
and intrepidly goe on to be ioyed; yea euen ouer-ioyed with the enioying of that Iewell which a while wee wanted, for this let our hearts be enflamed, our spirits filled with mar∣uellous iucundity; yea let vs euen know no measure nor moderation in the comfort that wee take in the same, beside a little, let vs en∣deauour to track Mephibosheths steps in for∣giuing, and giuing. First in forgiuing; for as hee forgaue Zibah, so let vs forgiue: 1. Our enemies. 2. Our Debtors. Our Enemies: For how vnsightly a thing would it be that they wt come to reioyce at the same Temple, and which goe triumphing in the same Streets, should looke with euill aspects, like Malignant Planets, one vpon another? Where there is ioynt Reioycing▪ there should bee ioynt Reconcilement; Oh how acceptable would it be to the Lord, our Prince if hee might be wel∣commed home with the Nobles and Commons, laying downe all their priuate spleenenes? They could not bee more ioyfull to see him in Peace from Dangers; then hee to see them in Peace from Grudges: their hearty concord would with∣out all question be his hearty consolation; but if their eyes looke cheerefully vpon him, but are ready to looke asquint one vpon another, and their mouthes shoot in ioy of his Returne, but are ready to glow with Rage, and to spew out scandals, ignominies, opprobrious, calumnious
speeches one against annother; if they clap their hands in his honour, but ready to smite with the fist of wickednesse, as the Prophet saith, or to strike their hands in token of indignation as Balack did against Balaam: How great a a quenching will this be to the Lord our Prince, for that true full ioy he should take in the Peo∣ples Melody-makings? Oh therefore let all bit∣ter rootes be plucked vp, all old greeuances re∣moued, all indignities, abuses forgiuen, be Me∣phibosheths. Our Debtours: For, can we truely reioyce in our Princes Returne, and yet suffer others to mourne in the House of Bondage? Is their meanes wasted, their Estates so decayed, that they are not able to satisfie, and yet will yee suf∣fer them in Prison, rather to pine away then yeeld to release them? oh remember this is not a time with all rigour and extremitie to exact debts; therefore now let vs ease burthens, free enthralled men, and giue them liberty vpon this gladsome tydings. Secondly, in giuing, and that towards the Poore, and Prince. First, towards the Poore. For vpon this oc∣casion should not rich mens houses bee like the Courts of Charitie? Yes, for a Nabal hee is in∣deed, that now eats his bread & his flesh onely a∣mongst his Sheepe-shearers, therefore bring forth the raiment for the naked, the siluer for the nee∣dy, the sustenance for the hungry & thirsty, giue
Portions to seuen and likewise to eight. To the Prince. For this voyage must needs haue bene costly and chargeable. Princes whensoeuer they trauell must be Liberall to honour the State from whence they come: and should not these ex∣pences be made vp by vs? Yes, whensoeuer he cal we should haue our presents ready; for will wee bestow nothing but a little sounding of Cornets, and Sackbuts, Powder and shot, Bonefires and ringing of Bells? This were poore congratulati∣on, cheape welcome. Let our Coffers therefore be opened, our Estates set forth, and seeing the Lord our Prince is come home in Peace let him take am∣ply, freely. But amongst all these Solemnities, let vs not forget the Fat of the Peace offering. How came the Lord our Prince thus home in Peace, but by the Prouidence of God? Giue vnto God therefore that which is Gods, Let him take 1. Present De∣uotion. 2. Future Dutie. First, Present Deuotion. For, Bring vnto the Lord oh ye Sons of the Mightie, bring young Rammes vnto the Lord, ascribe vnto the Lord the honour due to his Name. Come into his Courts with Thankes-gi∣uing, and shew your selues glad in him with Psalmes. Let not so precious a benefit be receiued without praise, nor so Gracious a Fauour without con∣digne commemoration. It becommeth well the Iust to be thankfull. Let his name be extolled, his mercy magnified. Secondly, Future Dutie. For hath not God try∣ed
by his fauours to Winne vs, by his blessings to drawe vs vnto him? Yes, the Lord might haue paid vs home at one stroake, but he hath spared vs, to see if we will open our eyes and see his good∣nesse, open our eares and heare his will, open our hearts and follow his precepts; Oh therefore with the Cords of his loue let vs be pulled vnto him, let this vnspeakeable fauour bring vs vnto vnfeyned duty: Yea, Seeing the Lord our Prince is come home in Peace, let him take All. All Seruice both of Body and Soule. By this time I trust I haue taught you how your Cup might runne ouer with the oyle of gladnesse, and how you might rightly and fully discharge what belongs to you vpon this blessed Euent. What last shall be done? Let vs set our mouthes toward Heauen, & implore Diuine assistance for after times for our Prince. The Lord water him with ye dew of Heauē, endew him with his further graces, cause his face stil to shine vpō him, his mer¦cies still to keepe him, his Spirit stil to direct him, that our ioyes may abound vnder him, our happi∣nesse encrease as his yeares encrease, that if this worthy Prince suruiue that matchlesse Father, as now we receiue him with Triumph into the Land, so then we may receiue him with Triumph into his Throne, and at last hee may bee receiued by the Angels, and Archangels with Honour and Glory into Heauen. Amen. FINIS.
