22109 99846350 11312
AN ESSAY OF DRAPERY OR THE COMPLEATE CITIZEN Trading Iustly Pleasingly Profitably By William Scott Ne{que} nihil, ne{que} omnia dicenda sunt LONDON Printed for Stephen Pemel and are to be sold at h Shop upon Lon. Bridge 1635
AN ESSAY OF DRAPERY: OR, THE COMPLEATE CITIZEN. Trading Iustly. Pleasingly. Profitably. By William Scott. Ne{que} nihil, ne{que} omnia dicenda sunt. LONDON, Printed by Eli, All-de, for Stephen Pemell, and are to be sold at his Shop upon London Bridge neere the Gate. 1635.
TO THE VVOR∣SHIPFVLL Mr. GEORGE SCOTT ESQUIRE. Reverenced Vncle, I Have long run upō your score, so long, till Ʋ∣sura superat sortem, the interest of your love ex∣ceeds the principall of mine abilities: Yet rather than prove a Banckrupt, I
will compound and pay you as I may, though it be but Vnciatim. I would I could say with that Ser∣vant in the Gospell, Sir, have patience, I will pay you all; which seemes impossible for me. I must borrow of your patience and protection, while I present you with this in part of payment:Ex meran∣do me ma∣gis onero. Bernard. so stri∣ving to disingage my selfe I runne further into debt. I pay not this to free my selfe for,Senec. Qui, quo sit liber gratus est, haud gratus est; nor to procure ingage∣ment
from you:Durand. Sent. lib. 2. d. 27. q. 2. for Pri∣us debitum solvitur quam meritum acquiritur. You will not wonder what businesse my Citizen should have with you a Counsellor, for you know he cannot be compleat in his actions, unlesse grave Counsell be his Director. Yet you may wonder how my young yeeres dare venture to instruct o∣thers. Brutus soliciting Statilius to adhere in the Conspiracy against Cae∣sar, was answered by him, that he allowed the
enterprize to bee just, but disallowed of the men that should performe it My subject you will not dislike: but that I a yong Citizen should treat of it, perhaps you will not al∣low. You may say to me as Isaak to Jacob, how hast thou found it so soon my Sonne? The Learned lament the losse of those Bookes which Brutus wrote of vertue, because they account it a goodly thing to learne the Theo∣rick of such as understand the practise well; they and
onely they are fit to write of affaires, whose owne hands have bin imployed in the conduct of them. That I have manag'd bu∣sinesse, may authorize me to write of it: but since I have not done it long, may make you question whether my Writings Wilbe worth the reading That Augustus which had been supreame Iudge of the world when he was but nineteene yeeres old, would have another to be thirty before he should bee thought a competent
Iudge of a Cottage or Farme. Yet I hope I need not aske leave to thinke that hee who at twenty yeeres hath not given some token of his suffici∣ency, wil hardly doe it af∣terward it is a true French Proverb, Si l'espine non picqu quand nai, A peine que pic{que} jamai: A thorne unlesse at first it prick, Will hardly ever pierce to'th quick. Hanibal and Scipio lived the greater part of
their lives with the glory they had gotten in their youth, and though after∣ward they were great in regard of others, yet were they but meane in respect of themselves. Let this excuse my youths bold∣nesse, & let your goodnes pardon his presumption, whose All if that be any thing, you may claime as your due and arrest for your service. Your Nephew humbly devoted WILLIAM SCOTT.
TO THE READER. IT was the chiefest commendation of So∣crates, that he turned all his acquir'd knowledge into morality; of whom one said, hee fetcht Philo∣sophie from Heaven, and plac't her in Cities. Him I try to imitate, wherein if I write nothing but words I write what the Title of my Book promiseth, a tri∣all
an Essay: supposing you to be a Citizen I now say the lesse, because I will not anticipate my selfe in speaking that at the doore which I can but repeat in the best roome of the House. Wealth with peace of conscience bee multiplied unto you. So prayes Your Well-wisher William Scott.
AN ESSAY OF DRAPERY. IT is a happie thing for a man to goe through his affaires with∣out Injustice, which he can∣not doe but by bringing his spirit into liberty, In omnes ejus actus contemplationem su∣am mittens, contemplating upon all his actions: so by due consultation, and dis∣creete action, hee may live justly, pleasingly, profita∣bly.
Hot youth running with∣out consideration, and gi∣ving time no leasure to doe any thing for him, runnes unjustly and troublesomely, but catches nothing, or no∣thing durable. And a dul-spirited man not taking oc∣casion when 'tis ready, mis∣seth his advancement, yet hath his trouble too; both these trust to Fortune, the Goddesse of rashnesse, and sloth: both falling, Imperitia fecit casum, their unskilfull∣nesse hath effected their de∣stiny. The first course of the three is the best; the se∣cond and third may rise, but it is not certaine; the first cannot but rise, the order of his actions being set downe in his decree that
made him; thus it is in all Professions; thus it is in Drapery, the foundation whereof is Honesty: Hee cannot bee a good Draper which is not first a good man, Conscientiam suam ape∣riens, semperque tanquam in publico vivens, se magis veritus quam alios, opening his con∣science, living as if he were allwaies in publique, rather fearing himselfe then o∣thers; by this hee raiseth himselfe above and beyond all feare, contemning the blowes of Fortune: His wisedome without this will bee erroneous, his policie will bee knavery; yet hone∣sty without wisedome is unprofitable. Wisedome is the beautifull and noble
composition of him in his words, his actions, and all his motions, Si oculis ipsis cerneretur, mirabiles amores ex∣citaret sui, could the eyes see her, shee would stirre up wonderfull love; by her he doth emancipate his spirit from unjust subjection, unto things out of his calling not necessary: though no know∣ledge is unfruitfull; yet the course of a generall know∣ledge being too long, the knowledges most pertinent to himselfe, are to bee cho∣sen, which hee shall hardly end before his course bee ended; so much there is to be knowne of his trade and about it; of his commodity, as it is cloth, and as it is his cloth, and so lives by it.
For the first, as no hu∣mane action is delivered to the World without many circumstances, so no cloth without them; there is no circumstance in it but is a step mounting the under∣standing to the true value of it, Caeca regens filo vestigia: by laying the circumstan∣ces together, the body of an action is fully knowne. In cloth is to bee considered wooll, the matter of it, whe∣ther it bee course or fine, which are qualitates tangibi∣les, perceived with the exte∣rior sence, the touch, the eye: but seeing is more con∣versant about colour, which is qualitas visibilis, of which anon. Coursenesse is a quality
of parts well compacted, difficultèr cedens tactui, gi∣ving way to the touch, hardly arising from dry∣nesse; those sheep that beare it, being very dry or grow∣ing remote from the kindly moisture of the braine. Finenesse is a quality of soft parts, Facilè cedens tactui, giving way to the touch ea∣sily, arising from moystnes, those sheep being moist that beare it, or growing upon or neere the forehead, thus for qualities of the matter: there are qualities of the form too. Thicknesse: Partes habens multas constrictas & cohaeren∣tes, having many parts bound and coherent. Thinnesse: Partes habens extenuatas, having extenuate
parts not solidly compact as the other: both are made by the accession and deces∣sion of the matter. Now Feeling, which is Potentia sensitiva exterior, the outward sensitive power seated in the Nerves, expan∣ded through the whole bo∣dy betweene the skin and the flesh, apprehends these qualities, with their seve∣rall degrees, and carries them to the sense interior. The Visible quality is co∣lour, which is Extremitas cor∣poris perspicui, the extremi∣ty, the outmost part of a perspicuous body, or it is the motive of that which is perspicuous in act; it is a quality in Cloth of obscure originall, it is the splendor
of it illustrated by light, ha∣ving seven species, whereof two of them are the extre∣mities of colour, white, black; the one arising from the multitude of light, the other from the paucitie of it: these are as it were Pa∣rentes aliorum, all other co∣lours are from these, ming∣led in a meane or unequall proportion. Of equall mix∣ture (according to Gerrard Malgnes) is greene, but Ari∣stotle and all the Philoso∣phers have taken red, for the equall mixture of white and black all other colours are made of this meane, and one of the extremes: yellow is two parts of white, and one of red; orange tawney hath two parts of red, and
one of white; greene is of more black and lesse red; purple is of more red and lesse black. These being the origi∣nall colours, how they should amount to our great number, I know not; unlesse the dyers fat sometimes working ill, hee to make a∣mends invents new names. All colours are objects of the sight, which is the exte∣riour sence, Percipiens oculis species colorum, perceiving with the eyes the kindes of colours, and offers them to the sence interiour. But the eye it selfe is of no colour, for if it were of any one, all things it could looke upon should be of the same, as we see by experience, if a co∣lourd
glasse be held before the eye. Next for quantity. Weight is the quantity of the matter, Measure is of the forme; which two con∣trowling each other, the number of both must decide the difference, the number of Weight shewes the sub∣stance, which is too often a∣bused by increasing the number of measure, that both bee according to the Statute is desired by those who would buy good cloth good cheape. These cir∣cumstances with others considered, the Judgement which can bona & mala di∣stinguere, puts a difference between good and ill, co¦pares all with the pr and so makes bargaines,
inverting the end of Trade, which should bee for the good of both parties. But whither doe I goe? Dioge∣nes at a Faire full of those things which curiosity calls necessary, proclaimes his abundance such, as not to need them; So may these be thought potiùs subtilia quā utilia, rather curious than necessary: I therefore spend no more time upon them. Thus he considers his com∣modity, as Cloth. Now as his Cloth in trading; with which that hee may carry himselfe, Justly, Pleasingly, and Profitably, I descend to par∣ticulars: yet some one trade as ell as another shal have  rest in my discourse.
THE COMPLEAT CITIZEN. I Define him to be a man whom se∣ven yeeres ser∣vice having made a Citizen: now just, plea∣sing, profitable wayes, have made compleat. He shall live justly. SAint Augustine makes mention of a certain Je∣ster,Trin. lib. 13 cap. 3.
who undertook to tell the people what they all most desired; standing up he said with a loud voice, vilt vultis emere, & carè vendere, you will buy cheap, and sell deare:Vili vello emere & arè ven∣dere, com¦mune qui∣dem est sed tamen est vitium commune. August. to doe so, as it was in his time, so is in ours com∣mon, but a common vice, un∣lesse it consist in certaine li∣mits. That Justice may bee kept in prizing commodi∣ties, the common estimation of wise Good-men is to bee followed; upon some the Law hath pitcht a price, which may bee diminisht, not increased; because that price was set in favour of the buyer, of all which with their sorts, it is impossible for Law to determine the value; yet the Civill Law
saith, that's the just price of commodity, Sitanti vendatur, quanti vendi potest, if it be sold for so much as it can be sold for; that is, saith Ameus,De Consc lib. 5. c. 48. quanti vendi potest communi∣ter, for how much it can be sold commonly; the affecti∣on or profit of this or that particular man not conside∣red: But where taxation or common estimation can∣not, there seclusâ fraude, without deceit, the judge∣ment of the Owner must set the price. A Contract must be made according to the equality of the thing; and that must bee measured by the price that is given. For as time is the measure of businesse, so is price of Wares. If the price exceed
the worth of the thing, or the thing exceed the price, the equality of justice is ta∣ken away; that both agree is the just rule of trading, against which deceit is op∣posite, decipere est unum osten∣tare, & aliud praeter opinionem inferre, to deceive is, to make shew of one thing, and bring in another, beside the opinion of the party; by which more is given for Wares so sold, than they are worth: taking lesse for them then they are worth, a man deceives himselfe: to prevent which, my dis∣course of his living profita∣bly shal endeavour.Sn. His rule was peremptory, that said a wise man will not deceive, neither can hee bee decei∣ved;
So was his profession of honesty and wisedome, lowd who chose this Mot∣to, fallere vel fallires odiosa mihi, to deceive or be decei∣ved, is hatefull to me. Augustine (and who not) met with many that would deceive, but never with any that would be deceived. To deceive others, is worse than to be deceived, as a sin is worse than a crosse; not that all deceit is a sinne. Lucius approching the boat wherein Athanasius was,Euseb. whom he pursued, asked for him, and was answered by him (who was knowne to Lucius by name, not face) that Athanasius was hard be∣fore him, if hee made haste hee might overtake him;
who being violent in his pursuit, mist Athanasius. Thus the Arrian Persecu∣tor was deceived by the truth spoken with wisdome and a good conscience: but that deceit which is against justice towards others, I shall now speak against: this stands more in the wills, than wits of men. This is first against nature; one Serpent doth not sting an∣other, and the Fishes of the Sea devoure none but those that are of other kindes.O huma∣nae mali∣tiae dete∣stnda  fe∣rae par∣unt, aves pascunt, ho¦mines in∣iantur, tsaeviunt. Cyp. Ser. 6. But the greatest evills that come to man, come from man. Homo homini Lupus, one Man is a Wolfe to another. The Lions spared Daniel, the ravenous Birds fed Eli∣ah: but man exerciseth cru∣elty
against man. Second∣ly, this is against civill So∣ciety; for the preservation whereof, it is necessary that men converse safely toge∣ther, without feare one of another. Therefore one said well, the first founda∣tion of Justice is not to hurt, the second to indeavour to procure the common be∣nefit: thirdly,Vita Chri∣stiana est benè faci∣endi, et malè pati∣endi disci∣plina. it is against Christianity, which teach∣eth a man so much charity and patience, as to bee rea∣dy to doe well, and suffer ill. It was prophesied, that in the time of the Gospell the Sucking childe should play upon the hole of the Aspe,Isai. 11. and the weaned childe should put his hand upon the Cockatrice his hole.
Fourthly, it is theft. Themistocles espying a dead body richly adorn'd, passed by, but called to his Com∣panion, Tolle haec, tu enim Themistocles non es, take up these, for thou art not The∣mistocles, he could not stoop so low as to gather Gold out of the blood and dirt; but hee stoopes lower, that plucks it from the living, and commits a double theft, robbing himselfe of honor, and the other of the means of life. Lastly, it is odious to God. It is the will of God, that no Man oppresse and defraud his Brother,Thess. 1.4.6. for the Lord is the Avenger of all such. And to good men, even to the Hea∣then, they counted no pro∣fit
lasting which was got by fraud. Romanis artibus, virtu∣te, opere, armis, vincam (saith one amongst them) I will overcome by the Romane Arts, (viz.) Vertue, labour,Stobaeus ex Theo∣pomp. and Armes. In Athens it was a custome, that when men bought or sold any thing, they came before the Magistrate appointed for that purpose, and there tooke a solemne oath, that they had not dealt fraudu∣lently, nor used any deceit. I have heard of a Turke that having bought Cloth of an English-man, wherein was inclosed a great summe of money, unknowne to both parties: and finding it, made many Journeyes in quest of the English-man; at
length meeting with him, unaskt restored the money. Are Heathens just, and art thou a Christian unjust? Quid prodest vocare quod non es? What doth it profit to call thee what thou art not? It is said of the Jesuits, nihil praeter nomen retinuerunt, they have retained nothing of Jesus but his name; and of the Popes, Qui Bonefacius, malefacius, qui Pius impius, qui Vrbanus rusticus, qui Innocens nocens; Hee that was called good doer, was an ill doer: who was called Holy, was wicked: who was called ci∣vill, was uncivill: who was called innocent, was no∣cent. And I would it might not bee said of many Christians, that they are
but so in name, having good words, not answera∣ble workes; supposing more of Gods hearing, than his seeing. But let these know that many eate that here, which they digest in Hell hereafter. If Dives was sent into the fire for not giving his own,Si in ig∣nem mitti∣tur q inon dedit rem propriam, ubimitten∣dus est qui invasit a∣lienam? Aug. whither shall they bee sent which take that which is anothers? If he goe to hell which gives not, whither shall hee goe which takes away? The unjust wayes of de∣ceit which I would have my Citizen to shun,Flattery. are ma∣ny: as Flattery, Dissimula∣tion, Lying, &c. of which in their order. There bee some whom
Gaine will transforme into all shapes;Flattery. let the Customer looke how hee will, they like a Looking-glasse will have something in them like him. The old Law would not allow the Swan for mans meat; his feathers being white, his body black. Neither are those fit to deale with man, whose pretences being faire, have foule practises: these Flatterers are the Aves Gaviae of the time; Which Birds, when Alphon∣sus King of CICELY lancht from the shore, flew about the Ship, hee causing meate to be throwne forth, they fled when they had taken it: Thus it is with me (saith he) my Flatterers having
received what they expe∣cted, withdraw their obse∣quiousnesse, and returne no more, Nisi nova munera Esu∣riant, unlesse they are a hun∣gry for new benefits. Di∣vines say that, with the He∣brewes: Verbum blandiendi separare significat, flattering divides a Man from him∣selfe, hee thinkes himselfe otherwise then hee is. A house divided cānot stand; which some unjust ones considering, by flattery part a Mans judgement from his will, and so deceive him. Oyle powred upon the Gras-hopper kills it, Vine∣ger revives it, Sic multos oc∣cidit adulatio, quos justa sanat reprehensio. Flattery kills those, whom just harsh dea∣ling
with doth heale: But it is not alwayes so in the way of Trade. Some Cu∣stomers will grow dull and displeased, if they bee not often whetted by a Flatte∣rer; downe-right honest speeches discontent them. For this cause, as the Apo∣stle said; Be angry, but sin not: So I say, Flatter, but sin not, if that be possible. Yet it is my opinion, that amiable lookes and faire speeches will goe farre enough, wee need seeke no by-wayes. Flattery is the corruption of truth, a thing as pernici∣ous, as truth excellent. A∣mong other things this is one the Flatterer is known by, Non imitatur amicittam, sed praeterit, hee doth not
onely imitate friendship, but goes beyond it. Dissimulation is a thing more tollerable with a Citizen; it is with him as with one who hath married a wife, whom hee must use well, pretending affection to her, though hee cannot love her: and indeed Divines hold it in some ca∣ses lawfull, to pretend one thing and intend an other; as in the case of our Savi∣our, going with the two Disciples to Emaus, he made as if hee would goe further, to stirre up their desire of his presence; what ever hee pretended, hee intended to stay with them that night. If a man pretends a long journey by being booted
and spurd, but intends to returne suddainely, to see what those whom hee puts in trust would doe; if he had gone is no sinne: whereas if he had said hee would have gone such a journey, and not performed it, had been a lye:Simulata aequitas est duplex in∣iquitas, quia et si∣mulatio est et iniqui∣tas. August. But woe to them which dissemble to an ill end: these have the voyce of Iacob, but the hands of Esau; they are smooth in their words, rough in their acti∣ons. Let them know that Ter peccat quise bonum illi si∣mulat, cui faciat malè, hee sins thrice that counterfeits himselfe good, to whom he may doe ill: consider Absa∣lon that Master-piece of Hy∣pocrisie; hee well knew to bee within a Nero, without
a Cato; hee had Linguam pi∣ctam, a painted tongue, but not supplicium pictum, a pain∣ted punishment. Behold him hanging on a Tree, as unworthy of Heaven or Earth: Behold him thrust through with three darts, as worthy of a treble death.Triplici dignum morte. These dissemblers like the Polypus can take all colours to deceive, but how cow∣ardly a humour is this, and besides servile: he that dis∣sembles, must have still a fearefull eye upon himselfe,Nemo po∣test diu personam ferre fi∣ctam: cito in natu∣ram suam recidunt quibus ve∣ritas non est Sen. lest hee be discovered; his mystery is poore, for hee is ere long found out, and then not credited; all hee speaks is held Apocryphal. O how excellent a thing is freedome! there is no bet∣ter
life then to live accor∣ding to a mans nature, re∣solving alwaies, Lingua ca∣lamum in corde tingere, to dip the penne of the Tongue in the Incke of the heart, speaking but what hee thinkes; to doe otherwise is impiety, yet to utter all hee thinkes is eminent fol∣ly. Lying is a base vice: therefore said an ancient Philosopher, it is the part of slaves to lie; and the Poet wisely, Dare to bee true, nothing can neede a lye, A fault that needes it most, growes two thereby. Lying is pernicious to humane society: for silence is more sociable then un∣true
speech; it is the worse because so various: if it had but one visage, there were some remedy for it, a man might take the contrary to it for truth: that which is good is certaine and finite (sayth Philosophy) there is but one way to hit the marke. Evill is infinite and uncertaine, there are a thousand wayes to misse it. It is reported of certaine new Indians, that they offe∣red humane blood to their gods, but none other then what was drawn from their tongues and eares, for an expiation of the sinne of ly∣ing; as well heard, as pro∣nounced; even those that use this vice, most conceive the basenesse of it, counting
that the extreamest injury that can be done to them in word, to reproach them with the lye:Aug. Facere non pu∣det, dicipudet: they are not a∣sham'd to lye, but to be cal∣led lyars. The tongue is connexed by vaines to the braine and heart; by which nature teacheth us, that it is to be govern'd by the intel∣lect, whose seat is in the head, so that it may agree with the heart: A man de∣ceived through errour, may pronounce this or that fals∣hood, thinking it is true which is no proper lye; for in a lye, Semper sermo discen∣tit à mente, the speech al∣wayes differs from the mind;Contra mentem ire. which the word Men∣tiri imports: to speake fals∣hood,
thinking it truth, is to lye onely Materialiter; to speake truth, thinking it is not true, is to lye Formalitèr; but hee that speakes false, thinking it false lyeth (Ma∣teraliter et formaliter) atque i∣deo perfectè mentitur, (sayth one) in the matter and forme, and therefore lyeth perfectly; thus lye to save our lives we may not, much lesse to save or increase our wealth. Memorable is the example of that woman in St. Hierom, mori scivit haec virago, mentiri nescijt, shee knew how to dye, she knew not how to tell an untruth. In a strait where money or Iustice must be lost, Per∣de potiùs pecuniam, nè perdas Iu∣stitiam, rather loose money
then Justice.Falsum ni¦hil dicere licet, ali∣quid au∣tem ver∣tacere ali∣quando est  Aug. Lying then is to be banisht: but this rule must bee observed; as wee may not lie, so we need not speake all the truth. Augu∣stine makes mention of one Fimus, who when hee was askt to tell where his friend was, lest he should be deli∣vered to his enemies hands, said he would not tell; Nec mentiar, nec prodam, I will neither lie, nor betray him. This man was firmus nomine, sed firmior men e (saith Au∣gustine,) Constant in name, but more constant in mind. Among these, Oris inqui∣namenta, Polluters of the Mouth, swearing must bee spoken of: when the rest will not serve turne, 'tis common to adde oathes:
and indeed what sinne so hainous, which hee that makes haste to be rich is a∣fraid or ashamed to com∣mit?Quis me∣tus aut pu¦dor est un∣quam pro∣perantis a∣vari? Iuve. Sat. 14. But what need I say any thing against this, but the Commandement, Thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vaine, for the Lord will not hold him guiltlesse which taketh his Name in vaine. Lex haec unica, Christianis om∣nibus instar mille concionum sit. (saith Augustine.) This one Law should bee to all Christians as a thousand Sermons. All oathes are not unlawfull; wee may sweare, sed praeeat lux, let the light goe before us. But how horrid a thing is it to call God to beare witnesse to trifles and lies! for Quid
aliud est jurare, quam Deum te∣stem invocare, (saith Augu∣stine.) What is it to sweare, but to call God as a witnes? If this were considered; ma∣ny would not, as they doe, make Rhetorick of an oath, taking delight in that which moves Gods displea∣sure. To forsweare is a greater sinne than to sweare; for the Apostle doth not say, Fra∣tres mei nolite perjurare,Iames 5.12. sed no∣lite jurare, My Brethren, doe not forsweare,Falsa juratio exitiosa est, vera ju ratio peri∣culosa est, nulla ju∣ratio secu∣ra est. Drex. orb. Pha. Cap 27. but doe not sweare. Wouldst thou bee farre from perjury? sweare not: false swearing is dead∣ly; true swearing is dange∣rous; not to sweare at all is secure. Those that have worshipt stones, have beene
afraid to sweare falsly by them; Et tu non times Deum praesentem? and dost not thou feare that God which is every where present, which sees all things generally without exception,Generali∣ter sine ex¦ceptione, evidenter sine dubi∣tatione, immutabi∣liter sine oblivione. evi∣dently without doubt, im∣mutably without forget∣fulnesse? Let me tell the Swearer in the words of another, Et si seras, severas tamen exolvet poe∣nas, though his punishment may be defer'd, yet it shall be heavie. Besides all other curses, this is one;Iis maxi∣mè nun∣quam qui jurant, creditur. the swea∣rer is not beleeved hee will certainely bee false to man, which is not true to Gods honour. O matchlesse folly! that men should through open slewces let their soules
runne out for nothing. I may not overslip those slippery ones, whose unjust hands with a just measure can deceive, though the vi∣gilancy of authority tyes them perhaps to a true measure; yet not remem∣bring that Patemus undique Deo, God sees that which man cannot, they pervert Justice: but man will disco∣ver them too. I have read that Ferdinand the Emperor possest a great number of Watches wherein he much delighted; it pleased him once to put this his variety of speaking Gold upon a Table, as if hee would ex∣pose it to sale. Going a side, one that stood by, driven by a desire of stealing, or
occasion, stole one of them: which the Emperour espy∣ing with an oblique eye, cal∣led him to him, and held him in various discourse, till the Watch striking, dis∣covered the houre and his theft. He which deceiveth with unjust measure may well apply this; what hee hath done, hath a tongue to discover him when 'tis mo∣ved by a true hand, and a just measure: which done, Sua se prodit conscientia, nec scipso judice absolvi potest, his conscience doth betray him, and though himselfe be judge, hee cannot be ab∣solved, habet conscientiam & conscium, he hath a witnesse within, and another with∣out. By this time he blushes,
where I leave him with re∣stitution to repent. Now I discover some false lights; their end is to make the Wares seeme bet∣ter than they are, that the seller may receive for them more than they are worth. But doe they which use them think Light can look upon the Wares, and not he that made the light? Or will they thinke to enjoy the perfect light hereafter, which adulterate it here? There was a presumptuous Carrier, that travelling in the night was told of cer∣taine dangerous pits in the way, that if he had no care of his Horse, hee might re∣gard his owne life. Oculos comprimo, & omnia ubique
plana sunt, I shut my eyes (saith he) and all things every where are plaine: like this man are these which cannot beleeve but there is danger, yet feare it not; they know Gods pre∣sence, but not reverence it. It is to bee lamented, that men have too darke, shops: but more, that they have too darke mindes; let them remember who it was which said, There is nothing hid which shall not be made ma∣nifest. A shop may bee too darke, and it may bee too light: therefore it is, or should bee so ordered, that least Commodities bee sold too deare, shops shall not be too darke; and lest they be sold too cheap, they shall
not bee too light. It is ordinary to prey up∣on the Sellers occasion to use money, or the Buyers to use the commodity: but this should move pitty, not cruelty. Pliny saith of the Lyon, parcit semper subjectis, and shall man bee so unjust as to doe lesse? or if man, far bee it from a Citizen, who conversing with most men, should have most humanity. As it is likewise unjust, so it is ordinary, to buy wares for time, yet pay not for them at the time agreed up∣on. The Indians of Guiana, when they promise any thing, will deliver a bundle of sticks equall to the num∣ber of dayes or moneths that they appoint, and for
themselves will have ano∣ther bundle of the like number: every day or mo∣neth they take away a sticke; when all is taken a∣way, they know the time of their appointment is come. Thus carefull are they in observing their time, but how negligent are we! It was well said by reverend Jewell, (the Jewell of his time) O nos miseros qui Chri∣stiani dicimur! hoc tempore gen∣tes agimus sub nomine Christi. 'Tis our misery, that we are called Christians, yet live like Heathen under that name: but here it were well if wee could gentes agere doe like these Heathen: they which are so backward in payment, are like ill Singers
saith one) they should be sēt to the compter, a good Sing∣ing school for them to learn to keepe better time in. But what shall we think of those which will finde no time at all to pay, breaking deeply indebted to many? I know what they will say of themselves, it was destin'd, Providence had decreed they should not prosper. I remember I have read of Zeno Catticus, that hee had a servant taken in theft, whom he commanded to be slaine; pleading for him∣selfe, he said the Fates had appointed he should steale. I and that you should suffer too (quoth Zeno) so for those that break, and that out of policy to deceive, let them
prove the appointment of it, their punishment is sure enough, designed. Was there ever any of these, but it might be said of him, Sensit opus he felt the smart of it? he may seeme to prosper for a time, and we may wonder that the way of the wicked should doe so; but Divinity it selfe will answere us, there is no peace to the wicked; if no peace no pro∣sperity. Yet some there are whom I must pitty, (not en∣veigh against) the violent blasts of crosse accidents have blowne them downe, they would pay every man his owne, but cannot; of these I must say, as Augustine in another case; it is not so much to be considered what
they doe,Non est considera dum quid facnt sed quo animo et volun∣tate. and with what minde they doe it, 'tis with griefe enough. These are those broken ones into whom Charity must powre the balme of Comfort; they have broken estates, and broken hearts. The last way of deceit, of which I will discourse, is the inhaunsing and raysing the prizes of commodities above measure; which the very light of nature con∣demneth,Offic lib. . as Cicero honest∣ly. If a man in time of dearth bring a Ship laden with Corne, and know that there are a great many more Ships comming within few dayes; if hee dissemble this, taking advantage of the
present want, to sell his Corne at too high a rate, he is condemned for hard and unjust dealing: so a consi∣deration of what cases doe lessen and increase the price, doth here offer it selfe. There is as much inju∣stice in selling commodi∣ties too cheap, as too deere:D'vn petit ruisseau sort sou∣vant une grande vi∣viere. the beginning of the evill may seeme small, but the end is great, saith the French phrase. A commoditie may bee worth more, being sold to one man then to an other; as Cloth, if by the English private trades it bee sold cheap, without respect of persons; Farreners can in other Countries sell it as
cheape as the English Mer∣chant, which must spoyle his trade; the decay of the trade into Russia came by this meanes. Commoditie increaseth its price, victualls or house∣hold provision being deare; otherwise those many thou∣sands which live by making, dying, dressing, selling them or the like, must fare the worse. When the buyers seeke the wares, they or a sort of them being scarce, the com∣mon estimation is increa∣sed, so the price may be rai∣sed. Commodities sold by re∣tayle, must bee sold dearer then when they are sold o∣therwaies; the labour and
care in selling them thus being the greater: not to doe so, is to undervalew the labour and care of the whole profession. Lastly, commodities may bee sold dearer for time, then ready money: sale is a perpetuall alienation of the property for a price; but that that price should bee alienated for a time, is not the most ancient nor most true way; it should be payed upon the receipt of the wares, which so payed may by industry bee increa∣sed, not payd; thence fol∣lowes a sensible want of what might have beene gai∣ned, which the buyer in conscience ought to re∣compence; and the seller
may take, if the other be not poore, or a looser by the wares thus bought: I have heard and read words a∣gainst this, but not argu∣ments. The price is to bee lesse∣ned, when a man hath foo∣lishly bought his wares; for it may happen that he may sell them cheaper then hee bought them, and yet doe unjustly: or if the estimati∣on of his commodities after his buying them is lesned, then the price is to bee les∣ned with it. When one sells a great deale together, here the manner of selling, lessening the number of buyers, but increasing his takings, les∣sens the price; and giving
thus occasion of selling them againe; they must bee sold cheaper, lest many thousands, as it may fall out, suffer detriment by them in buying them at too deare a hand. When wares seeke buy∣ers, Merces oblatae vilescunt, prosered wares grow cheap yet this is no sufficient rea∣son of lessening the price, unlesse the thing thus sold be little profitable to the buyer; or such as hee would not buy, but because of its cheapenesse, or buying it, rather respecting the seller then himselfe. When a commodity proves faulty, or is any wayes perisht in the sub∣stance or circumstance, the
price is to bee lessened. I might insist upon some o∣ther petty cases lessening and increasing the price, but let this suffice: all contracts must tend Ad bonum ipsorum contrahentium, to the good of them which make them. So shall all injustice bee avoyded. That my Citizen may doe so: I desire that he may never forget, that God is Totus oculus, all eye; and so must see all his Actions. There is a figure in Rheto∣rick call'd Conversio, resol∣ving many questions with one answere, which St. Ba∣sil useth thus: his Disciples sought who amongst them was most often angry? who was most slow to divine ser∣vice? whose mind most of∣ten
wandred at Prayers?Qui non semper co∣gitat sua∣rum actio∣num, & cogitatio∣num in∣spectato∣rem esse Deum. He answered all at once thus; hee that doth not alwaies thinke that God is the be∣holder of his thoughts and actions. So if it be deman∣ded; who is a flatterer, dis∣sembler, lyer, deceitfull person? I answere, he who thinkes not that God takes notice of his doings. He who remembers this, will live Justly, and that God which sees him doe so, hath a blessing for him; sure∣ly in the flood of many wa∣ters they shall not come neere him; hee will draw him out of many waters, as he did Moses; he will keepe him safe in the midst of many waters, as he did Io∣nas: so trouble shall not
hurt him, hee and his seede after him shall prosper. But unjust wicked deceit∣full wayes are so common, that I must say nothing of blessings, they must sleepe a while; Mercy goe aside, Peace returne to the God of Peace, and not bee spoken of. There is Judgement with thee O Lord, with thee there is ruine and sub∣version, with thee there is battaile and famine, with thee there are snares, plagues, storme and tem∣pest, fire and brimstone, and therefore thou shalt be fea∣red. Thou art as a Cart pressed under the sheaves, Praegravatum oneri, loaded too much, and that Vsque ad stridorem, till thou makest a
noyse, till thou complaine of it: and that dayly by thy Ministers, that thy noyse is Gemibundus stridor, uttered from them with drest sighes: but if any oppresse thee thus, it should not be London, for whom thy mercy hath done so much, that they are quieter in their houses, then their friends abroad in their Castles; they have many Conduits to convey Com∣forts to their Soules, which others wāder many leagues for. Thy mercies toward them are new and strange, and their peace which in∣cludes them all, hath an Eve upon it: if God be Subter, under, which is no fit place for his Majesty; Me thinkes hee should not be Subter vos,
under you of London, my words will not bee regar∣ded: I therefore speake from the mouth of David;Psal. 107. God turnes a fruitfull Land in∣to barrennesse, for the wicked∣nesse of them that dwell therein: and from Augustine,Civitatis eversio, morum, non muro∣rum casus. the ruine of a Citie is not wrought by the walls weakenesse, but the Citi∣zens wickednesse. Livy hath observed, that Rome began to lose all, when sinne a∣bounded amongst all. In Gel∣lius mention is made of the Horse of Sejanus, called Se∣jus; this Horse a goodly Horse to looke on, but who∣soever owned it was still unfortunate: such a thing is Injustice, faire to the eye; but he prospers not that u∣seth
it.Intramu∣ros hostis. The enemy is with∣in the walls: this enemy is Injustice, but shall that bee found in Sion? if the same things be there that were in Sodome, how then shall not God doe to one Citie, as to another? or shall there bee any difference between the one and the other? but that it shall bee easier in the day of Judgement for them of Sodome, then for them of Sion: the more grace Sion, the more grace London hath received; the more feareful∣ly for her sins shall shee bee punished and tormented. But lest I bee censured for putting my Sickle into the Divines Harvest, I turne this discourse into a Pray∣er; beseeching God to guide
my Citizen so in the way of Justice, that he may follow him who said, Ego sum veri∣tas, I am the truth: let him endeavour to bee with him; truth in words, not know∣ing how to deceive; Truth in thoughts, not knowing how to be deceived: Truth in deeds, conforming his Actions to the Divine will; following him thus, which is the truth; hee followes him which is the way too, Et illa vi quae ducit ad vitam, and that way which leades to life, to a good life here, to a better hereafter. So I come to my se∣cond thing.
He shall live Plea∣singly to Himselfe. Others. BUt how shall he live so to himselfe? Philoso∣phie professes sorrow to be naturall to all conditions, pleasure is but a stranger.  All parts of man are cape∣able of sorrow, few of de∣light. The parts capeable of pleasure, can receive but on or two sorts at once,  but all parts can receive the greatest number of griefes. Man hath no continuance
in pleasure, it quickly vani∣sheth: so he tastes of happi∣nesse, but drinkes deepe of misery, according to the French Proverb;Lo ma¦vient par livres &  va par onres. evill comes by pounds, but goes away by ounces: the best condi∣tion of this life hath bin so undervalewed, that even wise men have said; had man bin worthy to have known what life was before hee re∣ceived it,Nemo vi∣tam acci∣peret si da∣retur sci∣entibus. he would have bin loath to have accepted it. This made Seneca embrace death, as his deliverer from misery, saying, as he bled to death, Scalpello aperitur ad il∣lam magnam libertatem via, with a penknife is the way opened, to that great liber∣ty. The Mexicanes thus sa∣lute their Children com∣ming
out of the Wombe; Infant, thou art come into the World to suffer: indure, suffer, hold thy peace. They observed the condition of all men to bee full of trou∣ble: And I have observed that the condition of a Ci∣tizen is full of trouble, more then ordinary. As no man hath pleasure or profit without the price of some evill, so hee payes a greater price for them,Dij nos hommes quasi ilas habent. then most men doe. God makes men his Balls; and of these Balls, who is more tost up and downe then the Citizen? He never rests: thus his state seemes miserable. But no∣thing is so which custome hath brought into nature: every milke soppe can swim
in hot bathes; but he is the man, that can endure vio∣lent Tides, and still swim aloft. In cam intravimus Ci∣vitatem, ubi his legibus vivitur. Wee have entred into the Citie, where wee must live by these Lawes: to desire Freedome from all trouble is vaine, yet that my Citi∣zens trouble may not bee so great, I now endeavour. A deepe inspection into his trade is necessary, they take least delight in their businesse, which know least of it. It is necessary that he be accomplisht with sufficient skill in Arithmetick, and a right way of keeping Books; by these a great Trade may be drawne into
a little compasse, bringing forth that with pleasure, which the nature of most could not doe without ex∣cessive paine. Let him not tye himselfe too strictly to any thing beyond nature; the least wrested and most naturall proceedings are most plea∣sing. 'Tis worth the time to observe, that wisedome doth a good office to those whose desires shee squareth according to their power, as one may, was the favou∣red saying of Socrates, a Sen∣tence of great Weight. If hee study the liberall Arts, he must doe it superficially; so as not to bee swallowed up of them, lest hee bee brought to say with Ovid, I
can utter nothing but Art. Quic quid .Of all bodies politique, the Lacedemonian built by Lycurgus, was the best; which often overcame A∣thens, yet never boasted of Learning. And 'tis worth the noting, that Rome for the first five hundred yeeres flourisht by Vertue, not Learning; whereas now decayed, it hath more Lear∣ning, little Vertue. And have not our times seene those which have had al∣most all Aristotle and Cicero in their heads, to bee the worst, in the execution of businesse? Policy when it is naturall, workes free and quietly; it is without noise, whereas the other is of an ambitious clamour. I speak
not this against Learning; for a Citizen may use her, so she be not imperious, but assistant: yet let me say, that Discretion, which is above Learning, doth sufficiently in able a man to improve in all his affaires, what ever he is or hath, to the best ad∣vantage; the other stands in Contemplation, this is bu∣sie in action. 'Tis neither Wit, Wisdome, Learning, Art, liberall, or illiberall; but that which shewes how to governe them all conve∣niently, and every other thing with them, like Iphi∣crates, who was neither Legi∣onary, Souldier, nor Archer, nor Targeter: but one who could rule and use all these. Againe, let him not have
too great a care of the fu∣ture: Future things shall in their times become present, therefore the care of the present sufficeth. It was said at first, In the sweat of thy browes thou shalt eate thy bread. Hee did not say (saith Au∣gustine) In solicitudine & cura, in solicitude and care; wee may bee carefull, but our care must not have a kinde of sicknesse with it, like that of covetous men. A good Bishop could have preacht against this humour a whole houre together, and have said nothing but beware of Covetousnesse;Amorus est mundus et diligi∣tur, ttas i dulcis es∣set quali∣ter ? 'tis a won∣der to see what anxious thoughts men have, and all for the world, which is bit∣ter, and yet 'tis loved: but
how would it be loved, if it did become sweet? What extreme care doe men take to encrease their wealth? Yet 'tis worth knowing, that this care hath not suc∣cesse; for Divine Provi∣dence will not be bound by our provisions; those have beene most quiet and pro∣sperous in their Actions that have beene ready at hand to apprehend the pre∣sent occasion with alacrity: a man may bee carefull for to morrow with content; if too carefull, hee misseth it: to bee negligent in our af∣faires is a defect; to dwell longer in them then will serve for due deliberation, and firme resolution, is ex∣cesse; both disturbe our
peace. As the Emperour would adde City to City, Country to Country, Nati∣on to Nation: so men strive to joyne hundreds to hun∣dreds, thousands to thou∣sands; thinking that when their proposed estate is ac∣quir'd, they can then rest; O fooles, they may doe so before if they please; for e∣very man is rich, or may be so if his minde hinder not: that man is truely wealthy, which wanting a great e∣state, wants not a minde which doth not desire it. All things which we suf∣fer are by our opinion made greater, there are more things which affright, than oppresse us: some things trouble us more than
they should, some things before they should, and some things trouble us which should not. It is strange to consider that most of our trouble should arise from most small cau∣ses, and that accidents should touch us more than the principall. The Robe of Caesar troubled Rome more than his twenty two stabs, and the lesser circumstances move us more many times than the Subjects them∣selves: in all these wee are all so miserable, as we think our selves; how quietly might we then live, if find∣ing our selves disturb'd, we lie not swelling in our pas∣sion, but get up to the top of our reason, and fall into
some contrary qualificati∣on. So the Dolphins at the beginning of a Tempest, which arising from the bot∣tome of the Sea when it is troubled with hot exhala∣tions and vapours, mount up to the top of the water for refrigeration. 'Tis ordinary for a Citi∣zen to trust, and hee com∣monly loseth much by it. I thinke there is no Citizen can say hee hath had no los∣ses. Democritus promised to resuscitate Artaxerxes his dead friend, upon condition that the Inscription of his Tombe might be the names of thirty men that had li∣ved to the twentieth yeere of their age without griefe; they sought thirty, but
found none. I might pro∣mise the like impossibility upon condition, that I might see the names of thir∣ty Citizens which have tra∣ded twenty, nay ten yeers, whose Bookes are without some debts, which they ne∣ver hope to see discharg'd: but what of that? Quid mi∣raris bonos viros ut confirmen∣tur, concuti? Why dost thou wonder that good men are smitten, to bee confirmed? Our Saviour shewed his glo∣ry in Tabor but to three, and those his Apostles: but why was there no Centurion, no Publican? or why not all the Apostles? There was a world of people saw him on the Crosse, and good rea∣son for it (saith one) Prospe∣ritas
vix ullis, Crux & afflictio innumeris solet prodesse, pro∣sperity scarce profits any, the Crosse and affliction doth many good; and there∣fore Bonaventure said, he had rather goe with Christ to Golgotha then to Tabor. Shall a man bee weary of his life, because it is accompanied with trouble and losses? no, our Saviour (our Head) was crown'd with Thornes:Heu malè conveni∣unt deli∣cata mem∣bra sub spinoso ca∣pite. Oh how ill doe delicate mem∣bers agree with a Thorny head. When Marcus Aure∣lius, and others his Souldi∣ers and Citizens of Rome wore Garlands to testifie their joy publiquely: One of them a Christian wore his Crowne upon his arme, not head: saying, Non decere
Christianum in hac vita corona∣ri, that it did not become a Christian to bee crowned in this life: a man must suf∣fer losses,At tu ne cede malis sed contra audentior ito quam tua te for∣tuna sinet. Virg. but let him not be so unwise, as with vexation to debarre himselfe of rest, when even his teares can∣not recover a losse, or recall time: make things ill done, better, we may; to make them not to bee at all, re∣quires more than humane strength or finite power. Actions once past may ad∣mit a correction, not a nul∣lity; why then should losses trouble a man, or make his heart not his owne? 'Twas well said of one; who hath himselfe, hath lost nothing. But of all losses, I must not passe over the losse of
all. Versa est in cineres Troja, Troy is turned into ashes. Suppose my Citizen bro∣ken; he hath endevoured to prosper, but divine provi∣dence hath not seconded his care, which is a questi∣on; hee hath surely negle∣cted some meanes, hee hath bin an ill husband, and spent too much time and money in vaine: let him have my advice before my comfort: I would have him, though hee leave himselfe worth nothing, to pay every man all their owne; or if he com∣pound for a part, let him resolve to pay all, and en∣devour to be able. Heer's his comfort; by suffering he shall overcome, Romani sedendo vincunt, the
Romanes overcome with sitting still: his soule because his intentions are sincere, is quiet, sits still: And by how much the more quiet, by so much the more stronge. Great aspersions lye heavy upon his name, great sor∣row lyes heavy upon his soule; now patience being added to give him, and Sic vinci est vincere, so to bee o∣vercome is to conquer. His blessings which hee had be∣fore, were of the Lord: how then can hee want, who by patience keepes him that gave them? He that hath ta∣ken away, can give more: what wicked Cain said of his sinnes, they are greater then can be forgiven, no Chri∣stian may say of his losses;
they are greater then can be given: God can blesse a∣bove losses, so hee blessed Iobs latter end, more then his beginning. Perhaps he had not seene fortunes both faces before: now provi∣dence sends adversity to make his wisedome grea∣ter, Quae nocent docent, which the Greekes expresse ele∣gantly, , we grow wise by our blowes. Illustrious Hanibal having long time beene conversant in warre, did boast thus of himselfe, and that deserved∣ly; Age, Prosperity, and Ad∣versity have so instructed me, Vt rationem sequi quàm fortunam malim, that I had rather follow reason then fortune: hee had never at∣tain'd
his height of wisdome, had he not beene throwne downe, that hee might rise strengthened. My experi∣ence, which is not of much more then seaven yeares standing in the City hath furnisht me with examples of those, who have fallen from a meane estate, and ri∣sen to a greater; which are examples not of falling,Exempla non caden∣dised sice∣cideris re∣surgendi. August. but of rising, in case thou fal∣lest. He was a wise King that would bee pictured swim∣ming, with this motto, Lu∣ctor, non mergor, I strive, I am not drowned. And the fa∣mous Admirall Chabotco would bee symboliz'd by a ball, with this inscription, Concussus surgo, being smit∣ten I rise higher.
But above all examples take this: our Saviour cal∣ling to Saul, said, arise, and stand upon thy feete: as if he had said (saith one), Ideo te dejeci, ut fortior surgeres, I have therefore thrown thee down, that thou mightest rise more strong. And this was the voyce of that great Apostle, Cum infirmor, tunc potens sum, when I am weak∣ned, I then grow mighty: This I speake that hee may doe his soule good, that hee may by his affliction rise in his Religion,Rarae fu∣mant seii∣cibut arae. as well as in his estate; men are seldome Religious in prosperity: he therefore, and onely he gets by his breaking, that is af∣ter it more humble, more pittifull, more mortified,
more given to prayer,Fori au∣per, intus dives. and the like duties; doing thus, if he be poore without, he is rich within,Nostrae fa∣cultates & turum hristus,  abun∣dabis. B. Lp. tom. 2. Habet intus quo gandeat, he hath that within him, whereof he may rejoyce. Our wealth and gold is Christ come to him and you shall abound with true riches. He now breaks off his former carelesse way, Et mutatus mutatum invenit, and findes God that was an∣gry before, to be now kind. Nothing but his sinning could keepe off Gods bles∣sing, now nothing but a con∣tinued serious repentance breakes off sinning; which repentance with the whole course of piety, I advise may not fall short, but reach out as farre as the blessing ex∣pected:
for that fals not up∣on the beginning of a spi∣rituall grace, but the latter end; he and onely hee that endures to the end, shall re∣ceive the Crowne. Nothing can lay claime to the eter∣nall blessings of God, but perseverance, which is the eternity of man. If thou wouldst then from the losse of temporall blessings, get those which are spirituall, if thou wouldst by Iacobs ladder clyme from the bles∣sings of Earth, which are the foote of it, to the bles∣sings of Heaven, which are the top of it; Remember that upon that ladder were Angells ascending and de∣cending, but none standing still; therefore persevere.
To conclude this; if hee would live Pleasingly, let him live Religiously. I would not have his Bible stand in his Hall so much for ornament, as use: Let him study Divinity, yet so as the Priests lipps may bee still said to preserve know∣ledge▪ 'Tis the fault of these times, to make that their and others destruction, which should be their so∣lace, by mistaking Schisme, for true Religion: They would not runne from Re∣ligion to superstition,Non con∣turbabit sapiens publicos mores, nec popu∣lum in se novitate vitae con∣vertet. yet they runne from it to pro∣phanenes. Superstition and Schisme, are both bad; the one erects an absolute Ty∣ranny in the mindes of men, the other gives way to all
loosenesse. He was a wise Statist that said, he had ra∣ther have a man an Atheist,Papists call the true way , the No∣velists Formali∣ty. then either of them, be∣cause he seldome petturbs states, and is ever most wa∣ry: but to our purpose, let his Religion teach him to have his soule still panting after Heaven, stealing up thither in the midst of busi∣nes, as if he were there ever more conversant, whence hee lookes for a Saviour. Man is made De terra & ex terra, in the earth, and of the earth, non tamen ad terram, nec propter terram, sed ad Coe∣lum & propter Coelum, (saith one) but not to the earth, or for the earth; but to Heaven, and for Heaven. He whom no busines should
put out of our mindes, is in Heaven, Resurrexit non est hic, he is risen, hee is not here: Looke for him in the Church, you shall heare of him there: looke for him by invocation, and a con∣scionable diligence in thy Calling, and the holy Ghost will shew him there: and when thou hast thus found him, hee will take thee up to Heaven, to raigne with him there. Saint Chrysost m and Hierome wonder at the Eunuch mentioned in the eighth Chapter of the Acts, He was a Barbarian distract with many businesses hee read: and though hee did not understand, yet he read, and that in the way in the Chariot: Si talis in ipso itinere
qualis in quiete domi fuisse cre∣dendus est, if hee were thus devoted in his journey; how would hee have beene in quiet at home? if hee a Heathen did thus much up∣on the way; shall not wee Christians doe much more in our Shops? to minde the affaires of the soule, is the way to prevent distraction, not to further it; as Physi∣cians say of sorrow for sin, it hurts not the heart as worldly sorrow doth: so I may say, it is worldly care, not this care that troubles our peace. So much of his living pleasingly to him∣selfe.
Hee shall live Plea∣singly to others. VVHich that hee may performe, he must be assisted by beha∣viour: without this, his o∣ther qualities will not help him. It cannot but bee di∣stastfull to any man, com∣ming into a Shop, when he sees a man stand as if hee were drown'd in flegme and puddle; having no other testimony of his being a∣wake, than that his eyes are open. It is expected that the outward carriage should promise what's with∣in a man.
Except liberality, cour∣tesie is more regarded of men than any vertue: it payes a great deale, yet is never the poorer: it satis∣fies every man, yet lessens not the Stock: it is a good Character of a good nature, and it hath beene observed that few men have risen to great Fortunes, which have not beene courteous. These small ceremonious matters win great commendations, because they are continual∣ly in use and note; whereas the occasion of a great ver∣tue commeth but seldome. To use these not at all, is to teach others not to use them, and so to diminish respect: they have in them a certaine well-becomming
majestie, if they bee used without pride or affectati∣on. To make no difference in the use of them, to a Lord, and a Ploughman kissing their hands, and bowing as low to a Cham∣ber-maide, as to her Lady, is uncomely. It was well said of one, Corpus animum tegit & detegit, the body, the outward carriage of it co∣vers and uncovers the mind, which should bee to some more open, to some more hid. Let my Citizen then use Ceremonies, but not with affectation, neither let him use them too often. He cannot comprehend great matters, that breaketh his minde too much to small observations.
But there is an inward thing, which unlesse it bee added to these, makes them all nothing. A Schoole∣master had in his place of exercise, a Glasse, wherein hee caus'd his Schollers to behold themselves. If they were comely, he would tell them what pitty it was that goodly bodies should bee possest with defective mindes: if they were ill-fa∣voured, he would tell them they should make their bo∣dies faire, with dressing their mindes handsomely. If the behaviour and countenance bee good; the adorning the minde, dou∣bles the excellency: If ill, it will make it good, when a mans minde performeth
what his body promiseth not. His minde must be stuf't with sufficiency to produce pleasing discourse, wherein he must not bee so lavish as to hinder his observation, and become tedious to him he deales with. To speake all he can at once (as if hee were making his Will) is not the way to please: the best way to doe that, is to know how to be silent; and when he speakes, to let his speech not be accompanied with vehemency: his words should flow from his mouth, so that it might bee said of them, they are non tam verba quàm mella, not so much words as Honey. And I would have these words
tyed to his Commerce, for therein his Customer will commonly take more de∣light to heare, than hee to speak. All hee speakes of, that must bee true: How∣ever the Dresse be, Truth is constantly the same; it still keepes the same Splendor, that if it met with mascu∣line and true elocution fit∣ted to the matter and cir∣cumstances, is praise wor∣thy: but note that it alwaies gives more grace and lustre to the speech, than possibly it can borrow from it. Yet because men are most taken with pleasing words, let them be discreetly chosen, and properly applied: For as speech makes a man more excellent than a Beast, so
eloquence will make him more excellent than other men: but to this must bee added a grave naturall acti∣on, wherein a man may see the visage, hands, and mem∣bers of the man to speake with his mouth; and thus perswading his Customer to the liking of his commo∣dity, hee must put on the same liking himselfe; for putting on the same passion hee would stir up in others, he is most like to prevaile: Yet in as much as hee is to deale with men of divers conditions, let him know that to speake according to the nature of him with whom he commerceth, is the best Rhetorick. I must needs condemne
the using of one phrase to all men, and the mistrusting of every mans sences with, doe you heare Sir, and to tell every man he will make a word; as if he would be thought an augmenter of learning is vaine: but if he meanes to speake his mind, at once I wish him so to doe, for that's the old and the best way. He that sold A∣braham the field for buriall, askt what he would, and had it; but the custome of our times is contrary, Et quod censuetum praesumitur esse ju∣stum, and what is usuall is presumed to be just: yet I desire every man to use as few words as possible hee may; so the way of making bargaines, may in time be
brought to the first and best state. I shall not taxe the ordi∣nary phrase, what lacke ye; it being great policy, for a man to entreat for his own necessities, by asking others what they want; but the too common use of it sounds harsh. I would not have a mans throate worne like a high way, let him step a lit∣tle out of the common Road: but taking heede of the other extreame, he must not become a wilfull ma∣ker of complemēts, and so a tyrannous torment to his customer, who will count him for a man of a trouble∣some spirit, if he find him infected with impertinent ceremonies.
To his superiour, his words must carry much hu∣mility in them; to his e∣qualls familiarity, which because he shall be sure of from them, must bee ming∣led with a little state. To his inferiours famili∣arity too, but not too much of it, lest hee breed con∣tempt; yet his words may carry a great deale, for with inferiours he shall be sure of reverence. To conclude this, that my Citizen may deale pleasingly with all men; I would have him be a good Linguist, getting so many Languages, and those so well, that if it were pos∣sible, every man he deales with, should thinke him his Countrey-man. These ob∣servations
are necessary to his profit; for he shall hard∣ly get by that man, whom he cannot please. So I come to my third part. He shall live Profitably. to Himselfe. Others. To Himselfe. IT cannot be denyed but outward accidents con∣duce much to a mans For∣tune, as death of others, oc∣casion fitting vertues; but most commonly the folly and fall of one man, is the
fortune of an other: no man prospers so sodainely, as by others errours:Serpens nisi seren tem come∣derit, non fit Draco. therefore Daemades the Athenian nee∣ded not to have condemned a man of the City for sel∣ling necessaries, belonging to burialls, saying, his great profit could not come unto him without the death of many; for what man almost profiteth, but by the losse of others? Was not Romes rising by the ruine of her neighbour Cities? doe not most Traders thrive by the licentiousnesse of youth? the Husband man by the dearth of Corne: the Ar∣chitect by the ruine of hou∣ses, the Lawyer by conten∣tions betweene men, the Physitians by others sick∣nesses?
this is not contrary to the generall policy of nature; for Physitians hold, that the birth and augmen∣tation of every thing, is the alteration & corruption of another; God takes from one, and gives to another; but let no man desire it; for the Commandement is, thou shalt not covet: there are then and must be exter∣nall causes of a mans rising. But there is some hidden vertue, which must beare a great stroake in the busines. Salomon saith, he that consi∣dereth the wind, shall not sow; and he that looketh to the cloudes shall not reape: whereupon sayth one; a wise man will make more opportunities then he finds.
Is the maine thing which raiseth a mans estate with∣out him, or within him? Quaeritur. Livy tells us of Cato seuior, that he was so well accom∣plisht in minde and body; that in what place soever he had bin borne,Quocun{que} loco natus esset, for∣tunam sibi facturus videretur. Livy. he could have made himselfe a for∣tune. There are then open vertues which bring forth praise; but hidden and se∣cret ones which bring forth fortune. Certaine deliveryes of a mans selfe, which have no name; like the milkie way in the skie, which is a mee∣ting of many small starres, not seene asunder, but gi∣ving light together, for there are a number of scarse
discerned vertues, which make men fortunate. For that which is with∣out a man, instead of pro∣vidence; let me call it Di∣vine providence: it can make him fortunate, which is not wise; and him that is wise to be miserable: some∣times simple men bring to a happy end great matters, both publique and private; and againe sometimes the best counsells, have the worst issues: the same coun∣sell doth happily succeed to one, unhappily to ano∣ther; in the same case, with the same man many things went luckely yesterday, un∣luckely to day: so that wee cannot judge of mens suffi∣ciency by event. One won∣dering
why ill successe should follow upon the ma∣ture deliberation of wise men, was answered thus; they were Masters of their deliberation, not of the successe of their affaires. Ti∣motheus the Athenian, when he had in the account,It was the Spar∣tan reso∣lution, Ad mota manu for∣tunam in∣vocare. Iudg. 7.20. The sword of the Lord and of Gideon; the one as Conca, the Foun¦taine, the other as Canalis the Con∣duit. he gave to the State, often in∣terlaced this speech; and in this fortune had no part: it was noted of him, that he never prospered after∣wards. Divine providence must have it's due, there is no rising without it: laying both these together, the question will be resolved thus; a mans industry with Gods blessing upon it, is that which makes him for∣tunate; both have force in
the businesse; it is clearely false, that one doth all, and the other nothing. The ad∣vice of wisedome then, is not wholly to settle our selves to one, for they mu∣tually attend each other. It was the plot of Iosephs Religion to preserve him honest,Virtute duce, co∣mite for∣tuna. that he might re∣maine fortunate: There∣fore the first thing that I advise to, that my Citizen may live profitably; is that he be sincerely and con∣stantly Religious; so he may expect Gods blessings upon his labour, to which I pro∣ceede. If a man should at every weekes end consider with himselfe, how he hath spent it, how many houres might
he reckon up, which he cannot tell how he bestow∣ed, besides eating and drinking? how many need∣lesse Items would he find given to sleepe? Item seaven nights, Item perhaps seaven halfe afternoones, besides halfe houres, and quarters, at unaccustomed times; had those men for whose great estates the World hath had them in admiration, kept eight a Clock houres; fame had never had them upon Record: as indeede I never knew a perpetual bed-pres∣ser so much as mentioned, but to his disgrace. Adam in the state of Innocency, must dresse the Garden, and after it was said, in the sweat of thy browes, thou
shalt eat thy bread; the pre∣cept is Labour, and there is a reward annext to it; there∣fore Salomon said, seest thou a man diligent in his busi∣nesse? that man shall stand before Kings. Labour not for the meate which perisheth, but for that which endureth everlastingly, (saith our Saviour) Should we heare of labour, and not of Everlasting life, wee should be discouraged: so, should wee heare of labour, and not of profit, we could have little comfort in im∣ployment. But shall wee thinke Providence hath nimble feet, if ours be slow? Shall we eat and not work? shall we think with the Lil∣lies (which neither spin nor
labour) our clothes will grow upon us? God forbid: or shall wee thinke the la∣bour of others shall suffice for us? no, let him that will take the profit, take the paines. Selim the first, had reason to say, that hee thought victories gotten in the Masters absence, not to be compleat: as it is in Mi∣litary, so in Civill affaires; and that man may blush for shame, who puts off his busi∣nesse to his Servants, doing nothing himselfe, but by thoughts and verball dire∣ction. Julian the Emperour was ashamed any man should see him spit or sweat, because hee thought continuall la∣bour should have concocted
and dryed up all such super∣fluities. Thus he a Heathen testified his hate to idlenes; and shall we whom Christi∣anity hath taught that wee came into the world to la∣bour, sit still? I speake not this against a mans imploy∣ing others in his affaires, when their burthen is too heavie for him: but I would have a Master doe, as well as direct; for nothing doth more derogate from his re∣spect, than that hee lets his Servant bee sole Master of his Trade, while hee is but Master of the Servant, and in the meane time being a slave to an idle disposition, is lesse honourable than his Man. Hee must labour, but there is Labor importunus, and
non opportunus, the first is too solicitous, the second is out of its time; both these must bee avoyded. For the first, Malè cuncta ministrat impetus, force gives all things ill. The Lions rore, yet they suffer hunger, while the quiet Sheepe have a Shep∣heard to provide for them; a too sharpe intention hin∣ders the wise conduct of bu∣sinesse.Ipsa se ve∣locitas im∣plicat, un∣de fostina∣tio tarda est. Hee that is hastie, stumbles, and is stayed, whe∣ther hee will or not. Velo∣city doth intangle it selfe: whence it comes to passe, that haste is slow, an over ardent way in dealing is ne∣ver without many indis∣creet actions and wrongs: Even in play, he that is car∣ried with an earnest thirst
of gaming, troubleth him∣selfe: and the more he trou∣bleth himselfe, the more he loseth. He that walkes mo∣derately, is alwaies with himselfe, and directeth his businesse with the best ad∣vantage. Therefore one said, well, let us stay a while, that wee may make an end the sooner. The deliberate man is alwaies ready for a new change, festinat lentè, he makes haste, yet goes slow∣ly. I would have my Citi∣zen diligent, but not passio∣nate: they deceive them∣selves, which think busines∣ses are not well done, un∣lesse they be done with tem∣pest and clamour. For the second, there is a time to eate, and a time to
drinke, a time to sleepe, a time for recreation as well as for labour. Labour may be as meat,Et data non ato tempore vina no∣cent. Ovid. which out of it's time doth hurt, not nourish: but above all, let us not by labour commit Sacriledge, wee must not make our soules feasts moveables. Gods time is measured out by inches, ours by ells: since hee hath so little allotted him, let us not take from him any of that. How can we expect Gods blessing up∣on our day, if we serve not him upon his Day? Nay, if wee will bee blest in the weeke day, let us pray in the weeke dayes, Ibi nunquam res humanae prosperè succedunt ubi negliguntur divinae: there hu∣mane businesse doth not suc∣ceed
well, where divine is neglected. Let us not omit that time of publique prayer which the Church hath ap∣pointed, let not our labour be so out of time, as to take up that time: O Tempora, O Mores! What a change is here! in King Edwards time,Sixt. when our Land was delive∣red from that Fogge of Egypt; with what joy,Nil adeo magnum, nec tam mirabile quicquam principio, quod non minuut mirarier omnes pau latim. rea∣dinesse, and thanks-giving did the people come to heare the Liturgie in their owne tongue? but nothing is so great or admirable in the beginning; of which men doe not lessen their admiration by little and little: Now men come to it, as if preaching were a∣gainst
praying, wee shall have more Pillars in the Church, than men. It is well that it is said, Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the middest of them. Had the promise beene tyed to a greater number, those few that are sometimes assem∣bled might doubt of suc∣cesse. No question but the times might prosper as well as ever they did, if our Temples were filled with praying, as well as preach∣ing, as they have beene. O the wonderfull sweetnesse of Divine Letanies, where many hands and hearts are lifted up! hands in purity, hearts in piety! hands in good workes, hearts in
good thoughts. Who is a∣ble to conceive the un∣speakable value of publike Services? of these sacred and heavenly Evaporati∣ons? they are more than the breath of Spices; they are none other than the Emissions of Paradise, when the Organs are blowne, and the Cymbals make a noyse; when the voices are heard, and the whole Quire of Re∣ligious men doe fill the aire with loud cryes, and vocall symphonies of devout and patheticall invocations, then doe the Spices flow, the Odours are burnt,Apocal. 8.4. and the smoke of our Incense goes up before the Lord from the Angels hand. To labour, when these Prayers
are to be performed; to la∣bour at such a time, must needs be out of time: so la∣bour, if it be not importunus, nor non opportunus, my Citi∣zen may have profit by it: these things considered, let him endeavour to grow rich. They report of the Birds of Norway, that they flie faster than the Fowles of any other Country; by an instinct they know the dayes in that Climate to be very short, not above three houres long, and therefore they make the more haste. Let him learne of the Fowles of the Aire, which know their times, and con∣sidering his lives shortnesse, let him bee the more indu∣strious. Let him labour and
consider it is for wealth,Dives li∣ber, hono∣ratus, pul∣cher rex denique re¦rm Hoc Epi. the monyed man is the mighty man: Honour, Li∣berty, and Royalty attend on Riches; Logick faileth, Rhetorick fainteth, when Gold pleads the Cause. Orpheus his Harpe, Amphions Musick, Virgils Muse, Tullies Tongue are silent:Quamvis non anginâ correptus, sed argen∣tanginâ corruptus fuerit Ora¦tor. Plut. yea Thundring Demosthenes will complaine of the Squinsies, if mony forbid him to play the Orator: they onely de∣spise Riches, which de∣spaire of them; like the Foxe in the Fable, cursing the Grapes hee could not reach.Divitae ne malae putantur; dantur bo∣nis; ne sum¦mae, malis. Aug.  But to better pur∣pose, consider, Riches are not the chiefest good, there∣fore wicked men enjoy them. But because they are
not evill in themselves, it may become a good man to labour for them. The Poore and the Rich meete toge∣ther, and the Lord is the Maker of them all, (saith Salomon) The holy Ghost hath plac'd Lazarus so poore in the bo∣some of Abraham that was so rich, to shew that Rich and Poore, if they be inde∣nizon'd in the Kingdome of Grace, have an equall in∣terest in the Kingdome of Glory. If outward blessings might be monopoliz'd one∣ly to the wicked, the godly being incompassed with flesh and blood, would thinke basely of the Reli∣gion, Worship, and Ser∣vice of God; therefore
labour for them. These are expedient to set many of the vertues a going; as Charity, Almes-giving, and the like: there∣fore Aristotle is not to bee taxed for making Riches necessary for some of the Vertues: they are out of all question, Bonum unde facias bonum, a good by which thou maist doe good. Men are not apt to take so exact notice of those spi∣rituall blessings wherewith the Elect are inwardly adorned, (so God loseth some of his glory) unlesse temporall blessings bee ad∣ded to them, therefore la∣bour for them. Lastly, let the considera∣tion of that grand Senator,
the Lord Mayors Dignity, with his Brethren the right Worshipfull Alder∣men shew, what a man in time may come to, if hee bee industrious in his Cal∣ling. Senators ought to bee rich, for these Reasons. Wealth is a pledge of their care of the Common-wealth: it is likely, he that hath done well for him∣selfe, will know how to doe well for the publike good, being put to it. Wealth being gotten, their minds may with more diligence intend the pub∣like affaires, having enough to maintaine Servants to performe the domestick.
In Ruling, there must be power and command, which a poore man cannot have, all the world despi∣seth him, Animal periculosis∣simum Rex pauper, to have a poore Governour is a great plague. Thus let the Ho∣nour which any man may bee called to, move him to get Riches; the meanes is ordained, together with the end. In the raigne of King RICHARD the first, in the yeere of Grace, 1188. Sir HENRY FITZ-ALLEN, who was the first Lord Mayor of London, continu∣ed in that Dignity foure and twenty yeeres, and be∣side him many have held the place 3. or 4. times.
But excellent policy hath now so ordered, that every yeere shall have a new Major. Majores Magi∣stratus sint perpetui, annui atque ambulatorij minores, saith a good Politician. Let the chiefest Magistrates be per∣petuall, the lesser yeerely, still removing. Besides o∣ther reasons, this is none of the least. It encourageth every man to labour, when his merits may be so Crowned; but ambition must be avoy∣ded: there is a two fold way to honour, Direct when God calls; Indirect when man seekes for it without his warrant. Let my Citi∣zen mind the way, as well as the end: let him not run
to honours, but expect them, not as one who seeks them, but deserves them. It is not now the World, where a man shall beare the token of his desert about him; vertuous men are not now so honoured, that they may by triumphs imprint their actions deeply in mens memories; nor is there such an equalnesse in States, that all mens actions should be seene, with the like Judge∣ment; and indeede it were pitty it were so now, for pride would ruine all in a moment: Marcellus dedica∣ted two Temples; the one to Vertue, the other to Ho∣nour, and made them so, that none could enter into the Temple of Honour, but
he that had first gon through that of Vertue: my Citizen must not be ambitious, if he would be honour'd, he must be vertuous as well as rich: why he must endeavour for riches, hath beene shewed. So I now proceed; as I would have him labour, so let not his labour be over∣long; there is a difference betweene providing for a mans selfe and family, and doing nothing else: the af∣faires of the soule, the re∣freshing of the body must be lookt after, beside the publique good hath some interest in every mans time. The labours of lesse then the third part of the World, maintaine all the World: how many live idlely? al∣most
all women, which are halfe of the number; or if women be imploy'd, in their stead men be idle; put to those candid men, and great men; then adde the last and worst sort, the great num∣ber of beggers, and you shall see that few labour, and of those, few be well imploy∣ed. If the labour of lesse then the third part main∣taynes the World, lesse then the third part of my Citi∣zens time, one day with an other, will be sufficient for him; unlesse his private af∣faires be extraordinary, or he be imployed in the pub∣lique. But before I speake any thing of his getting by his endeavour; let me say some∣thing
of his spending. I would have him think it more honourable to stoope to petty savings,Plutarch saith of Cato, that hee held this for a max¦ime. then to base gettings; let him imi∣tate the thriftie King of France, who thought it no discredit to tye a knot in a broken poynt, and reweare it. 'Twas onely for Widows and Or∣phans to sufferany diminuti¦on in their e∣states.Let him not haunt Ta∣verns too much which is the Epidemicall fault of the Ci∣tie; I know it is not compa∣ny, but want of discretion in the choyce and use of it, which overthrowes a man; but besides needlesse expen∣ces;Apollo will not keep him company who makes Bacchus his chief God. how can that man be fit for busines, who makes his body a continuall quag∣mire? The refined wits of the separation, love bro∣therhood,
not fellowship: we may with the Apostle love brotherly fellowship, so making use of both, yet drink as they did in the Pri∣mitive times, thinking Deum esse per noctem memorandum, that God is to be remem∣bred in the night, as well as in the day. And what shall I say of superfluous dyet? In mea pa∣tria venter est Deus (saith one) in my Countrey the belly is the God; and is it not so in ours? What infinite summes of money are sacrificed to it, in procuring the Earth, the Ayre, the Sea, to cen∣tre at one Table, making Table-clothes like Peters sheete, including creatures, cleane, and uncleane? Our
Fathers were they alive now, surely they could not tell the names of our need∣lesse variety of dishes, with∣out the helpe of a Kitching Dictionary; they would wonder that Art should keepe Schoole in the Kit∣chin, and that the palats of these times should be so in∣genious. I must not speake against good house-keeping; that cost is not vaine, if the poore may eat thereof: but Hospitality is now not knowne; the men of these times were borne since the death of it. Needlesse expences in clothes must not be forgot∣ten; one bragging of his or∣naments and gold, was thus
answered, Haec laus metallo∣rum, non hominis, this is the praise of the metalls,Ornamen¦tum est quod or∣nat, ornat autem quod hone∣stiorem fa∣cit. not of the man; that is the orna∣ment of a man, which doth adorne him; but that only adornes him, which makes him more honest: I am not sumptuous saith Seneca, sed nemo aliter Romae vivere potest, but no man can live other∣wise at Rome. O why doe we deceive our selves saith he? the evill is within us, vis∣ceribus haeret, it cleaves to our bowells, the fault is our owne. Because I would not be so tedious as to mention other expences: Let mee advise my Citizen onely with Seneca, to endeavour to have Plus vtalici quàm viae, let him have more provisi∣on
for the way than of the way. Saint Bernard preach∣ing the Funerall Sermon for Gerardus the Steward of his Abbey at Clare Vallis, a∣mong many commendati∣ons, gives him this: that he was Magnus in minimis, great even in little matters, his care and circumspection extending to the smallest atome of affaires: let my Citizen imitate him. Hap∣pie is hee that deserves the title, Fidelis in minimo, hee shall bee made owner of a great deale. Let him save any thing hee can save, without hurt to his conscience, or losse to his credit. Crossing the appetite, as it is the way of Vertue, so the way of profit.
Thus I have opened the passage: let mee now lead him into the way of profit. Cunning is a crooked Wisedome: let him shun that, and take that wise∣dome which is direct, which is not without ho∣nesty, nor ability; which teacheth, that a true know∣ledge of the parties with whom a man deales, is first necessary. Hee must under∣stand their nature, humour, inclination, designments, and proceedings: so the nature of businesse in hand must bee knowne too. A su∣perficiall knowledge of it is not enough, a man must penetrate into the inside, and see things in them∣selves, with the accidents
and consequents that be∣long thereunto; joyning both these together, it will be easy for him to profit, if according to the divers na∣tures of the persons and a∣faires, he change his stile, and manner of proceeding;Non se mu tat sed ap∣tat. as a wise Sea-man, who ac∣cording to the divers state of the Sea, and change of winds, doth diversly turne his sayles and rudder; know∣ing every mans nature and fashions, hee may lead him; knowing his ends, he may perswade him; knowing his weaknesse or disadvantage, he may awe him; if the qua∣lity of the businesse be un∣derstood, to the finding out of which, every mans owne observation must bee set a
worke; which if it be dili∣gent, will bring forth more then the best writer is able to utter. His words I would have to be few:Quòd ge∣minas au∣res, es quòd na∣tura dat unum, nos docet audire plu¦rima, pau∣ca loqui. It was well advi∣sed by Cleanthes; to one who entreated him to instruct his sonne, he said, be silent; for beside the advantage he hath of a talker in having all he knowes without pay∣ing of him any thing for it: silence is also more becom∣ing, and instructing: did all men thinke alike, secresie were not necessary; but since the speaker and expo∣siter utter and receive with different mindes; speech cannot carry her meaning alwaies just as a man would have her; therefore a man
must defend her impotency by keeping her in: other∣wise he may let loose many prisoners, which will be∣tray him to disadvantage: let him remember the Ita∣lian Proverb, La lingua del Savio è ascosta nel suo cuore, the tongue of a Wiseman is hid∣den in his heart. Those servants which are about a man must bee enjoyned secresie. It is well their Indentures mention it, and it were better if they did more regard it. I wonder that the Barbari∣ans generally doe not de∣prive those Servants they imploy neere them, of their tongues, as well as their privities: me thinkes they should be as jealous of their
secrets, as their lusts: but the better wisedome of the Turkes is to have certaine Mules to performe their executions. Scilla found where Athens might bee attempted by Flavius, that had the talking disease, the Fluxe of words. Next I would have my Citizen more wise, than to let his wife know of his Af∣faires; every Mans experi∣ence can tell him of the mischiefe done by Womens talking, without my citing Histories for examples. If hee doe impart his se∣crets, let him know they cannot be kept secret, un∣lesse committed to a few: this is an infallible pre∣cept, lay your estate (if need
requires) upon many, your thoughts and waighty in∣tents upon few; among ma∣ny you shall hardly finde one so honest, who will not abuse them to his particu∣lar profit, if he know them. Tattling was once a safe∣guard, wher the Geese pre∣served the Romane Capi∣toll by it: but such exam∣ples are very rare in Hi∣story. Of his speaking let mee deliver this: hee must take counsell with himselfe first, and then speake. I never knew a man better him∣selfe, or others, by those words which came forth rashly. Let even the least circumstances be weighed; as you would choose what
to eate,Orbum per os ingressu∣rum exa∣minas, cur nogrssu rum per os verbum? Aug. in Psal. 51. so choose what to speake: thou examinest the meat that goes into thy mouth, so examine the word that comes out of it: for this may worke greater Tragedies without thee, then that within thee. But to proceed, let him which desires his actions should goe forward with a profitable successe, delibe∣rate upon them: the wisest say a man must consult slowly, & execute speedily, deliberate with leasure, ac∣complish with expedition, sometimes the contrary is practized with good event, Subiti Consilijs, eventu faelices, sudden in Counsels, happy in successe: but this is seldome, and by chance;
according to which wee must not direct our actions; as hee must consult with himselfe, so with other; (be∣cause no mans wisedome is sufficient for all businesses), yet so as he aske, what is best to be done, without telling what he will doe; suffer not their counsell to goe through with resoluti∣tion, and direction, as if it depended upon them; take the matter back into your owne hands, to make it a∣peare to the World, that the finall directions, (which because they come forth with prudence, and power, are resembled to Pallas ar∣med), proceede from your selfe, and not from the au∣thority of your Counsel∣lours;
but consider with whom you deliberate, Cla∣rissima sente, confide paucis, It is an excellent sentence, trust few. Conside nulli, trust none, is a sentence too, but too strict; to counsell is the best office of a friend; but let him be a friend with whom you counsell;Oma cum ami∣co deli∣bera,  de ipso pri∣us. delibe∣rate of all things with thy friend; but first of him; looke that he want neither of his two proper qualities, ho∣nesty, sufficiency. For the acting of things, duely con∣sulted upon, times and sea∣sons must be well observed: precipitation is an enemy to businesse, and the Step-mother of all good actions: affected dispatch is a most dangerous thing; it is like
that which Physitions call predigestion, which is sure to fill the body full of cru∣dities and secret seedes of diseases: therefore measure not dispatch by the times of imployment, but by the ad∣vancement of the businesse. If the case require the help of an other in a mans affaires; let him embrace the use of his vertues, and offi∣cious service ablenesse; let him use him, and his abili∣ties so long as they may be used upon good termes, thankfully, and respectiue∣ly; remembring that the labourer is worthy of his hyre. In some cases my Citizen may mingle profit with ho∣nesty, and enter into a com∣position
with both: he must never turne his back to ho∣nesty; yet sometimes goe a∣bout and coast it, using an extraordinary skill, which may be better practis'd then exprest; something which may be done openly, must be done secretly, because of the misconstruing world; but this is a good rule, a∣voyd unjust wayes, and of just wayes, take those that are most plausible. It is necessary, my Citizen defend himselfe, by this buckler, distrust, which is a great part of prudence; it is even the very sinew of wise∣dome, for a mans selfe to take heed of all men; the nature of the World indu∣ceth a man to this, which is
wholly composed of lyes, fraud, and counterfet dea∣lings. Opimius being dange∣rously sick of a Lethargie; when some would share his goods, before the breath was out of his body, his care∣full Physitian caused his money to be powred out before him, and bid him a∣wake,Vt vivae viga. that he might live; so distrust will cure a Lethar∣gie, of a sleepfull man it makes a wakefull one, and so keepes out poverty; a man must trust few, and those known by long expe∣rience, and distrust must be disguised; for open diffi∣dence inviteth as much to deceive, as an overcarelesse confidence;Seneca, Multi fallere do∣cuerunt, dum timent falli; many
fearing to be deceived, have taught how to deceive; wheras oftē a professed trust hath taken away a desire to deceive, by obliging fidelity; every man would be credi∣ted, and a beliefe of his ho∣nesty, doth many times bind him to be honest; a professed trust then doth well with a conceald diffidence. In the practise of which he must be very circumspect, for I can∣not warrant it in all cases to be just. From this so ordered di∣strust, proceeds a commēda∣ble close commodious car∣riage, which in matters of lesse importance, must for a mans credit sake some∣times be layd aside; so with applause he may deale close∣ly
in matters of weight; cu∣rious subtleties are no more so, when they are once dis∣covered. Let him not keepe infe∣riours so distant, that he cannot afterwards imploy them at his need: It was the wisedome of a French King, to doe any thing to win that man to him, which might benefit or hurt him; let him be liberall in his words, so he bestows favours which cost him nothing; let him be free in his deeds, for a be∣nefit is the Father of a be∣nefit. It was observed of Sejanus, that he could not have bin advanced, with∣out an infinite number of men obliged by his favours; yet here let his discretion
direct him, for small bene∣fits are easily forgotten; great ordinarily surcharge: some ungratefull ones neg∣lect them, and some would not there should be any, to whom they may account themselves as debtors, wish∣ing nothing more then the death of him that hath done them good. In conversing with e∣qualls, let him professe him∣selfe to be lesse then they; let him be courteous and affable to them; for they that are so, will find their enemies to bee greater friends to them, then natu∣rall brothers will be to men high minded. If he deale with superi∣ours let him make what use
he can of them, but not trust in them; among all mortall things, there is no∣thing more fading then that power which hath not sup∣port from it selfe; it is com∣mon for that man to be unfortunat, which depends upon another. Let him in∣devour by good courses to winne speedily the opinion of all honest men, which much imports to the short∣ning that way, which guides to an eminent esteeme: so let him strive to be in his rising, assisted by many; o∣ther wise, he will find him∣selfe opprest with age, be∣fore hee be rich, or well knowne. Thus let him be diligent in the Quest of riches, and
credit; but not over-violent and long; he knowes not how to begin to enjoy, which knowes not how to make an end of having: therfore let him be content with what he may have, for aboundance is not the end of evills, but the mutation. If doing these things, hee misse of wealth & esteeme, let him not misse of vertue; for though every fortune faile him, it is no meane for∣tune to be vertuous. There is Sancta avaritia, a holy covetousnesse, let him never be satisfied with do∣ing good to his better part; I would have him thinke, that by every man with whom he shall trade, he may benefit his mind some∣thing.
If those which trade with most men did so, wee might wonder more at their wisedome, then we doe now at their wealth. Thus my Compleat Ci∣tizen shall live in his cal∣ling; that's a mans proper calling, for which GOD hath fitted him with abili∣ty. Secondly, it is his cal∣ling, if he came to it by the ordinary way, of the place wherein he lives: in stead of divers sorts of men which I might here taxe, I will in∣stance but one. Many Petitions have bin put up to the high Court of Parliament, for the sup∣pressing of those brokers, which deale in cloth, and other commodities; the
reason of which alleadg'd, I know not, but imagine this. They wrong the whole Republique, wanting suf∣ficiency of skill, to buy and order the commodity: hee that buyes it of them, payes too deare for it; or if hee buyes it cheape, it is too bad for his use. Not knowing how to or∣der their trade, they cannot hold out long so, breaking they hurt the seller too; for I have observed that all, (or most) suddainely breake, which meddle in those bu∣sinesses, in which they have no skill: the reason of these two incōveniences, is their not comming into what they professe, by the way of
the City, a seven yeeres Apprentiship, having beene most of them before Tay∣lors, Tapsters, or the like, which is the cause of a third evill. Many of them comming in, and not by the ordinary way, raise the number of Traders to such a multi∣tude, that in the end (with∣out redresse) they will un∣doe themselves and others, for there will bee more of them, then our people or strangers wee deale withall shall have occasion to im∣ploy. Thus I have shewed how my Citizen shall live profi∣tably to himselfe in his way: but himselfe is too poore an end for an honest
mans actions: let him not be right earth, which onely stands fast upon its one Centre, whereas all things which have affinity with the Heavens, move upon the Centre of another, which they benefit there∣fore. Hee shall live Profi∣tably to others. FIrst, to his Wife. We are taught by the light of nature, that In Familia, pri∣ma cura Vxoris habenda sit, in a Family, the first and chiefe care should be of the Wife; shee is a great Officer in the little Common-wealth the
House; she is I know an im∣pediment to great enter∣prizes: the best workes of merit have proceeded from the unmarried, which have sought eternity in memory, not in posterity: and in re∣gard of liberty,Quaeritis uxorem fu giat cur ducere fae∣lix? hoc si∣ne jactura neminis il∣le nequit. the unmar∣ried man is most happy. Some have said wittily, and in my opinion devoutly; marriage fills the earth, and virginity Heaven: but o∣thers have better said, how should Heaven be full, if the Earth were empty? or how should the earth but bee empty without marriage? which the best Common∣wealths have so esteemed, that they have freed him from taxation and Offices, that had many Children,
but punisht him for an un∣profitable member that li∣ved long single. It is commendable for a Citizen to marry: but since his negligence may bee his Wifes undoing, let him live so profitably to her, as by his discretion to direct her. The ancient Heathen u∣sed to place Mercury by Ve∣nus, to shew what need the affections of marriage have of the rule of Reason and wisedome to order them. God cast Adam into a heavy sleepe,Gen. 2. whilest he made him a Wife of one of his Ribs: upon which one morali∣zeth very well thus: the af∣fections ought to sleepe a∣bout this worke, and rea∣son
to wake: as in the choice of a wife, so in the governing of her when shee is chosen. As he married, or should have done, respecting his posterity, and the Common∣wealth: so now he must not let her spend too much, lest his posterity rue it, or he be disabled to doe good to o∣thers. Among many faults of Shee-Citizens, their pride stands as a Saul, higher by the head and shoulders than the rest; not that it is grea∣ter, or more common than their secret sins, but more seene; and so with lesse dan∣ger I may speake against it. Doe any of them beare the minde of Philons wife, who
being demanded why she a∣lone went so plainely ap∣parelled, made answer, that her Husbands vertues were ornament sufficient for her. For redresse of their pride, let Husbands shew them good examples by go∣ing plainely themselves: so they, if they have any good∣nesse in them, will bee asha∣med to doe otherwise; if this will not doe, let them be restrain'd. Let not a woman rule, it is the counsell of the Apo∣stle, Let wives be subject to their husbands, he considered that the woman rul'd, nay over∣ruled so ill at first, as that it were pitty shee should bee permitted to rule againe.
Le  uxorious man, who will et his wife doe any thi rather than displease her,Siens ju dicto debet amarecon gem, non affectu harken to St. Hierom; a wise man must love his wife with judgement, not with blinde affection. As hee may not dote on his wife, so let him not bee bitter towards her: oppro∣brious termes and dealings have made women doe that which otherwise they would never have done. Clytem nestra being injured by her Husband, fell into adultery, and consequently slew him. Let him walke honestly towards her, let him bee to her, as he desires she should be to him. Culpa libido fuit, poena libido fuit, was said of
one; I may say the same of two: the lust of the one be∣ing the fault, the lust of the other may bee the punish∣ment. Let him beare with her infirmities, remem∣bring that she is the weaker vessell:Ʋirà viri∣bus, mulier quasi mol∣lior. let him practice le∣nity, not severity; clemen∣cy, not tyranny; otherwise a good womans patience may bee turned to fury: if she doe not performe such businesse as hee puts upon her,Patientia nimium laesa fit fu∣ror. with that wisedome he expects, let him beare with her; he was a wise man that expected no more wit from a woman, then to know her Husbands bed from a stran∣gers. If he perceive her an∣gry, let him beare with her infirmitie in that also, and
not bee angry, at the same time, for a house divided cannot stand. Socrates was the more able to converse quietly with perverse persons abroad, hea∣ring with patience dayly, thescolding of his Zantippe at home. Let him bee willing and endeavour to be able to in∣struct her; it is not onely necessary that hee walke with his Wife as a man of love, but before her, as a man of understanding: It is monstrous to see the head stand where the feet should be; and a double pitty, when a Nabal and Abigail are matcht together; but if thou hast a Wife whose wise∣dome needs none of thy in∣struction,
thank GOD for her;Pro. 19.14. Houses and riches are the inheritance of the Fathers, but a prudent Wife is of the Lord. Lastly, let him shew kind∣nesse to her at his death: one makes mention of a Law among the Romanes, Ne quis haeredem faeminam fa∣ceret, nec unicam filiam,Civi. Dei lib. 3. Cap 21. that no man should make a Wo∣man or his onely daughter heire; I know not what Law can be devised more unjust than this. God himselfe hath said, If a man dye and have no Son,Num. 27.8. then hee shall turne his inheri∣tance to his Daughter; and Di∣vinitie which hath taught men how to love their Wives, hath taught them to provide for them; but dis∣cretion
must teach to leave them no more then enough: for we often see a mans e∣nemies enjoy that which he hath laboured for; how much good might those ma∣ny thousands (which many Citizens have left), have done to the poore, to Hos∣pitalls, to Schooles of Lear∣ning and Religion, to re∣pairing of Churches, and other good uses, if they had not bin given to silly ambi∣tious Women, which can doe nothing with them, but buy the title of a Lady! As hee shall live profitably to his Wife, so to those of whom he hath the charge, Children, and Aprentices; Dionysius meaning to reveng himselfe upon Dion, who
made warre against him, caused his son to be brought up in ryot and wanton∣nesse; this labour many save their enemies, and doe it themselves, proving mise∣rable Governours, of disso∣lute young ones; what hope can the City have of those youth, the debauchtnesse of whose lives hath not been prevented by good educati∣on?Quo semel est imbuta recens ser∣vabit odo∣rem testa diu. Hor. Few good Citizens sons become good Citizens thē∣selves; they know those waies of spēding, which the Father never knew; but not his wayes of getting, and sa∣ving; as Cicero's son, they are like their Fathers in no∣thing, but in name. To re∣dresse this, let youths wilful∣nes
be restrained; they should not know they have a will in their owne keeping; but in the charg of those which are above them. Quaeritis Aegistus quare sit factus a∣dulter? in promptu causa est, desidiosus erat Ovid.Let them not be idle, in doing nothing they learne to doe ill; it was good policy in the Romanes to let their youth learn nothing sitting; the best Commonwealthes have allowed them Thea∣tres, and spacious fields, for them to exercise their gym∣nicks and exercises in, and the best Republiquists have allowed those youths whom they had in their tuition, time to performe them. Let them have good ex∣amples shewed them: I may say of most of them, Vel in poculum impingunt, vel in pu∣ellam;
and I would they did it not by example; Cicero ex∣acteth an extraordinary knowledge from his sonne, because of his hearing, and conversing with Catippus; and we might expect great vertue from our youth, if those that governe them would walke vertuously. In the next place, he shall live profitably to the poore. Art thou a great man, and wouldst make thy great∣nes known? make it known by thy gifts. Marcus Anto∣nius said of the Romane greatnes, that it was not so much discern'd by what it tooke, as what it gave: if occasions of doing good be not offered, seeke for them; It was St. Augustines advice,
Emamus occasiones, let us buy occasions of doing good; mercifull workes are, Pro sacrificijs, imo prae sacrificijs, accepted of God as sacri∣fice; yea more than sacrifice. Anthony Prince of Salern a liberall man, being askt what he would leave him∣selfe, answered, Quod dedi, that which I have given;Parcus quasi par artae qui∣a sicut arca tenaciter omnia cu∣stodit. but avaritious men thinke they lose what they give. When they beg in Italy, they use this phrase, Fate ben per voi, doe good for your selves, Foeneratur Domino qui misere∣tur pauperis, he that giveth to the poore,Aug. in Psal. 36. Serm. 3. lendeth to the Lord. Qui prohibet te esse foe∣neratorem, jubet te esse faenera∣torem, so he that forbids thee to be an usurer, doth com∣mand
thee to be so; To con∣clude this,Aug. Hom. 7. let all covetous wretches consider Dives, de∣sideravit guttam qui non dedit micam, he that denyed a crumme of bread in his life, was denyed a drop of water in hell: alas what are 10000. Rivers, or that whole Sea of water to that infinit world of fire? yet Dives, unhappy Dives, who wasted in his life so many tuns of wine, cānot now procure water enough, a pot of water, a drop of water to coole the tip of his scorched tongue. In the last place, let him live pro∣fitably to the whole Re∣publique. An Ant is a wise creature for it selfe, but a shrewd thing in an Orchard or Garden: and
certainely men that are great lovers of them∣selves, wast the Publique. My Citizen must then with reason divide be∣tweene selfe-love and so∣ciety;Non nobis solum na∣ti sumus. Cicero. so walking profi∣tably to himselfe, as hee hinder not the good of the Common-wealth, but fur∣ther it. In performing such acti∣ons as tend to the pub∣lique good, it is to bee in∣quired how hee shall pro∣ceed. Hanibal in Italy by his vices did the same thing which Scipio in Spaine did by his vertues:Machia∣vel Lib. 3 Cap. 21. the love of the one, the feare of the other, produced one effect. But wee Christians are
taught, that evill may not bee done, that good may come of it: besides our experience shewes us, that no profit is permanent, which is raised by wicked∣nesse. All honest meanes are to bee used in advancing the Common good. I will insist upon no more but two. Let every man study Unity. Scilurus having many Children being about to die,Plu. apo. gave them a bundle of Darts, bidding every of them try in their order to breake them; they try∣ed, but could not while they were bound toge∣ther; himselfe taking them
asunder, Facilè confregit omnia, brake them all easi∣ly: So it shall be with you (saith hee) Si concordes eri∣tis, &c. if you agree toge∣ther, no man shall hurt you: but divided, you can∣not prosper: so it fares with a City, their safety de∣pends chiefly upon Vnity and mutuall conjunction of the Inferiours,Discordia et seditio omnia op∣portuna in sidiantibus faciunt. Curt. with the Superiours; and of these one with another, discord and sedition makes all things fit their purpose, which lie in waite to prey upon the City, or the wealth of it. Secondly, I could wish that Citizens did not so much increase the number of Apprentices as in these
times they doe. It is strange, that Cloth-workers, Plaisterers, and other inferiour Trades, should in their policy this way, exceed those of a higher ranck. It is proba∣ble, that scarce one of these Artificers in five, could have beene imploy∣ed three dayes in a weeke, without their laudable course of restrayning eve∣ry man to one or two Ap∣prentises in his appointed time; which hath wrought this effect, that none in these Trades so ordered, can (unlesse the fault bee his owne) complaine for want of worke. In taking many Apren∣tises, a mans secrets lying
upon many, shall soone be discovered; and it may be to his great disadvantage; thus he hurts himselfe, but hurts the publique chiefe∣ly. A man that hath had a good stock to begin with, being brought to decay, is it not a thousand pitties, that having paid a summe of money at his initiation, and discharged all requi∣red duties in the City, shall be forced to begge or starve in it, of goe out of it for a living? Againe, many a young man which shall not have, or hath not for the present a sufficient stock of money or credit to begin with, is it not pitty that he should
leave the City? yet while men may have what num∣ber of Aprentices they please; it shall be very hard for either of these to find imployment. To redresse this, let few Aprentices be taken, and those for longer time then ordinary: 'Tis pitty that every child with whom is given a great summe of money, should be bound but for seven yeeres, which expired, he must needs be a Master before hee be a man; so the splendor of the City will bee dim'd, and boyes stand in shoppe doores, in the places of personable men; which is an inconveniencie, almost as great as the former.
These things conside∣red, let the common good of all bee rather endevou∣red, then the particular of a few: Every private man is a servant to the Common wealth; it is a great disproportion, that the servants good be pre∣ferred before the Masters; but a greater, when the little good of the Servant, shall goe against the great good of the Master; which is as to set another mans house on fire, to rost a mans owne eggs. But fearing my prolixi∣ty may offend my Reader, I am willing to end; so for a conclusion, I propound the Words of our Saviour, Negotiamini, donec venero,
Trade while I come: Let my Citizen remember his comming, and so let him trade now, as he may be able to give an account of his trading hereafter.
Perlegi librum hunc, in quo nihil reperio quo minus cum utili∣tate imprimatur, Ex aedibus Londin. Feb. ult. 1634. SA. BAKER.
