22796 99847166 12189
THE TRUE TRAVELS, ADVENTVRES, AND OBSERVATIONS OF Captaine IOHN SMITH, In Europe, Asia, Affrica, and America, from Anno Domini 1593. to 1629. His Accidents and Sea-fights in the Straights; his Service and Stratagems of warre in Hungaria, Transilvania, Wallachia, and Moldavia, against the Turks, and Tartars; his three single combats betwixt the Christian Armie and the Turkes. After how he was taken prisoner by the Turks, sold for a Slave, sent into Tartaria; his description of the Tartars, their strange manners and customes of Religions, Diets, Buildings, Warres, Feasts, Ceremonies, and Living; how hee slew the Bashaw of Nalbrits in Cambia, and escaped from the Turkes and Tartars. Together with a continuation of his generall History of Virginia, Summer-Iles, New England, and their proceedings, since 1624. to this present 1629; as also of the new Plantations of the great River of the Amazons, the Iles of St. Christopher, Mevis, and Barbados in the West Indies. All written by actuall Authours, whose names you shall finde along the History. LONDON, Printed by J. H. for Thomas Slater, and are to bee sold at the Blew Bible in Greene Arbour. 1630.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, William EARLE OF PEMBROKE, Lord Steward of his Majesties most Honourable Houshold. Robert EARLE OF LINDSEY, Great Chamberlaine of ENGLAND. Henrie Lord Hunsdon, Vicount Rochford, Earle of Dover. And all your Honourable Friends and Well-willers. My Lords: SIR Robert Cotton, that most learned Treasurer of Antiquitie, having by perusall of my Generall Historie, and others, found that I had likewise un∣dergone divers other as hard hazards in the other parts of the world, reque∣sted me to fix the whole course of my passages in a booke by it selfe, whose noble desire I could not but in part satisfie; the rather, because
they have acted my fatall Tragedies upon the Stage, and rac∣ked my Relations at their pleasure. To prevent therefore all future misprisions, I have compiled this true discourse. En∣vie hath taxed me to have writ too much, and done too little; but that such should know, how little I esteeme them, I have writ this, more for the satisfaction of my friends, and all gene∣rous and well disposed Readers: To speake only of my selfe were intolerable ingratitude; because, having had so many co-partners with me; I cannot make a Monument for my selfe, and leave them unburied in the fields, whose lives be∣got me the title of a Souldier; for as they were companions with me in my dangers, so shall they be partakers with me in this Tombe. For my Sea Grammar (caused to bee printed by my wor∣thy friend, Sir Samuel Saltonstall) hath found such good en∣tertainment abroad, that I have beene importuned by many noble persons, to let this also passe the Presse. Many of the most eminent Warriers, and others, what their swords did, their penns writ: Though I bee never so much their inferi∣our, yet I hold it no great errour, to follow good examples; nor repine at them, will doe the like. And now my most Honourable good Lords, I know not to whom I may better present it, than to your Lordships, whose friendships, as I conceive, are as much to each others, as my duty is to you all; and because you are acquainted both with my endevours, and writings, I doubt not, but your honours will as well accept of this, as of the rest, and Patronize it under the shadow of your most noble vertues, which I am ever bound in all duty to reverence, and under which I hope to have shelter, against all stormes that dare threaten. Your Honours to be commanded, IOHN SMITH.
The Contents of the severall Chapters. CHAP. I. HIs birth; apprentiship; going into France; his beginning with ten shillings and three pence, his service in Nether∣lands; his bad passage into Scotland; his returne to Willoughby; and how he lived in the woods. page 1. Chap. 2. The notable villany of foure French Gallants, and his revenge; Smith throwne over-boord, Captaine La Roche of Saint Malo releeves him. 3. Chap. 3. A desperate Sea-sight in the Straights; his passage to Rome, Naples, and the view of Italy. 5. Chap. 4. The Siege of Olumpagh; an excellent stratagem by Smith; another not much worse. 6. Chap. 5. The siege of Stowlle-Wesenburg; the effects of Smiths Fire-workers; a worthy exploit of the Earle Rosworme; Earle Meldritch takes the Bashaw prisoner. 8. Chap. 6. A brave encounter of the Turks armie with the Chri∣stians; Duke Mercury overthroweth Assan Bashaw; He divides the Christian armie; his noblenesse and death. 9. Chap. 7. The unhappy siege of Caniza; Earle Meldritch serveth Prince Sigismundus; Prince Moyses besiegeth Regall; Smiths three single combats. 11. Chap. 8. Georgio Busca an Albane his ingratitude to Prince Sigismundus; Prince Moyses his Lieutenant, is overthrowne by Busca, Generall for the Emperour Rodulphus; Smiths Patent from Sigismundus, and reward. 14. Chap. 9. Sigismundus sends Ambassadours unto the Emperour; the conditions re-assured; he yeeldeth up all to Busca, and retur∣neth to Prague. 18. Chap. 10. The Battell of Rottenton; a pretty stratagem of fire-workes by Smith. 20. Chap. 11. The names of the English that were slaine in the bat∣tle
of Rottenton; and how Captaine Smith was taken prisoner; and sold for a slave. 21. Chap. 12. How Captaine Smith was sent prisoner thorow the Blacke and Dissabacca Sea in Tartaria; the description of those Seas, and his usage. 23. Chap. 13. The Turks diet; the Slaves diet; the attire of the Tartars; and manner of Warres and Religions, &c. 24. Chap. 14. The description of the Crym-Tartars; their houses and carts; their idolatry in their lodgings. 26. Chap. 15. Their feasts; common diet; Princes estate; buil∣dings; lawes; slaves; entertainment of Ambassadours. 27. Chap. 16. How be levieth an Armie; their Armes and Provision; how he divideth the spoile; and his service to the Great Turke. 29. Chap. 17. How Captaine Smith escaped his captivity; slew the Bashaw of Nalbrits in Cambia; his passage to Russia, Tran∣silvania, and the middest of Europe to Affrica. 31. Chap. 18. The observations of Captaine Smith; Mr. Henry Archer, and others in Barbary. 34. Chap. 19. The strange discoveries and observations of the Por∣tugals in Affrica. 37. Chap. 20. A brave Sea-fight betwixt two Spanish men of warre, and Captaine Merham, with Smith. 39. Chap. 21. The continuation of the generall History of Virginia; the Summer Iles; and New England; with their present estate from 1624. to this present 1629. 41. Chap. 22. The proceedings and present estate of the Summer Iles, from An. Dom. 1624. to this present 1629. 45. Chap. 23. The proceedings and present estate of New England, since 1624. to this present 1629. 46. Chap. 24. A briefe discourse of divers voyages made unto the goodly Country of Guiana, and the great River of the Amazons; relating also the present Plantation there. 48. Chap. 25. The beginning and proceedings of the new plantation of St. Christopher by Captaine Warner. 51. Chap. 26. The first planting of the Barbados. 55. Chap. 27. The first plantation of the Ile of Mevis. 56. Chap. 28. The bad life, qualities and conditions of Pyrats; and how they taught the Turks and Moores to become men of warre. 58.
To my worthy friend, Captaine IOHN SMITH. TWo greatest Shires of England did thee beare, Renowned Yorkshire, Gaunt-stild Lancashire; But what's all this? even Earth, Sea, Heaven above, Tragabigzanda, Callamata's love, Deare Pocahontas, Madam Shano's too, Who did what love with modesty could doe: Record thy worth, thy birth, which as I live, Even in thy reading such choice solace give, As I could wish (such wishes would doe well) Many such Smiths in this our Israel. R. BRATHWAIT. To my noble brother and friend, Captaine IOHN SMITH. THou hast a course so full of honour runne, Envy may snarle, as dogges against the Sunne May barke, not bite: for what deservedly With thy lifes danger, valour, pollicy, Quaint warlike stratagems, abillity And judgement, thou hast got, fame sets so high Detraction cannot reach: thy worth shall stand A patterne to succeeding ages, and Cloth'd in thy owne lines, ever shall adde grace, Vnto thy native Country and thy race; And when dissolv'd, laid in thy mothers wombe; These, Caesar-like, Smiths Epitaph and tombe. ANTHONY FIREBY.
To his valiant and deserving friend, Captaine IOHN SMITH. MOngst Frenchmen, Spanyards, Hungars, Tartars, Turks, And wilde Virginians too, this tells thy works: Now some will aske, what benefit? what gaine? Is added to thy store for all this paine? Th' art then content to say, content is all, Th'ast got content for perils, paine and thrall; Tis lost to looke for more: for few men now Regard Wit, Learning, Valour; but allow The quintessence of praise to him that can Number his owne got gold, and riches, than Th' art Valiant, Learned, Wise; Pauls counsell will, Admire thy merits, magnifie thy skill. The last of thine to which I set my hand Was a Sea Grammar; this by Sea and Land, Serves us for imitation: I know none, That like thy selfe hast come, and runne, and gone, To such praise-worthy actions: bee't approu'd, Th'ast well deserv'd of best men to be lou'd: If France, or Spaine, or any forren soile Could claime thee theirs, for these thy paines and toile, Th'adst got reward and honour: now adayes, What our owne natives doe, we seldome praise. Good men will yeeld thee praise; then sleight the rest; Tis best praise-worthy to have pleas'd the best. Tuissimus ED. IORDEN.
To my worthy friend, Captaine IOHN SMITH. DEare noble Captaine, who by Sea and Land, To act the earnest of thy name hast hand And heart; who canst with skill designe the Fort, The Leaguer, Harbour, City, Shore, and Port: Whose sword and pen in bold, ruffe, Martiall wise, Put forth to try and beare away the prize, From Caelar and Blaize Monluc: Can it be, That Men alone in Gonnels fortune see Thy worth advanc'd? no wonder since our age, Is now at large a Bedlem or a Stage. RICH. IAMES. To his worthy friend, Captaine IOHN SMITH. THou that hast had a spirit to flie like thunder, Without thy Countries charge through those strange dangers▪ Doth make my muse amaz'd, and more to wonder, That thy deserts should shared be by strangers, And thou neglected; (ah miracle!) most lamented, At thy great patience thus to rest contented. For none can truly say thou didst deceive, Thy Souldiers, Sailers, Merchants, nor thy friends, But all from thee a true account receive, Yet nought to thee all these thy vertues brings; Is none so noble to advance thy merit, If any be, let him thy praise inherit. MA. HAWKINS.
To my worthy friend, Captaine IOHN SMITH. TO combate with three Turks in single du'le, Before two Armies, who the like hath done? Slaine thy great Iailor; found a common weale In faire America where; thou hast wonne No lesse renowne amongst their Savage Kings, Than Turkish warres, that thus thy honour sings. Could not those tyrants daunt thy matchlesse spirit, Nor all the cruelty of envies spight: Will not thy Country yet reward thy merit, Nor in thy acts and writings take delight? Which here in so few sheets doth more expresse Than volumes great, this is thy happinesse. RICHARD MEADE. To my well deserving friend, Captaine IOHN SMITH. THou hast no need to covet new applause, Nor doe I thinke vaine-glory moves thee to it; But since it is thy will (though without cause) To move a needlesse thing, yet will I doe it: Doe it in briefe I will, or else I doe the wrong, And say, read or'e Captaine Smiths former song; His first then will invite thee to his latter: Reader 'tis true; I am not brib'd to flatter. EDW. INGHAM.
To his approved friend, the Authour; Captaine IOHN SMITH. THe old Greeke Beard, counts him the onely man, Who knowes strange Countries, like his Ithacan, And wise, as valiant, by his observation, Can tell the severall customes of each Nation: All these are met in thee, who will not then Repute thee in the ranke of worthiest men? To th' Westerne world to former times unknowne, Thy active spirit hath thy valour showne: The Turks and Tartars both can testifie, Thee t'have deserv'd a Captaines dignity; But verse, thou need'st not to expresse thy worth, Thy acts, this booke doe plainly set it forth. M. CARTNER. To the Valourous and truly-vertuous souldier, Captaine IOHN SMITH. NO Nulla fides pie∣tasque viris, qui castra sequuntur. Faith in Campe? tis false: see pious Smith Hath brought stragling Astraea backe, and with An all-outdaring spirit made Valour stand Vpheld by Vertue in bold Mars his land: If Valourous, be praise; how great's his Name? Whose Valour joynd with Vertue laud's his Fame. T'was Homers boast of wise Laertes sonne, Hom. Odyst. c. Well-read in men and Cities: than thou none (Great Smith) of these can more true tales rehearse; What want thy praises then, but Homers verse? Jn Smithum Distichon. Quisque suae sortis Appius. Faber: an Faber exstitit unquam T (Smithe) fortunae verior usque suae? I. C. C. P.
To his noble friend, Captaine IOHN SMITH. TO see bright honour sparkled all in gore, Would steele a spirit that ne're fought before: And that's the height of Fame, when our best bloud, Is nobly spilt in actions great and good: So thou hast taught the world to purchase Fame, Rearing thy story on a glorious frame, And such foundation doth thy merits make it, As all detractions rage shall never shake it; Thy actions crowne themselves, and thy owne pen, Gives them the best and truest Epiphonem. BRIAN O ROVRKE. To his truly deserving friend, Captaine IOHN SMITH. CAn one please all? there's none from Censure free, To looke for't then it were absurd in thee; It's easie worke to censure sweetest Layes, Where Ignorance is Iudge thou'd have no praise: Wisdome I know will mildly judge of all, Envious hearts, tongues, pennes, are dippt in Gall. Proud malignant times will you now bring forth Monsters at least to snarle at others worth; O doe not so, but wisely looke on him That wrought such Honours for his Countries King▪ Of Turks and Tartars thou hast wonne the field, The great Bashaw his Courage thou hast quel'd; In the Hungarian warre thou'st shewd thy Arts, Prou'd thy Selfe a Souldier true in all parts: Thy Armes are deckt with that thy Sword hath wonne, Which mallice can't out-weare till day be done: For three proud Turks in single fight thou'st slue, Their Heads adorne thy Armes, for witnesse true; Let Mars and Neptune both with Pregnant wit, Extoll thy due deserts, He pray for it. SALO. TANNER.
THE TRVE TRAVELS, ADVENTVRES, AND OBSERVATIONS OF CAPTAINE IOHN SMITH, in Europe, Asia, Africke, and America: beginning about the yeere 1593. and continued to this present 1629. CHAP. I. His Birth; Apprentiship; Going into France; His beginning with ten shillings and three pence; His Service in Netherlands; His bad passage into Scotland; His returne to Willoughby; And how he lived in the Woods. HE was borne in Willoughby in Lincolne-shire, and a Scholler in the two Free-schooles of Alford and Louth. His father anciently de∣scended from the ancient Smiths of Crudley in Lancashire; his mother from the Rickands at great Heck in York-shire. His parents dying when he was about thirteene yeeres of age, left him a competent meanes, which hee not being capable to manage, little regarded; his minde being even then set upon brave adven∣tures, sould his Satchell, bookes, and all he had, intending secretly to
get to Sea, but that his fathers death stayed him. But now the uardians of his estate more regarding it than him, he had libertie enough, though no meanes, to get beyond the Sea. About the age of fifteene yeares hee was bound an Apprentice to Mr. Thomas Sendall of Linne, the greatest Merchant of all those parts; but because hee would not presently send him to Sea, he never saw his master in eight yeeres after. At last he ound meanes to attend Mr. Perigrine Barty into France, second sonne to the Right Honourable Perigrine, that generous Lord Willoughby, and famous Souldier; where comming to his brother Robert, then at Orleans, now Earle of Linsey, and Lord great Chamberlaine of England; being then but little youths under Tutoage: his service being needlesse, within a moneth or six weekes they sent him backe againe to his friends; who when he came from London they liberally gave him (but out of his owne estate) ten shillings to be rid of him; such oft is the share of fatherlesse children: but those two Honourable Brethren gave him sufficient to re∣turne for England. But it was the least thought of his determination, for now being freely at libertie in Paris, growing acquainted with one Ma∣ster David Hume, who making some use of his purse, gave him Letters to his friends in Scotland to preferre him to King Iames. Arriving at Roane, he better bethinkes himselfe, seeing his money neere spent, downe the River he went to Haver de grace, where he first began to learne the life of a souldier: Peace being concluded in France, he went with Captaine Io∣seph Duxbury into the Low-countries, under whose Colours having ser∣ved three or foure yeeres, he tooke his journey for Scotland, to deliver his Letters. At Ancusan he imbarked himselfe for Lethe, but as much danger, as shipwracke and sicknesse could endure, hee had at the holy Ile in Nor∣thumberland neere Barwicke: (being recovered) into Scotland he went to deliver his Letters. After much kinde usage amongst those honest Scots at Ripweth and Broxmoth, but neither money nor meanes to make him a Courtier, he returned to Willoughby in Lincolne-shire; where within a short time being glutted with too much company, wherein he took small de∣light, he retired himselfe into a little wooddie pasture, a good way from any towne, invironed with many hundred Acres of other woods: Here by a faire brook he built a Pavillion of boughes, where only in his cloaths he lay. His studie was Machiavills Art of warre, and Marcus Aurelius; his exercise a good horse, with his lance and Ring; his food was thought to be more of venison than any thing else; what he wanted his man brought him. The countrey wondering at such an Hermite; His friends perswa∣ded one Seignior Theadora Polaloga, Rider to Henry Earle of Lincolne, an ex∣cellent Horse-man, and a noble Italian Gentleman, to insinuate into his wooddish acquaintances, whose Languages and good discourse, and exercise of riding drew him to stay with him at Tattersall. Long these pleasures could not content him, but hee returned againe to the Low-Countreyes.
Chap II. The notable villany of foure French Gallants, and his revenge; Smith throwne over-board; Captaine La Roche of Saint Malo releeves him. THus when France and Netherlands had taught him to ride a Horse and use his Armes, with such rudiments of warre, as his tender yeeres in those martiall Schooles could attaine unto; he was desirous to see more of the world, and trie his fortune against the Turkes, both lamenting and repenting to have seene so many Christians slaughter one another. Opportunitie casting him into the company of foure French Gallants well attended,A notable villan of foure rench Gallants. faining to him the one to be a great Lord, the rest his Gentlemen, and that they were all devoted that way; over-perswaded him to goe with them into France, to the Dutchesse of Mercury, from whom they should not only have meanes, but also Let∣ters of favour to her noble Duke, then Generall for the Emperour Ro∣dolphus in Hungary; which he did, with such ill weather as winter affor∣deth, in the darke night they arrived in the broad shallow In-let of Saint Valeries sur Some in Picardie; his French Lord knowing he had good ap∣parell, and better furnished with money than themselves, so plotted with the Master of the ship to set his and their owne trunckes a shore leaving Smith aboard till the boat could returne, which was the next day after towards evening; the reason hee alleaged was the sea went so high hee could come no sooner, and that his Lord was gone to Amiens where they would stay his comming; which treacherous villany, when divers other souldiers, and passengers understood, they had like to have slaine the Master, and had they knowne how, would have runne away with the ship. Comming on shore hee had but one Carralue,A Carralue is in value a penny. was forced to sell his cloake to pay for his passage. One of the souldiers, called Curzianvere, compassionating his injury, assured him this great Lord Depreau was on∣ly the sonne of a Lawyer of Mortaigne in base Britany, and his Attendants Cursell, La Nelie, and Monferrat, three young citizens, as arrant cheats as himselfe; but if he would accompany him, he would bring him to their friends, but in the interim supplied his wants: thus travelling by Deepe, Co∣debeck, Humphla, Pount-demer in Normandie, they came to Cane in base Nor∣mandie; where both this noble Curzianvere, and the great Prior of the great Abbey of S. Steven (where is the ruinous Tombe of William the Conquerour,) and many other of his friends kindly welcomed him, and brought him to Mortaigne, where hee found Depreau and the rest, but to small purpose; for Mr. Curzianvere was a banished man, and durst not be seene, but to his friends: yet the bruit of their cosenage occasioned the Lady Collumber, the Baron Larshan, the Lord Shasghe, and divers o∣ther honourable persons, to supply his wants, and with them to recreate himselfe so long as hee would: but such pleasant pleasures suited little with his poore estate, and his restlesse spirit, that could never finde con∣tent, to receive such noble favours, as he could neither deserve nor re∣quite:
but wandring from Port to Port to finde some man of war, spent that he had, and in a Forest, neere dead with griefe and cold, a rich Far∣mer found him by a faire Fountaine under a tree: This kinde Pesant re∣leeved him againe to his content, to follow his intent. Not long after, as he passed thorow a great grove of trees, ere he incoun∣ned one of the theeves. betweene Pounterson and Di∣na in Britaine, it was has chance to meet Cursell, more miserable than him∣selfe: His piercing injuries had so small patience, as without any word they both drew, and in a short time Cursell fell to the ground, where from an old ruinated Tower the inhabitants seeing them, were satisfied, when they heard Cursell confesse what had formerly passed; and that how in the dividing that they had stolne from him, they fell by the ears amongst themselves, that were actors in it; but for his part, he excused himselfe to be innocent as well of the one, as of the other. In regard of his hurt, Smith was glad to be so rid of him, directing his course to an honoura∣ble Lord, The noblenesle of the Earle of Ployer. the Earle of Ployer, who during the warre in France, with his two brethren, Viscount Poomory, and Baron d' Mercy, who had beene brought up in England; by him he was better refurnished than ever. When they had shewed him Saint Malo Mount, Saint Michael, Lambal, Simbreack, Lanion, and their owne faire Castle of Tuncadeck, Gingan, and divers other places in Britanny, (and their Brittish Cornwaile) taking his leave, he tooke his way to Raynes, the Britaines chiefe Citie, and so to Nantes, Poyters, Rochell, and Burdeaux. The umour of the strength of Bayon in Biskay, caused him to see it; and from thence tooke his way from Leskar in Biearne, & Paw in the kingdom of Navar to Tolouz  Gascoigne, Bezers and Carcassone, Narbone, Montpellier, Nimes in Languedock, and tho∣row the Country of Avignion, by Arles to Marcellos in Province, there im∣barking himselfe for Italy, the ship was enforced to Tolonne, and putting againe to sea, ill weather so grew upon them, they anchored close aboard the shore, under the little Isle of S. Mary, against Neice in Savoy. Here the inhumane Provincialls, An inhumane act of the Provin∣ialls in casting  over-board. with a rabble of Pilgrimes of divers Nati∣ons going to Rome, hourely cursing him, not only for a Hugonoit, but his Nation they swore were all Pyrats, and so vildly railed on his dread So∣veraigne Queene Elizabeth, and that they never should have faire wea∣ther so long as hee was aboard them; their disputations grew to that passion, that they threw him over-board, yet God brought him to that little Isle, where was no inhabitants, but a few kine and goats. The next morning he espied two ships more riding by them, put in by the storme, that fetched him aboard, well refreshed him, and so kindly used him, that he was well contented to trie the rest of his fortune with them. After he had related unto them his former discourse, what for pitie, and the love of the Honourable Earle of Ployer, this noble Britaine his neighbour, Captaine la Roche of Saint Malo,Capt. La Roche re∣leeves him. regarded and entertained him for his well respected friend. With the next faire wind they failed along by the Coast of Corsica and Sardinia, and crossing the gulfe of Tunis, passed by Cape Bona to the Isle of Lampadosa, leaving the coast of Barbary till they came at Cape Rosata, and so along the African shore, for Alexandria in Aegypt. There delivering their fraught, they went to Scandaroone; rather to view what ships was in the Roade, than any thing else: keeping their
course by Cypres and the coast of Asia, sayling by Rhodes, the Archipellagans, Candia, and the coast of Grecia, and the Isle of Zaffalonia. They lay to and againe a few dayes betwixt the Isle of Corfue and the Cape of Otranto in the Kingdome of Naples, in the Entrance of the Adriatike sea. CHAP. III. A desperate Sea-fight in the Straights; His passage to Rome, Naples, and the view of Italy. BEtwixt the two Capes they meet with an Argosie of Venice, it see∣med the Captaine desired to speake with them,A desperate sea-fight. whose untoward answer was such, as slew them a man; whereupon the Britaine presently gave them the broad-side, then his Sterne, and his other broad-side also, and continued the chase, with his chase peeces, till he gave them so many broad-sides one after another, that the Argosies sayles and tack∣ling was so torne, she stood to her defence, and made shot for shot; twice in one houre and a halfe the Britaine boarded her, yet they cleared them∣selves, but clapping her aboard againe, the Argosie fired him, which with much danger to them both was presently quenched. This rather aug∣mented the Britaines rage, than abated his courage; for having reaccom∣modated himselfe againe, shot her so oft betweene wind and water, shee was readie to sinke, then they yeelded; the Britaine lost fifteene men, she twentie, besides divers were hurt, the rest went to worke on all hands; some to stop the leakes, others to guard the prisoners that were chained, the rest to rifle her. The Silkes, Velvets, Cloth of gold, and Tissue, Pya∣sters, Chicqueenes and Sultanies, which is gold and silver, they unloaded in foure and twentie houres, was wonderfull, where of having sufficient, and tired with toile, they cast her off with her company, with as much good merchandize as would have fraughted such another Britaine, that was but two hundred Tunnes, she foure or five hundred. To repaire his defects, hee stood for the coast of Calabria, but hea∣ring there was six or seven Galleyes at Mesina hee departed thence for Malta, but the wind comming faire, he kept his course along the coast of the Kingdome of Sicilia by Sardinia and Corsica, till he came to the Road of Antibo in Peamon, where he set Smith on shore with fiue hundred chic∣queenes, and a little box God sent him worth neere as much more. Here he left this noble Britaine, and embarked himselfe for Lygorne, being glad to have such opportunitie and meanes to better his experience by the view of Italy; and having passed Tuskany, and the Countrey of Sieana, where hee found his deare friends, the two Honourable Brethren, the Lord Willoughby and his Brother cruelly wounded, in a desperate fray, yet to their exceeding great honour.The Popes holy Staires brought from Ierusalem, whereon (they say) Christ went up to Pontious Pi∣late. Then to Viterbo and many other Cities he came to Rome, where it was his chance to see Pope Clement the eight, with many Cardinalls, creepe up the holy Stayres, which they say are those our Saviour Christ went up to Pontius Pilate, where bloud fal∣ling from his head, being pricked with his crowne of thornes, the drops
are marked with nailes of steele, upon them none dare goe but in that manner, saying so many Ave-Maries and Pater-nosters, as is their devot∣on, and to kisse the nailes of steele: But on each side is a paire of such like staires, up which you may goe, stand, or kneele, but divided from the holy Staires by two walls: right against them is a Chappell, where hangs a great silver Lampe, which burneth continually, yet they say the oyle neither increaseth nor diminisheth. A little distant is the ancient Church of Saint Iohn de Laterane, where he saw him say Masse, which commonly he doth upon some Friday once a moneth. Having saluted Father Par∣sons, that famous English Iesuite, and satisfied himselfe with the rarities of Rome, he went downe the River of Tiber to Civita Vechia, where he em∣barked himselfe to satisfie his eye with the faire Citie of Naples, and her Kingdomes nobilitie; returning by Capua, Rome and Seana, he passed by that admired Ctie of Florence, the Cities and Countries of Bolonia, Fer∣rara, Mantua, Padu, and Venice, whose Gulfe he passed from Malamoco and the Adriatike Sea for Ragouza, spending some time to see that barren broken coast of Albania and Dalmatia, to Capo de Islria, travelling the maine of poore Slavonia by Lubbiano, till he came to Grates in Steria, the Seat of Ferdinando Arch-duke of Austria, now Emperour of Almania: where he met an English man, and an Irish Iesuite, who acquainted him with many brave Gentlemen of good qualitie, especially with the Lord Ebersbaught, with whom trying such conclusions, as he projected to un∣dertake, preferred him to Baron Kisell, Generall of the Arllery, and he to a worthy Collonell, the Earle of Meldritch, with whom going to Vi∣enne in Austria, under whose Regiment, in what service, and how he spent his time, this ensuing Discourse will declare. CHAP. IV. The Siege of Olumpagh; An excellent Stratagem by Smith; Another not much worse. The siege of O∣lumpagh.AFter the losse of Caniza, the Turkes with twentie thousand besie∣ged the strong Towne of Olumpagh so straightly, as they were cut off from all intelligence and hope of succour; till Iohn Smith, this English Gentleman, acquainted Baron Kisell, Generall of the Arch-dukes Artillery, he had taught the Governour, his worthy friend, such a Rule, that he would undertake to make him know any thing he inten∣ded, and have his answer, would they bring him but to some place where he might make the flame of a Torch seene to the Towne; Kisell inflamed with this strange invention; Smith made it so plaine, that forthwith hee gave him guides, who in the darke night brought him to a mountaine, where he shewed three Torches equidistant from other, which plainly appearing to the Towne, the Governour presently apprehended, and answered againe with three other fires in like manner; each knowing the others being and intent; Smith, though distant seven miles, signified to him these words: On Thursday at night I will charge on the East, at the
Alarum, salley you; Ebersbaught answered he would, and thus it was done: First he writ his message as briefe, you see, as could be, then di∣vided the Alphabet in two parts thus; A. b. c. d. e. f. g. h. i. k. l. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. m. n. o. p. q. r. s. t. v. w. x. 2. 2. 2. 2. 2. 2. 2. 2. 2. 2. 2. y. z. 2. 2. The first part from A. to L.An excellent Stratagem. is signified by shewing and hiding one link, so oft as there is letters from A. to that letter you meane; the other part from M. to Z. is mentioned by two lights in like manner. The end of a word is signified by shewing of three lights, ever staying your light at that letter you meane, till the other may write it in a paper, and answer by his signall, which is one light, it is done, beginning to count the letters by the lights, every time from A. to M. by this meanes also the other returned his answer, whereby each did understand other. The Guides all this time having well viewed the Campe, returned to Kisell, who, doubting of his power being but ten thousand, was animated by the Guides, how the Turkes were so divided by the River in two parts, they could not easily second each other.Another Strata∣gem. To which Smith added this conclusion; that two or three thousand pieces of match fastened to di∣vers small lines of an hundred fathome in length being armed with pow∣der, might all be fired and stretched at an instant before the Alarum, up∣on the Plaine of Hysnaburg, supported by two staves, at each lines end, in that manner would seeme like so many Musketteers; which was put in practice; and being discovered by the Turkes, they prepared to en∣counter these false fires, thinking there had beene some great Armie: whilest Kisell with his ten thousand being entred the Turks quarter, who ranne up and downe as men amazed. It was not long ere Ebersbaught was pell-mell with them in their Trenches; in which distracted confusi∣on, a third part of the Turkes, that besieged that side towards Knousbruck, were slaine; many of the rest drowned, but all fled. The other part of the Armie was so busied to resist the false fires, that Kisell before the mor∣ning put two thousand good souldiers in the Towne, and with small losse was retired; the Garrison was well releeved with that they found in the Turkes quarter, which caused the Turkes to raise their siege and re∣turne to Caniza: and Kisell with much honour was received at Kerment, and occasioned the Author a good reward and preferment, to be Cap∣taine of two hundred and fiftie Horse-men, under the Conduct of Colo∣nell Voldo, Earle of Meldritch.
CHAP. V. The siege of Stowlle-wesenburg; The effects of Smiths Fire∣workes; A worthy exploit of Earle Rosworme; Earle Mel∣dritch takes the Bashaw prisoner. A Generall rumour of a generall peace, now spred it selfe over all the face of those tormented Countries: but the Turke intended no such matter, but levied souldiers from all parts he could. The Emperour also, by the assistance of the Christian Princes, provided three Armies, the one led by the Arch-duke Mathias, the Emperours brother, and his Lieutenant Duke Mercury to defend Low Hungary, the second, by Ferdinando the Arch-duke of Steria, and the Duke of Mantua his Lieute∣nant to regaine Caniza; the third by Gonzago, Governour of High Hun∣gary, to joyne with Georgio Busca, to make an absolute conquest of Tran∣silvania. The siege of Al∣ba Regalis.Duke Mercury with an Armie of thirtie thousand, whereof neere ten thousand were French, besieged Stowlle-wesenburg, otherwise called Alba Regalis, a place so strong by Art and Nature, that it was thought impreg∣nable. At his first comming, the Turkes sallied upon the Germane quar∣ter, slew neere five hundred, and returned before they were thought on. The next night in like manner they did neere as much to the Bemers, and Hungarians; of which fortune still presuming, thinking to have found the French quarter as carelesse, eight or nine hundred of them were cut in pieces and taken prisoners. In this encounter Mousieur Grandvile, a brave French Colonell, received seven or eight cruell wounds, yet fol∣lowed the Enemie to the Ports; he came off alive, but within three or foure dayes died. Earle Meldritch, by the information of three or foure Christians, (esca∣ped out of the Towne) upon every Alarum, where there was greatest as∣semblies and throng of people,The effect of good -work. caused Captaine Smith to put in practice his fiery Dragons, hee had demonstrated unto him, and the Earle Von Sulch at Comora, which hee thus performed: Having prepared fortie or fiftie round-bellied earthen pots, and filled them with hand Gunpow∣der, then covered them with Pitch, mingled with Brimstone and Tur∣pentine; and quartering as many Musket-bullets, that hung together but only at the Center of the division, stucke them round in the mixture about the pots, and covered them againe with the same mixture, over that a strong Searcloth, then over all a good thicknesse of Towze-match well tempered with oyle of Lin-seed, Campheer, and powder of Brim∣stone, these he fitly placed in Slings, graduated so neere as they could to the places of these Assemblies. At midnight upon the Alarum, it was a fearfull sight to see the short flaming course of their flight in the aire, but presently after their fall, the lamentable noise of the miserable slaughte∣red Turkes was most wonderfull to heare: Besides, they had fired that Suburbe at the Port of Buda in two or three places, which so troubled the Turkes to quench, that had there beene any meanes to have assaulted
them, they could hardly have resisted the fire, and their enemies. The Earle Rosworme, contrary to the opinion of all men, would needs under∣take to finde meanes to surprize the Segeth and Suburbe of the Citie, strongly defended by a muddie Lake, which was thought unpassable. The Duke having planted his Ordnance, battered the other side,A worthy ex∣ploit of Earle Rosworme. whi∣lest Rosworme, in the darke night, with every man a bundle of sedge and bavins still throwne before them, so laded up the Lake, as they surprized that unregarded Suburbe before they were discovered: upon which un∣expected Alarum, the Turkes fled into the Citie, and the other Suburbe not knowing the matter, got into the Citie also, leaving their Suburbe for the Duke, who, with no great resistance, tooke it, with many peeces of Ordnance; the Citie, being of no such strength as the Suburbs, with their owne Ordnance was so battered, that it was taken perforce, with such a mercilesse execution, as was most pitifull to behold.Earle Meldritch takes the Bashaw prisoner. The Bashaw notwithstanding drew together a partie of five hundred before his owne Pallace, where he intended to die; but seeing most of his men slaine be∣fore him, by the valiant Captaine Earle Meldritch, who tooke him priso∣ner with his owne hands; and with the hazard of himselfe saved him from the fury of other troopes, that did pull downe his Pallace, and would have rent him in peeces; had he not beene thus preserved. The Duke thought his victory much honoured with such a Prisoner; tooke order hee should bee used like a Prince, and with all expedition gave charge presently to repaire the breaches, and the ruines of this famous Citie, that had beene in the possession of the Turkes neere threescore yeares. CHAP. VI. A brave encounter of the Turkes Armie with the Christians; Duke Mercury overthroweth Assan Bashaw; Hee divides the Christian Armie; His noblenesse and death. MAHOMET, the great Turke, during the siege, had raised an Ar∣mie of sixtie thousand men to have releeved it; but hearing it was lost, he sent Assan Bashaw Generall of his Armie, the Bashaw of Buda, Bashaw Amaro, to see if it were possible to regaine it; The Duke understanding there could be no great experience in such a new levied Armie as Assan had; having put a strong Garrison into it: and with the brave Colonell Rosworme, Culnits, Meldritch, the Rhine-Grave, Vahan and many others; with twenty thousand good souldiers, set forward to meet the Turke in the Plaines of Girke.A brave encoun∣ter of the Turkes Armie with the Christians. Those two Armies encountred as they marehed, where began a hot and bloudy Skirmish betwixt them, Regiment against Regiment, as they came in order, till the night parted them: Here Earle Meldritch was so invironed amongst those halfe circu∣ler Regiments of Turkes, they supposed him their Prisoner, and his Regi∣ment lost; but his two most couragious friends, Vihan and Culnits,
made such a passage amongst them, that it was a terror to see how horse and man lay sprawling and tumbling, some one way, some another on the ground. The Earle there at that time made his valo shine more bright than his armour, which seemed then painted with Turkish bloud, he slew the brave Zanzack Bugola, and made his passage to his friends, but neere halfe his Regiment was slaine. Captain Smith had his horse sle under him, and himselfe sore wounded; but he was not long unmounted, for there was choice enough of horses, that wanted masters. The Turke thinking the victory sure against the Duke, whose Armie, by the Siege and the Garrison, he had left behind him, was much weakned, would not be content with one, but he would have all; and left the Duke should returne to Alba Regalis, he sent that night twenty thousand to besiege the Citie, assuring them he would keepe the Duke or any other from re∣leeving them. Two or three dayes they lay each by other, entrenching themselves; the Turkes daring the Duke daily to a sett battell, who at length drew out his Army, led by the Rhine-Grave, Culnits and Meldritch, who upon their first encounter, charged with that resolute and valiant courage, as disordered not only the formost squadrons of the Turkes, but enforced all the whole Armie to retire to the Campe,Duke Mercury overthroweth Assan Rassa with the losse of five or six thousand, with the Bashaw of Buda, and foure or five Zanzacks, with divers other great Commanders, two hundred Prisoners, and nine pecces of Ordnance. At that instant appeared, as it were, another Ar∣mie comming out of a valley over a plaine hill, that caused the Duke at that time to be contented, and to retire to his Trenches; which gave time to Assan to reorder his disordered squadrons: Here they lay nine or ten dayes, and more supplies repaired to them, expecting to try the event in a sett battell; but the souldiers on both parties, by reason of their great wants and approach of winter, grew so discontented, that they were ready of themselves to breake up the Leager; the Bashaw, retiring him∣selfe to Buda, had some of the Reare Troopes cut off. Amaroz Bashaw hearing of this, found such bad welcome at Alba Regalis, and the Towne so strongly repaired, with so brave a Garrison, raised his siege, and reti∣red to Zigetum. The Duke understanding that the Arch-duke Ferdinando had so reso∣lutely besieged Caniza, as what by the losse of Alba Regalis, and the Turks retreat to Buda, being void of hope of any reliefe, doubted not but it would become againe the Christians.Duke Mercury di∣videth his Armie. To the furtherance whereof, the Duke divided his Armie into three parts. The Earle of Rosworme went with seven thousand to Caniza; the Earle of Meldritch with six thousand he sent to assist Georgio Busca against the Transilvanians, the rest went with himselfe to the Garrisons of Strigonium and Komara; having thus wor∣thily behaved himselfe, he arrived at Vienne, where the Arch-dukes and the Nobilitie with as much honour received him, as if he had conquered all Hungaria; his very Picture they esteemed would make them fortunate, which thousands kept as curiously as a precious relique. To requite this honour, preparing himselfe to returne into France, to raise new Forces against the next yeare, with the two Arch-dukes, Mathias and Maximi∣lian, and divers others of the Nobilitie, was with great magnificence
conducted to Nurenburg, there by them royally feasted,Duke  and his brother in law ere sud∣denly. (how it chanced is not knowne;) but the next morning he was found dead, and his bro∣ther in law died two dayes after; whose hearts, after this great triumph, with much sorrow were carried into France. CHAP. VII. The unhappie Siege of Caniza; Earle Meldritch serveth Prince Sigismundus; Prince Moyses besiegeth Regall; Smiths three single combats; His Patent from Sigismundus, and reward. THe worthy Lord Rosworme had not a worse journey to the mise∣rable Seige of Caniza,The unhappie siege of Caniza. (where by the extremitie of an extraordi∣nary continuing tempest of haile, wind, frost and snow, in so much that the Christians were forced to leave their Tents and Artillery, and what they had; it being so cold that three or foure hundred of them were frozen to death in a night, and two or three thousand lost in that miserable flight in the snowie tempest, though they did know no enemie at all to follow them:) than the noble Earle of Meldritch had to Transil∣vania, where hearing of the death of Michael and the brave Duke Mer∣cury, and knowing the policie of Busca, and the Prince his Roialtie, being now beyond all beleefe of men, in possession of the best part of Transil∣vania, perswaded his troopes, in so honest a cause, to assist the Prince against the Turke, rather than Busca against the Prince. The souldiers being worne out with those hard payes and travells,Earle Meldritch serveth Prince Sigismundus. upon hope to have free libertie to make bootie upon what they could get possession of from the Turkes, was easily perswaded to follow him whithersoever. Now this noble Earle was a Transilvanian borne, and his fathers Countrey yet inhabited by the Turkes; for Transilvania was yet in three divisions, though the Prince had the hearts both of Country and people; yet the Frontiers had a Garrison amongst the unpassable mountaines, some for the Emperour, some for the Prince, and some for the Turke: to regaine which small estate, hee desired leave of the Prince to trie his fortunes, and to make use of that experience, the time of twen∣tie yeares had taught him in the Emperours service, promising to spend the rest of his dayes for his countries defence in his Excellencies service. The Prince glad of so brave a Commander, and so many expert and an∣cient souldiers, made him Campe-master of his Armie, gave him all ne∣cessary releefe for his troopes and what freedome they desired to plun∣der the Turkes. The Earle having made many incursions into the Land of Zarkam a∣mong those rockie mountains, where were some Turks, some Tartars,Earle Meldritch maketh incursi∣ons to discover Regall. but most Bandittoes, Rennegadoes, and such like, which sometimes hee forced into the Plaines of Regall, where is a Citie not only of men and fortifica∣tions, strong of it selfe, but so environed with mountaines, that made the passages so difficult, that in all these warres no attempt had beene made upon it to any purpose: Having satisfied himselfe with the Situa∣tion
and the most convenient passages to bring his Armie unto it: The earth no sooner put on her greene habit, than the Earle overspread her with his armed troopes. To possesse himselfe first of the most convenient passage, which was a narrow valley betwixt two high mountaines; he sent Colonell Veltus with his Regiment, dispersed in companies to lye in Ambuscado, as he had directed them, and in the morning to driue all the cattell they could finde before a Fort in that passage, whom he supposed would sally, seeing but some small partie, to recover their prey; which tooke such good successe, that the Garrison was cut off by the Ambusca∣do, and Veltus seized on the Skonces, which was abandoned. Meldritch glad of so fortunate a beginning, it was six dayes ere he could with six thousand Pioners make passage for his Ordnance: The Turkes having such warning, strengthned the Towne so with men and provision, that they made a scorne of so small a number as Meldritch brought with him before the Citie, which was but eight thousand. Before they had pitched their Tents, the Turkes sallied in such abundance, as for an houre they had rather a bloudy battell than a skirmish, but with the losse of neere fifteene hundred on both sides.Moyses besiegeth Regall. The Turkes were chased till the Cities Ordnance caused the Earle to retire. The next day Zachel Moyses, Gene∣rall of the Armie, pitched also his tents with nine thousand foot and horse, and six and twenty peeces of Ordnance; but in regard of the situa∣tion of this strong Fortresse, they did neither feare them nor hurt them, being upon the point of a faire promontory, environed on the one side within halfe a mile with an un-usefull mountaine, and on the other side with a faire Plaine, where the Christians encamped, but so commanded by their Ordnance, they spent neere a month in entrenching themselves, and raising their mounts to plant their batteries; which slow procee∣dings the Turkes oft derided, that their Ordnance were at pawne, and how they grew fat for want of exercise, and fearing lest they should de∣part ere they could assault their Citie, sent this Challenge to any Cap∣taine in the Armie. That to delight the Ladies, who did long to see some court-like pa∣stime, the Lord Turbashaw did defie any Captaine, that had the com∣mand of a Company, who durst combate with him for his head: The matter being discussed, it was accepted, but so many questions grew for the undertaking, it was decided by lots, which fell upon Captaine Smith, before spoken of. Three single Combates. Truce being made for that time, the Rampiers all beset with faire Dames, and men in Armes, the Christians in Battalio; Turbashaw with a noise of Howboyes entred the fields well mounted and armed; on his shoulders were fixed a paire of great wings, compacted of Eagles fea∣thers within a ridge of silver, richly garnished with gold and precious stones, a Ianizary before him, bearing his Lance, on each side another leading his horse; where long hee stayed nor, ere Smith with a noise of Trumpets, only a Page bearing his Lance, passing by him with a courte∣ous salute, tooke his ground with such good successe, that at the sound of the charge, he passed the Turke thorow the sight of his Beaver, face, head and all, that he fell dead to the ground, where alighting and unbra∣cing
his Helmet, cut off his head, and the Turkes tooke his body; and so returned without any hurt at all. The head hee presented to the Lord Moses, the Generall, who kindly accepted it, and with joy to the whole armie he was generally welcomed. The death of this Captaine so swelled in the heart of one Grualgo, his vowed friend, as rather inraged with madnesse than choller, he directed a particular challenge to the Conquerour, to regaine his friends head, or lose his owne, with his horse and Armour for advantage, which accor∣ding to his desire, was the next day undertaken: as before upon the sound of the Trumpets, their Lances flew in peeces upon a cleare passage, but the Turke was neere unhorsed. Their Pistolls was the next, which mar∣ked Smith upon the placard; but the next shot the Turke was so woun∣ded in the left arme, that being not able to rule his horse, and defend himselfe, he was throwne to the ground, and so bruised with the fall, that he lost his head, as his friend before him; with his horse and Armour; but his body and his rich apparell was sent backe to the Towne. Every day the Turkes made some sallies, but few skirmishes would they endure to any purpose. Our workes and approaches being not yet advanced to that height and effect which was of necessitie to be perfor∣med; to delude time, Smith with so many incontradictible perswading reasons, obtained leave that the Ladies might know he was not so much enamoured of their servants heads, but if any Turke of their ranke would come to the place of combate to redeeme them, should have his also up∣on the like conditions, if he could winne it. The challenge presently was accepted by Bonny Mulgro. The next day both the Champions entring the field as before, each discharging their Pistoll, having no Lances, but such martiall weapons as the defen∣dant appointed, no hurt was done; their Battle-axes was the next, whose piercing bils made sometime the one, sometime the other to have scarce sense to keepe their saddles, specially the Christian received such a blow that he lost his Battle-axe, and failed not much to have fallen after it, wherat the supposing conquering Turk, had a great shout from the Ram∣piers. The Turk prosecuted his advantage to the uttermost of his power; yet the other, what by the readinesse of his horse, and his judgement and dexterity in such a businesse, beyond all mens expectation, by Gods as∣sistance, not onely avoided the Turkes violence, but having drawne his Faulchion, pierced the Turke so under the Culets thorow backe and bo∣dy, that although he alighted from his horse, he stood not long ere hee lost his head, as the rest had done.
CHAP. VIII. Georgio Busca an Albane his ingratitude to Prince Sigismun∣dus; Prince Moyses his Lieutenant, is overthrowne by Busca, Ge∣nerall for the Emperour Rodolphus; Sigismundus yeeldeth his Countrey to Rodolphus; Busca assisteth Prince Rodoll in Wal∣lachia. THis good successe gave such great encouragement to the whole Armie, that with a guard of six thousand, three spare horses, be∣fore each a Turkes head upon a Lance, he was conducted to the Generalls Pavillion with his Presents. Moyses received both him and them with as much respect as the occasion deserved, embracing him in his armes, gave him a faire Horse richly furnished, a Smitere and belt worth three hundred ducats; and Meldritch made him Sergeant major of his Regiment. But now to the siege, having mounted six and twenty peeces of Ordnance fifty or sixty foot above the Plaine, made them so plainly tell his meaning, that within fifteene dayes two breaches were made, which the Turkes as valiantly defended as men could; that day was made a darksome night, but by the light that proceeded from the murdering Muskets, and peace-making Canon, whilest their slothfull Governour lay in a Castle on the top of a high mountaine, and like a valiant Prince asketh what's the matter, when horrour and death stood amazed each at other, to see who should prevaile to make him victori∣ous: Moyses commanding a generall assault upon the sloping front of the high Promontory,Regall assaulted and taken. where the Barons of Budendorfe and Oberwin lost neere halfe their Regiments, by logs, bags of powder, and such like, tum∣bling downe the hill, they were to mount ere they could come to the breach; notwithstanding with an incredible courage they advanced to the push of the Pike with the defendāts, that with the like courage repul∣sed, till the Earle Meldritch, Becklefield and Zarvana, with their fresh Regi∣ments seconded them with that fury, that the Turks retired and fled into the Castle, from whence by a flag of truce they desired composition. The Earle remembring his fathers death, battered it with all the Ordnance in the Towne, and the next day tooke it; all he found could beare Armes he put to the sword, and set their heads upon stakes round about the walles, in the same manner they had used the Christians, when they tooke it. Moyses having repaired the Rampiers, and throwne downe the worke in his Campe, he put in it a strong Garrison, though the pillage he had got∣ten in the Towne was much, having beene for a long time an impregna∣ble den of theeves; yet the losse of the Armie so intermingled the sowre with the sweet, as forced Moyses to seek a further revenge, that he sacked Veratio, Solmos, and Kupronka, and with two thousand prisoners, most women and children, came to Esenberg, not farre from the Princes Pa∣lace, where he there Encamped. Sigismundus comming to view his Armie, was presented with the Pri∣soners,
and six and thirtie Ensignes; where celebrating thankes to Al∣mightie God in triumph of those victories, hee was made acquainted with the service Smith had done at Olumpagh, Stowle-Wesenburg and Re∣gall, for which with great honour hee gave him three Turkes heads in a Shield for his Armes, by Patent, under his hand and Seale, with an Oath ever to weare them in his Colours, his Picture in Gould, and three hun∣dred Ducats, yearely for a Pension. The Patent.SIGISMVNDVS BA∣THORI, Dei gratia Dux Transilvaniae, Wal∣lachiae, & Vandalorum; Co∣mes Anchard, Salford, Gro∣wenda; Cunctis his literis sig∣nificansus qui eas lecturi aut audituri sunt, concessam licen∣tiam aut facultatem Iohanni Smith, natione Anglo Gene∣roso, 250. militum Capitano sub Illustrissimi & Gravissimi Henrici Volda, Comitis de Meldri, Salmariae, & Peldoiae pri∣mario, ex 1000. equitibus & 1500. peditibus bello Vngarico con∣ductione in Provincias suprascriptas sub Authoritate nostra: cui ser∣vituti omni laude, perpetua{que} memoria dignum praebuit sese erga nos, ut virum strenuum pugnantem pro aris & focis decet. Quare è fa∣vore nostro militario ipsumordine condonavimus, & in Sigillum il∣lius tria Turcica Capita designare & deprimere concessimus, quae ip∣se gladio suo ad Vrbem Regalem in singulari praelio vicit, macta∣vit, at{que} decollavit in Transilvaniae Provincia: Sed fortuna cum variabilis anceps{que} sit idem forte fortuito in Wallachia Provincia Anno Domini 1602. die Mensis Novembris 18. cum multis aliis etian Nobilibus & aliis quibusdam militibus captus est à Domino Bascha electo ex Cambia regionis Tartariae, cujus severitate ad∣ductus salutem quantam potuit quaesivit, tantumque effecit, Deo om∣nipotente adjuvante, ut deliberavit se, & ad suos Commilitones re∣vertit; ex quibus ipsum liberavimus, & haec nobis testimonia habu∣it ut majori licentia frueretur qua dignus esset, jam tendet in patri∣am suam dulcissimam: Rogamus ergo omnes nostros charissimos, confinitimos, Duces, Principes, Comites, Barones, Gubernatores
Vrbium & Navium in eadem Regione & caeterarum Provincia∣rum in quibus ille residere conatiu fuerit ut idem permittatur Capi∣tancus libere sine obstaculo omni versari. Haec cientes pergraum nobis feceritis. Signatum Lesprizia in Misnia die Mensis Decem∣bris 9. Anno Domini 1603. Cum Pri∣vilegio pro∣priae Ma∣jestatis. SIGISMVNDVS BATHORI. UNIVERSIS, & singulis, cujuscun{que} loci, status, gra∣dus ordinis, ac conditionis ad quos hoc praesens scriptum per∣venerit, Guilielmus Segar Eques auratus aliàs dictus Garterus Principalis Rex Armorum Anglicorum, Salutem. Scia∣tis, quod Ego praedictus Garterus, notum, testatumque facio, quod Patentem suprascripium, cum manu propriapraedicti Ducis Tran∣silvaniae subsignatum, & Sigillo suo affixum, Vidi: & Copiam ve∣ram ejusdem (in perpetuam rei memoriam) transcripsi, & recorda∣vi in Archivis, & Registris Officii Armorum. Datum Londini 19. die Augusti, Anno Domini 1625. Annoque Regni Domini no∣stri CAROLI Dei gratia Magnae Britanniae, Franciae, & Hi∣berniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, &c. Primo. GVILIELMVS SEGAR, Garterus. The same in English.SIGISMVNDVS BATHOR, by the Grace of God, Duke of Transilvania, Wallachia, and Moldavia, Earle of Anchard, Salford and Growenda; to whom this Writing may come or appeare. Know that We have given leave and licence to Iohn Smith an English Gentleman, Captaine of 250. Souldiers, under the most Generous and Honourable Henry
Volda, Earle of Meldritch, Salmaria, and Peldoia, Colonell of a thousand horse, and fifteene hundred foot, in the warres of Hungary, and in the Provinces aforesaid under our authority; whose service doth deserve all praise and perpetuall memory towards us, as a man that did for God and his Country over∣come his enemies: Wherefore out of Our love and favour, ac∣cording to the law of Armes, We have ordained and given him in his shield of Armes, the figure and description of three Turks heads, which with his sword before the towne of Regall, in single combat he did overcome, kill, and cut off, in the Pro∣vince of Transilvania. But fortune, as she is very variable, so it chanced and happened to him in the Province of Wallachia, in the yeare our Lord, 1602. the 18. day of November, with many others, as well Noble men, as also divers other Souldi∣ers, were taken prisoners by the Lord Bashaw of Cambia, a Country of Tartaria; whose cruelty brought him such good fortune, by the helpe and power of Almighty God, that hee delivered himselfe, and returned againe to his company and fellow souldiers, of whom We doe discharge him, and this hee hath in witnesse thereof, being much more worthy of a bet∣ter reward; and now intends to returne to his owne sweet Country. We desire therefore all our loving and kinde kins∣men, Dukes, Princes, Earles, Barons, Governours of Townes, Cities, or Ships, in this Kingdome, or any other Provinces he shall come in, that you freely let passe this the aforesaid Cap∣taine, without any hinderance or molestation, and this doing, with all kindnesse we are alwayes ready to doe the like for you. Sealed at Lipswick in Misenland, the ninth of December, in the yeare of our Lord, 1603. With the proper privilege of his Majestie. SIGISMVNDVS BATHOR. TO all and singular, in what place, state, degree, order, or condition whatsoever, to whom this present writing shall come: [William Segar Knight, otherwise Garter, and principall King of Armes of England, wish health. Know that I the aforesaid Garter, do witnesse and approve, that this afore∣said Patent, I have seene, signed, & sealed, under the proper hand
and Seale Manual of the said Duke of Transilvania, and a true coppy of the same, as a thing for perpetuall memory, I have subscribed and recorded in the Register and office of the He∣ralds of Armes. Dated at London the nineteenth day of August, in the yeare of our Lord, 1625. and in the first yeare of our So∣ueraigne Lord Charles by the grace of God, King of great Bri∣taine, France, and Ireland; Defender of the faith, &c. WILLIAM SEGAR. CHAP. IX. Sigismundus sends Ambassadours vnto the Emperour; the conditi∣ons re-assured; He yeeldeth up all to Busca, and returneth to Prague. BVsca having all this time beene raising new forces, was comman∣ded from the Emperour againe to invade Transilvania, which be∣ing one of the fruitfullest and strongest Countries in those parts, was now rather a desart, or the very spectacle of desolation; their fruits and fields overgrowne with weeds, their Churches and battered Palaces and best buildings, as for feare, hid with Mosse and Ivy; being the very Bulwarke and Rampire of a great part of Europe, most fit by all Christians to have beene supplyed and maintained, was thus brought to ruine by them it most concerned to support it. But alas, what is it, when the power of Majestie pampered in all delights of pleasant vanity, neither knowing nor considering the labour of the Ploughman, the hazard of the Merchant, the oppression of Statesmen; nor feeling the piercing tormēts of broken limbes, & inveterated wounds, the toilsome marches, the bad lodging, the hungry diet, and the extreme misery that Souldiers endure to secure all those estates, and yet by the spight of malicious detraction, starves for want of their reward and recompences; whilest the politique Courtier, that cōmonly aimes more at his owne honors & ends, than his Countries good, or his Princes glory, honour, or security, as this worthy Prince too well could testifie. But the Emperor being certified how weak and desperate his estate was, sent Busca againe with a great Army, to trie his fortune once more in Transilvania. The Prince considering how his Country & subjects were consumed, the small means he had any longer to defend his estate, both against the cruelty of the Turke, & the power of the Emperor, & the small care the Polanders had in supplying him, as they had promised, sent to Busca to haue truce, till messengers might be sent to the Emperour for some better agreement, wherewith Busca was con∣tented. The Ambassadours so prevailed, that the Emperour re-assured vnto them the conditions he had promised the Prince at their confede∣racie for the lands in Silesia, with 60000. ducats presently in hand, and 50000. ducats yearely as a pension. When this conclusion was
knowne to Moyses his Liestenant then in the field with the Army, that would doe any thing rather than come in subjection to the Germans,Busca in Transil∣vania overthrow∣eth Moyses. he encouraged his Souldiers, and without any more adoe marched to en∣counter Busca, whom he found much better provided than he expected; so that betwixt them in six or seven houres, more than five or six thou∣sand on both sides lay dead in the field. Moyses thus overthrowne,  to the Turks at Temesware, and his scattered troopes some one way, some another. The Prince vnderstanding of this so sudden and unexpected acci∣dent, onely accompanied with an hundred of his Gentry and Nobility, went into the campe to Busca, to let him know, how ignorant he was of his Liestenants errour, that had done it without his direction or know∣ledge, freely offering to performe what was concluded by his Ambassa∣dours with the Emperour;Sigismundus yeel∣deth his country to Esa. and so causing all his Garrisons to come out of their strong holds, he delivered all to Busca for the Emperour, and so went to Prague, where he was honourably receiued, and established in his possessions, as his Emperiall Majestie had promised. Busca assem∣bling all the Nobility, tooke their oaths of allegeance and fidelity, and thus their Prince being gone, Trasilvania became againe subject to the Emperour. Now after the death of Michael,Busca assisteth Rodoll in Wallachia. Vavoyd of Wallachia, the Turke sent one Ieremie to be their Vavoyd or Prince; whose insulting tyranny caused the people to take Armes against him, so that he was forced to flie into the confines of Moldavia; and Busca in the behalfe of the Emperour, proclaimed the Lord Rodoll in his stead. But Ieremy having assembled an Army of forty thousand Turks, Tartars, and Moldavians, returned into Wallachia. Rodoll not yet able to raise such a power, fled into Transilvania to Busca, his ancient friend; who considering well of the matter, and how good it would be for his owne security to have Wallachia subject to the Emperour, or at least such an employment for the remainders of the old Regiments of Sigismundus, (of whose greatnesse and true affection hee was very suspitious,) sent them with Rodoll to recover Wallachia, condu∣cted by the valiant Captaines, the Earle Meldritch, Earle Veltus, Earle Nederspolt, Earle Zarvana, the Lord Bechlefield, the Lord Budendorfe, with their Regiments, and divers others of great ranke and quality, the greatest friends and alliances the Prince had; who with thirty thousand, marched along by the river Altus, to the streights of Rebrinke, where they entred Wallachia, encamping at Raza; Ieremie lying at Argish, drew his Army into his old campe, in the plaines of Peteske, and with his best diligence fortified it, intending to defend himselfe till more power came to him from the Crym-Tartar. Many small parties that came to his campe, Rodoll cut off, and in the nights would cause their heads to be throwne vp and downe before the trenches. Seven of their Porters were taken, whom Ieremie commanded to be stayed quicke, and after hung their skinnes vpon poles, and their carkasses and heads on stakes by them.
CHAP. X. The battell of Rotenton; a pretty stratagem of fire-workes by Smith. ROdoll not knowing how to draw the enemie to battell, raised his Armie, burning and spoyling all where he came, and returned againe towards Rebrinke in the night, as if he had fled vpon the generall rumour of the Crym-Tartars comming, which so inflamed the Turkes of a happy victory, they vrged Ieremy against his will to follow them. Rodoll seeing his plot fell out as he desired, so ordered the matter, that having regained the streights, he put his Army in order, that had beene neere two dayes pursued, with continuall skirmishes in his Reare,A battell betwixt Rodoll and Ieremie. which now making head against the enemie, that followed with their whole Armie in the best manner they could, was furiously charged with six thousand Hydukes, Wallachians, and Moldavians, led by three Co∣lonells, Oversall, Dubras, and Calab, to entertaine the time till the rest came up; Veltus and Nederspolt with their Regiments, entertained them with the like courage, till the Zanzacke Hamesbeg, with six thousand more, came with a fresh charge, which Meldritch and Budendorfe, rather like enraged lions, than men, so bravely encountred, as if in them only had consisted the victory; Meldritchs horse being slaine vnder him, the Turks pressed what they could to have taken him prisoner, but being remounted, it was thought with his owne hand he slew the vali∣ant Zanzacke, whereupon his troopes retyring, the two proud Bashawes, Aladin, and Zizimmus, brought up the front of the body of their battell. Veltus and Nederspolt having breathed, and joyning their troopes with Becklefield and Zarvana, with such an incredible courage charged the left flancke of Zizimmus, as put them all in disorder, where Zizimmus the Bashaw was taken prisoner, but died presently upon his wounds. Ieremie seeing now the maine battell of Rodoll advance, being thus constrained, like a valiant Prince in his front of the Vantgard, by his example so braue∣ly encouraged his souldiers, that Rodoll found no great assurance of the victorie. Thus being joyned in this bloudy massacre, that there was scarce ground to stand upon, but upon the dead carkasses, which in lesse than an hower were so mingled, as if each Regiment had singled out other. The admired Aladin that day did leave behinde him a glorious name for his valour, whose death many of his enemies did lament after the victory, which at that instant sell to Rodoll. It was reported Ieremie was also slaine, but it was not so, but fled with the remainder of his Ar∣mie to Moldavia, leaving five and twenty thousand dead in the field, of both Armies.Wallachia subje∣cted to the Em∣perour. And thus Rodoll was seated againe in his Soueraignty, and Wallachia became subject to the Emperour. But long he rested not to settle his new estate, but there came newes, that certaine Regiments of stragling Tartars, were forraging those parts towards Moldavia. Meldritch with thirteene thousand men was sent against them, but when they heard it was the Crym-Tartar and his two
sonnes, with an Armie of thirty thousand; and Ieremie, that had escaped with fourteene or fifteene thousand, lay in ambush for them about Lan∣ganaw, he retired towards Rottenton, a strong garrison for Rodoll; but they were so invironed with these hellish numbers, they could make no great haste for skirmishing with their scouts, forragers, and small par∣ties that still encountred them. But one night amongst the rest, having made a passage through a wood, with an incredible expedition, cutting trees thwart each other to hinder their passage, in a thicke fogge early in the morning, unexpectedly they met two thousand loaded with pillage, and two or three hundred horse and cattell; the most of them were slaine and taken prisoners, who told them where Ieremie lay in the pas∣sage, expecting the Crym-Tartar that was not farre from him. Meldritch intending to make his passage perforce, was advised of a pretty strata∣gem by the English Smith, which presently he thus accomplished; for having accommodated two or three hundred truncks with wilde fire, vpon the heads of lances, and charging the enemie in the night, gave fire to the truncks, which blazed forth such flames and sparkles, that it so amazed not onely their horses, but their foot also; that by the meanes of this flming encounter, their owne horses turned tailes with such fu∣ry, as by their violence overthrew Ieremy & his Army, without any losse at all to speake of to Meldritch. But of this victory long they triumphed not; for being within three leagues of Rottenton, the Tartar with neere forty thousand so beset them, that they must either fight, or be cut in peeces flying. Here Busca and the Emperour had their desire; for the Sunne no sooner displayed his beames, than the Tartar his colours; where at midday he stayed a while, to see the passage of a tyrannicall and treacherous imposture, till the earth did blush with the bloud of hone∣sty, that the Sunne for shame did hide himselfe, from so monstrous sight of a cowardly calamity. It was a most brave sight to see the ban∣ners and ensignes streaming in the aire, the glittering of Armour, the variety of colours, the motion of plumes, the forrests of lances, and the thicknesse of shorter weapons, till the silent expedition of the bloudy blast from the murdering Ordnance, whose roaring voice is not so soone heard, as felt by the aymed at object, which made among them a most lamentable slaughter. CHAP. XI. The names of the English that were slaine in the battell of Rot∣tenton; and how Captaine Smith is taken prisoner; and sold for a slave. IN the valley of Veristhorne, betwixt the riuer of Altus, and the moun∣taine of Rottenton, was this bloudy encounter, where the most of the dearest friends of the noble Prince Sigismundus perished. Meldritch having ordered his eleuen thousand in the best manner he could, at the oot of the mountaine upon his flancks, and before his front, he had pit∣ched
sharpe stakes, their heads hardned in the fire, and bent against the enemie, as three battalion of Pikes, amongst the which also there was digged many small holes.The battell of Rottenton. Amongst those stakes was ranged his foot∣men, that upon the charge was to retire, as there was occasion. The Tartar having ordered his 40000. for his best advantage, appointed Mu∣stapha Bashaw to beginne the battell, with a generall shout, all their En∣signes displaying, Drummes beating, Trumpets and Howboyes soun∣ding. Nederspolt and Mavazo with their Regiments of horse most vali∣antly encountred, and forced them to retire; the Tartar Begolgi with his Squadrons, darkening the skies with their flights of numberles arrowes, who was as bravely encountred by Veltus and Oberwin, which bloudie slaughter continued more than an houre, till the matchlesse multitude of the Tartars so increased, that they retired within their Squadrons of stakes, as was directed. The bloudy Tartar, as scorning he should sty so long for the victorie, with his massie troopes prosecuted the charge: but it was a wonder to see how horse and man came to the ground a∣mong the stakes, whose disordered troopes were there so mangled, that the Christians with a loud shout cryed Victoria; and with five or six field peeces, planted vpon the rising of the mountaine, did much hurt to the enemy that still continued the battell with that furie, that Meldritch see∣ing there was no possibilitie long to preuaile, ioyned his small troopes in one body, resolued directly to make his passage or die in the conclusi∣on; and thus in grosse gaue a generall charge, and for more than halfe an houre made his way plaine before him, till the maine battel of the Crym-Tartar with two Regiments of Turkes and Ianizaries so overmatched them, that they were overthrowen. The night approaching, the Earle with some thirteene or foureteene hundred horse, swamme the River, some were drowned, all the rest slaine or taken prisoners: And thus in this bloudy field, neere 30000. lay, some headlesse, armelesse and leg∣lesse, all cut and mangled; where breathing their last, they gaue this knowledge to the world, that for the liues of so few, the Crym-Tartar ne∣uer paid dearer. But now the Countreyes of Transilvania and Wallachia, (subjected to the Emperour) and Sigismundus that brave Prince his Sub∣ject and Pensioner, the most of his Nobilitie, brave Captaines and Soul∣diers, became a prey to the cruell devouring Turke: where had the Em∣peror been as ready to have assisted him, and those three Armies led by three such worthy Captaines, as Michael, Busca, and Himselfe, and had those three Armies joyned together against the Turke,Exracted out of a Booke intitu∣led, The wres of Hungaria, Wal∣lhia, and Mol∣davia, written by Francisco Frne∣za, a leaned Ita∣lian, the Princes Secretarie, and translated by Mr. urchas. let all men judge, how happie it might have beene for all Christendome: and have either regained Bulgaria, or at least have beat him out of Hungaria, where hee hath taken much more from the Emperour, than hath the Emperour from Transilvania. In this dismall battell, where Nederspolt, Veltus, Zarvana, Mavazo, Ba∣vell, and many other Earles, Barons, Colonels, Captaines, brave Gen∣tlemen, and Souldiers were slaine. Give mee leave to remember the names of our owne Country-men with him in those exploits,The English men in this Bat∣tell. that as re∣solutely as the best in the defence of Christ and his Gospell, ended their dayes, as Baskrfield, Hardwicke, Thomas Milemer, Robert Mullineux,
Thomas Bishop, Francis Compton, George Davison, Nicholas Williams, and one Iohn a Scot, did what men could doe, and when they could doe no more, left there their bodies in testimonie of their mindes; only Ensigne Carleton and Sergeant Robinson escaped: but Smith among the slaugh∣tered dead bodies, and many a gasping soule, with toile and wounds lay groaning among the rest, till being found by the Pillagers hee was able to live, and perceiving by his armor & habit, his ransome might be better to them, than his death, they led him prisoner with many others; well they used him till his wounds were cured, and at Axopolis they were all sold for slaves, like beasts in a market-place, where everie Merchant, viewing their limbs and wounds, caused other slaves to struggle with them, to trie their strength, hee fell to the share of Bashaw Bogall, who sent him forthwith to Adrinopolis, so for Constantinople to his faire Mi∣stresse for a slave. By twentie and twentie chained by the neckes, they marched in file to this great Citie, where they were delivered to their severall Masters, and he to the young Charatza Tragabig zanda. CHAP. XII. How Captaine Smith was sent prisoner thorow the Blacke and Dissabacca Sea in Tartaria; the description of those Seas, and his usage. This Noble Gentlewoman tooke sometime occasion to shew him to some friends, or rather to speake with him, because shee could speake Italian, would feigne her selfe sick when she should goe to the Banians, or weepe over the graves, to know how Bogall tooke him prisoner; and if he were as the Bashaw writ to her, a Bohemian Lord conquered by his hand, as hee had many others, which ere long hee would present her, whose ransomes should adorne her with the glorie of his conquests. But when she heard him protest he knew no such matter, nor ever saw Bogall till he bought him at Axopolis, and that hee was an English-man, onely by his adventures made a Captaine in those Countreyes. To trie the truth, shee found meanes to finde out many could speake English, French, Dutch, and Italian, to whom relating most part of these former passages he thought necessarie, which they so honestly reported to her, she tooke (as it seemed) much compassion on him; but having no use for him, left her mother should sell him, she sent him to her brother, the Tymor Bashaw of Nalbrits, in the Countrey of Cambia, a Province in Tartaria. Here now let us remember his passing in this speculative course from Constantinople by Sander, Screwe, Panassa, Musa, Lastilla, to Varna,How he was sent into Tartaria. an an∣cient Citie upon the Blacke Sea. In all which journey, having little more libertie, than his eyes judgement since his captivitie, he might see the Townes with their short Towers, and a most plaine, fertile, and de∣licate
Countrey, especially that most admired place of Greece, now cal∣led Romania, but from Varna, nothing but the Blacke Sea water,  he came to the two Capes of Taur and Pergilos, where hee passed the Straight of Niger, which (as he conjectured) is some ten leagues long, and three broad, betwixt two low lands, the Channell is deepe, but at the entrance of the Sea Dissabacca,The description of the Dissabacca Sea. their are many great Osie-shouds, and many great blacke rokes, which the Turkes said were trees, weeds, and mud, throwen from the in-land Countryes, by the inundations and vio∣lence of the Current, and cast there by the Eddy. They sayled by many low Iles, and saw many more of those muddy rokes, and nothing else, but salt water, till they came betwixt Susax and Curuske, only two white townes at the entrance of the river Bruapo appeared: In six or seven dayes saile, he saw foure or five seeming strong castles of stone, with flat tops and battlements about them, but arriving at Cambia, he was (accor∣ding to their custome) well used. The river was there more than halfe a mile broad. The Castle was of a large circumference, foureene or fifteene foot thicke, in the foundation some six foot from the wall, is a Paliizado, and then a Ditch of about fortie foot broad full of water. On the west side of it, is a Towne all of low flat houses, which as be concei∣ved could bee of no great strength, yet it keepes all them barbarous Countreyes about it in admiration and subjection. After he had stayed there three dayes; it was two dayes more before his guides brought him to Nalbrits, where the Tymor then was resident, in a great vast stonie Castle with many great Courts about it, invironed with high stone wals, where was quartered their Armes, when they first subjected those Countreyes, which only live to labour for those tyrannicall Turkes. Smith his usage in Tarria. To her unkinde brother, this kinde Ladie writ so much for his good usage, that hee halfe suspected, as much as she intended; for shee told him, he should there but sojourne to learne the language, and what it was to be a Turke, till time made her Master of her selfe. But the Tymor her brother, diverted all this to the worst of crueltie, for within an hour after his arrivall, he caused his Drub-man to strip him naked, and shave his head and beard so bare as his hand, a great ring of iron, with a long stalke bowed like a sickle, rivetted about his necke, and a coat made of Vlgries haire, guarded about with a peece of an undrest skinne. There were many more Christian slaves, and neere an hundred Forsados of Turkes and Moores, and he being the last, was slave of slaves to them all. Among these slavish fortunes there was no great choice; for the best was so bad, a dog could hardly have lived to endure, and yet for all their paines and labours no more regarded than a beast. CHAP. XIII. The Turkes diet; the Slaves diet; the attire of the Tartars; and manner of Warres and Religions, &c. The Tymors diet of Cambia is as the Turkes. THe Tymor and his friends fed upon Pillaw, which is boiled Rice and Garnances, with little bits of mutton or Buckones, which is rosted
peeces of Horse, Bull, Vlgrie, or any beasts. Samboyses and Muselbit▪ are great dainties, and yet but round pies, full of all sorts of flesh they can get chopped with varietie of herbs. Their best drinke is Coffa, of a graine they call Coava, boiled with water; and Sherbecke, which is only honey and water; Mres milke, or the milke of any beast, they hold re∣storative: but all the Comminaltie drinke pure water.The Slaves diet. Their bread is made of this Coava, which is a kinde of blacke whea, and Cuskus a small white seed like Millya in Biskay: but our common victuall, the entrailes of Horse and Vlgries; of this cut in small peeces, they will fill a great Cauldron, and being boiled with Cuskus, and put in great bowles in the forme of chaffing-dishes, they sit round about it on the ground, after they haue raked it thorow so oft as they please with their soule fists, the remainder was for the Christian slaves. Some of this broth they would temper with Cuskus pounded, and putting the fire off from the hearth, powre there a bowle full, then cover it with coles till it be baked, which stewed with the remainder of the broth, and some small peeces of flesh, was an extraordinarie daintie. The better sort are attired like Turkes,The Attire o those Tartars. but the plaine Tartar hath a blacke sheepe skinne over his backe, and two of the legs tied about his necke; the other two about his middle, with another over his belly, and the legs tied in the like manner behinde him: then two more made like a paire of bses, serveth him for breeches; with a little close cap to his skull of blacke felt, and they use exceeding much of this felt, for car∣pets, for bedding, for Coats, and Idols. Their houses are much worse than your Irish, but the In-land Countreyes have none but Carts and Tents, which they ever remove from Countrey to Countrey, as they see occasion, driving with them infinite troopes of blacke sheepe, Cattell and Vlgries, eating all vp before them, as they goe. For the Tartars of Nagi, they have neither Towne, nor house, corne,The Tartars of Nagi and their manners. nor drinke; but flesh and milke. The milke they keepe in great skinnes like Burracho's, which though it be never so sower, it agreeth well with their strong stomackes. They live all in Hordias, as doth the Crim-Tar∣tars, three or foure hundred in a company, in great Carts fifteene or six∣teene foot broad, which is covered with small rods, wattled together in the forme of a birds nest turned vpwards, and with the ashes of bones tempered with oile, Camels haire, and a clay they have: they lome them so well, that no weather will pierce them, and yet verie light. Each Hordia hath a Murse, which they obey as their King. Their Gods are in∣finite. One or two thousand of those glittering white Carts drawen with Camels, Deere, Buls, and Vlgries, they bring round in a ring, where they pitch their Campe; and the Murse, with his chiefe alliances, are placed in the midst. They doe much hurt when they can get any Stroggs, which are great boats used upon the river Volga, (which they call Edle) to them that dwell in the Countrey of Perolog, and would doe much more, were it not for the Muscovites Garrisons that there inhabit.
CHAP. XIIII. The description of the Crym-Tartars; their houses and carts; their Idolatry in their lodgings. NOw you are to understand,The description of the Crym-Tartars Court. Tartary and Scythia are all one, but so large and spacious, few or none could ever perfectly describe it, nor all the severall kinds of those most barbarous people that inhabit it. Those we call the Crym-Tartars, border upon Moldavia, Podolia, Lituania, and Russia, are much more regular than the interior parts of Scythia. This great Tartarian Prince, that hath so troubled all his neigh∣bours, they alwayes call Chan, which signifieth Emperour; but we, the Crym-Tartar. He liveth for most part in the best champion plaines of many Provinces; and his removing Court is like a great Citie of houses and tents, drawne on Carts, all so orderly placed East and West, on the right and left hand of the Prince his house, which is alwayes in the midst towards the South, before which none may pitch their houses, every one knowing their order and quarter,His houses and carts. as in an Armie. The Princes houses are very artificially wrought, both the foundation, sides, and roofe of wickers, ascending round to the top like a Dove-coat; this they cover with white felt, or white earth tempered with the powder of bones, that it may shine the whiter; sometimes with blacke felt, curi∣ously painted with vines, trees, birds, and beasts; the breadth of the Carts are eighteene or twenty foot, but the house stretcheth foure or five foot over each side, and is drawne with ten or twelve, or for more state, twenty Camels and Oxen.Baskets. They have also great baskets, made of smal∣ler wickers like great chests, with a covering or the same, all covered over with blacke felt, rubbed over with tallow and sheeps milke, to keepe out the raine; prettily bedecked with painting or feathers; in those they put their houshold stuffe and treasure, drawne upon other carts for that purpose. When they take downe their houses, they set the doore alwayes towards the South, and their carts thirtie or fortie foot distant on each side, East and West, as if they were two walls: the women also have most curious carts; every one of his wives hath a great one for herselfe, and so many other for her attendants, that they seeme as many Courts, as he hath wives. One great Tartar or Nobleman, will have for his particular, more than an hundred of those houses and carts, for his severall offices and uses, but set so farre from each other, they will seeme like a great village.Their idolatrie in their lodgings. Having taken their houses from the carts, they place the Master alwayes towards the North; over whose head is alwayes an Image like a Puppet, made of felt, which they call his bro∣ther; the women on his left hand, and over the chiefe Mistris her head, such another brother, and betweene them a little one, which is the keeper of the house; at the good wives beds-feet is a kids skinne, stuf∣fed with wooll, and neere it a Puppet looking towards the Maids; next the doore another, with a dried cowes udder, for the women that milke the kine, because only the men milke mares; every morning those
Images in their orders they besprinkle with that they drinke, bee it Cossmos,Cossmos is Me mke. or whatsoever, but all the white mares milke is reserved for the Prince. Then without the doore, thrice to the South, every one bowing his knee in honour of the fire; then the like to the East, in honour of the aire; then to the West, in honour of the water; and lastly to the North, in behalfe of the dead. After the servant hath done this duty to the foure quarters of the world, he returnes into the house, where his fellowes stand waiting, ready with two cups and two basons to give their master, and his wife that lay with him  night, to wash and drinke, who must keepe him company all the day following; and all his other wives come thither to drinke, where hee keepes his house that day; and all the gifts presented him till night, are laid vp in her chests; and at the doore a bench full of cups, and drinke for any of them to make merry. Chap. XV. Their feasts; common diet; Princes estate; buildings; tri∣butes; lawes; slaves; entertainment of Ambassadours. FOr their feasts they have all sorts of beasts, birds, fish, fruits,Their feasts. and hearbs they can get, but the more variety of wilde ones is the best; to which they have excellent drinke made of rice, millit, and honey, like wine; they have also wine, but in Summer they drinke most Cossmos, that standeth ready alwayes at the entrance of the doore, and by it a fidler; when the master of the house beginneth to drinke, they all cry, ha, ha, and the fidler playes, then they all clap their hands and dance, the men before their Masters, the women before their Mistresses; and ever when he drinks, they cry as before; then the fidler stayeth till they drinke all round; sometimes they will drinke for the victory; and to provoke one to drinke, they will pull him by the ears, and lugge and draw him, to stretch and heat him, clapping their hands, stamping with their feet, and dancing before the champions, offering them cups, then draw them backe againe to increase their appetite; and thus continue till they be drunke, or their drinke done, which they hold an honour, and no infirmity. Though the ground be fertile, they sow little corne,Their common diet. yet the Gentle∣men have bread and hony-wine; grapes they have plenty, and wine pri∣vately, and good flesh & fish; but the common sort stamped millit, ming∣led with milke and water. They call Cassa for meat, and drinke any thing; also any beast unprofitable for service they kill, when they are like to die, or however they die; they will eat them, guts liver and all; but the most fleshy parts they cut in thinne slices, and hang it up in the Sunne and wind wihout salting, where it will drie so hard, it will not putrifie in a long time. A Ramme they esteeme a great feast among forty or fiftie, which they cut in peeces boiled or roast, puts it in a great bowle with salt and water, for other sauce they have none; the master of the feast
giveth every one a peece, which he eateth by himselfe, or carrieth away with him.How they be∣come populous. Thus their hard fare makes them so infinite in Cattell, and their great number of captived women to breed vpon, makes them so populous. But neere the Christian frontiers, the baser sort make little cottages of wood, called Vlusi, daubed over with durt, and beasts dung covered with sedge; yet in Summer they leave them, beginning their progresse in Aprill, with their wives, children, and slaves, in their carted houses, scarce convenient for foure or five persons; driving their flocks towards Perecopya, and sometimes into Taurica, or Osow, a towne upon the river Tanais, which is great and swift, where the Turke hath a garri∣son; and in October returne againe to their Cottages. Their Clothes are the skinnes of dogges, goats, and sheepe, lined with cotten cloath, made of their finest wooll, for of their worst they make their felt, which they use in aboundance, as well for shooes and caps, as houses, beds, and Idolls; also of the coarse wooll mingled with horse haire, they make all their cordage.Their Princes state. Notwithstanding this wandring life, their Princes sit in great state upon beds, or carpits, and with great reverence are atten∣ded both by men and women, and richly served in plate, and great sil∣ver cups, delivered upon the knee, attired in rich furres, lined with plush, or taffity, or robes of tissue. These Tartars possesse many large and goodly plaines, wherein feed innumerable herds of horse and cattell, as well wilde as tame; which are Elkes, Bisones, Horses, Deere, Sheepe, Goates, Swine, Beares, and divers others. Ancient buil∣dings. In those countries are the ruines of many faire Monasteries, Castles, and Cities, as Bacasaray, Salutium, Almassary, Perecopya, Cremum, Sedacom, Capha, and divers others by the Sea, but all kept with strong garrisons for the great Turke, who yearely by trade or trafficke, receiveth the chiefe commodities those fertile countries afford, as Bezer, Rice, Furres, Hides,Commodities for tribute to the Turke. Butter, Salt, Cattell, and Slaves, yet by the spoiles they get from the secure and idle Christians, they maintaine themselves in this Pompe. Also their wives, of whom they have as many as they will, very costly, yet in a constant custome with decency. God lawes, yet no lawyers. They are Mahometans,  as are the Turks, from whom also they have their Lawes, but no Lawyers, nor Attournies, onely Iudges, and Iu∣stices in every Village, or Hordia; but capitall criminalls, or matters of moment, before the Chan himselfe, or Priuie Counsells, of whom they are alwayes heard, and speedily discharged; for any may have accesse at any time to them, before whom they appeare with great reverence, adoring their Princes as Gods, and their spirituall Iudges as Saints; for Iustice is with such integrity and expedition executed, without covetousnesse, bribery, partiality, and brawling, that in six moneths they have sometimes scarce six causes to heare. About the Princes court none but his guard weares any weapon, but abroad they goe very strong, because there are many bandytos, and Theeves. Their slaves. They use the Hungarians, Russians, Wallachians, and Moldavian slaves (whereof they have plenty) as beasts to every worke; and those Tartars that serve the Chan, or noblemen, have only victuall and apparell, the rest are generally nasty, and idle, naturally miserable, and in their warres better theeves than souldiers,
Ths Chan hath yeerely a Donative from the King of Poland,. the Dukes of Lituania, Moldavia, and Nagagon Tartars; their Messengers commonly he useth bountifully, and verie nobly, but sometimes most cruelly; when any of them doth bring their Presents, by his houshold Officers they are entertained in a plaine field, with a moderate propor∣tion of flesh, bread and wine, for once; but when they come before him, the Sultaines, Tuians, Vlans, Marhies, his chiefe Officers and Coun∣cellors attend, one man only bringeth the Ambassadour to the Court gate, but to the Chan he is led betweene two Councellors; where slu∣ting him upon their bended knees, declaring their message, are admit∣ted to eat with him, and presented with a great silver cup full of Mead from his owne hand, but they drinke it upon their knees: when they aredispatched, he invites them againe, the feast ended, they go backe a little from the Palace doore, and rewarded with silke Vestures wrought with gold downe to their anckles, with an horse or two, and sometimes a slave of their owne Nation; in them robes presently they come to him againe, to give him thankes, take their leave, and so depart. CHAP. XVI. How he levieth an Armie; their Armes and Provision; how he di∣videth the spoile; and his service to the Great Turke. WHen he intends any warres,How he levieth an Armie. he must first have leave of the Great Turke, whom hee is bound to assist when hee com∣mandeth, receiving daily for himselfe and chiefe of his Nobilitie, pensions from the Turke, that holds all Kings but slaves, that pay tribute or are subject to any: signifying his intent to all his sub∣jects, within a moneth commonly he raiseth his Armie, and everie man is to furnish himselfe for three moneths victuals, which is parched Millit, or grownd to meale, which they ordinarily mingle with water (as is said) hard cheese or cruds dried, and beaten to powder, a little will make much water like milke, and dried flesh, this they put also up in sackes: The Chan and his Nobles have some bread and Aquavitae, and quicke cattell to kill when they please, wherewith verie sparingly they are con∣tented. Being provided with expert Guides, and got into the Coun∣trey he intends to invade, he sends forth his Scouts to bring in what pri∣soners they can, from whom he will wrest the utmost of their knowledge fit for his purpose: having advised with his Councell, what is most fit to be done, the Nobilitie, according to their antiquitie, doth march; then moves he with his whole Armie: if hee finde there is no enemie to oppose him, he adviseth how farre they shall invade, commanding eve∣rie man (upon paine of his life) to kill all the obvious Rusticks; but not to hurt any women, or children. Ten, or fifteene thousand, he commonly placeth,The manner of his warres. where hee findeth most convenient for his standing Campe; the rest of his Armie hee di∣vides
in severall troops, bearing ten or twelve miles suare before them, and ever within three or foure dayes returne to their Campe, putting all to fire and sword, but that they carrie with them backe to their Campe; and in this scattering manner he will invade a Countrey, and be gone with his prey, with an incredible expedition. But if he understand of an enemie, he will either fight in Ambuscado, or flie; for he will never fight any battell if he can chuse, but upon treble advan∣tage; yet by his innumerable flights of arrowes, I have seene flie from his flying troopes, we could not well judge, whether his fighting or flying was most dangerous, so good is hs horse, and so expert his bow∣men; but if they be so intangled they must fight, there is none can bee more hardy, or resolute in their defences. Regaining his owne borders,How he divides the spoile. he takes the tenth of the principall cap∣tives, man, woman, childe, or beast (but his captaines that tke them, will accept of some particular person they best like for themselves) the rest are divided amongst the whole Armie, according to every mans desert, and quality; that they keepe them, or sell them to who will give most; but they will not forget to use all the meanes they can, to know their estates, friends, and quality, and the better they finde you, the worse they will use you, till you doe agree to pay such a ransome, as they will impose upon you; therefore many great persons have ndured much misery to conceale themselves, because their ransomes areso into∣lerable: their best hope is of some Christian Agent, that many times com∣meth to redeeme slaves, either with mony, or man for man; those Agents knowing so well the extreme covetousnesse of the Tartars, doe use to bribe some Iew or Merchant, that feigning they will sell them againe to some other nation, are oft redeemed for a very small ran∣some. How the Chan doth serve the great Turke. But to this Tartarian Armie, when the Turke commands, he goeth with some small artillery; and the Nagagians, Perecopens, Crimes, Osovens, and Cersessians, are his tributaries; but the Petigorves, Oczaconians, Bya∣logordens, and Dobrucen Tartars, the Turke by covenant commands to follow him, so that from all those Tartars he hath had an Army of an hun∣dred and twenty thousand excellent, swift, stomackfull Tartarian horse, for foot they have none. Now the Chan, his Sultaines and nobility, use Turkish, Caramanian, Arabian, Parthian, and other strange Tartarian horses; the swiftest they esteeme the best; seldome they feede any more at home, than they have present use for; but upon their plaines is a short wodde like heath, in some countries like gaile, full of berries, farre much better than any grasse. Their Armes. Their Armes are such as they have surprised or got from the Christi∣ans or Persians, both brest-plates, swords, semiteres, and helmets; bowes and arrowes they make most themselves, also their bridles and saddles are indifferent, but the nobility are very handsome, and well armed like the Turkes, in whom consisteth their greatest glory; the ordinary sort have little armor, some a plaine young pole unshaven, headed with a peece of iron for a lance; some an old Christian pike, or a Turks cava∣tine; yet those tattertimallions will have two or three horses, some
foure or five, as well for service, as for to eat; which makes their Armies seem thrice so many as there are souldiers. The Chan himselfe hath about his person ten thousand chosen Tartars and Ianizaries, some small Ord∣nance, and a white mares taile, with a peece of greene taffity on a great Pike, is carried before him for a standard; because they hold no beast so precious as a white mare, whose milke is onely for the King & nobility, and to sacrifice to their Idolls; but the rest have ensignes of dives colours. For all this miserable knowledge, furniture, and equipage, th mis∣chiefe they doe in Christendome is wonderfull, by reason of their hard∣nesse of life and constitution, obedience, agilitie, and their Emperours bountie, honours, grace, and dignities he ever bestoweth upon those, that have done him any memorable service in the face of his enemies. The Caspian Sea,A description of the Caspian Sea. most men agree that have passed it, to be in length about 200. leagues, and in breadth an hundred & fifty, environed to the East, with the great desarts of the Tartars of Turkamane; to the West, by the Circasses, and the mountaine Caucasus; to the North, by the river Volga, and the land of Nagay; and to the South, by Media, and Persia: this sea is fresh water in many places, in others as salt as the great Ocean; it hath many great rivers which fall into it, as the mighty river of Volga, which is like a sea, running neere two thousand miles, through many great and large Countries, that send into it many other great rivers; also out of Saberya, Yaick, and Yem, out of the great mountaine Caucasus, the river Sirus, Arash, and divers others, yet no Sea neerer it than the blacke Sea, which is at least an hundred leagues distant: in which Country live the Georgians, now part Armenians, part Nestorians; it is neither found to increase or diminish, or empty it selfe any way, except it be under ground, and in some places they can finde no ground at two hundred fadome. Many other most strange and wonderfull things are in the land of Cathay towards the North-east, and Chyna towards the South-east, where are many of the most famous Kingdomes in the world; where most arts, plenty, and curiosities are in such abundance, as might seeme incredi∣ble, which hereafter I will relate, as I have briefly gathered from such authors as have lived there. CHAP. XVII. How captaine Smith escaped his captivity; slew the Bashaw of Nalbrits in Cambia; his passage to Russia, Transilvania, and the middest of Europe to Affrica. ALL the hope he had ever to be delivered from this thraldome,How Smith es▪ his captivity. was only the love of Tragabigzanda, who surely was ignorant of his bad usage; for although he had often debated the matter with some Christians, that had beene there a long time slaves, they could not finde how to make an escape, by any reason or possibility; but God be∣yond
mans expectation or imagination helpeth his servants when they least thinke of helpe, as it hapned to him. So long he lived in this mise∣rable estate, as he became a thresher at a grange in a great field, more than a league from the Tymors house; the Bashaw as he ost used to visit his granges, visited him, and rocke occasion so to beat, spurne, and re∣vile him, that forgetting all reason, he beat out the Tymors braines with his threshing bat, for they have no flailes; and seeing his estate could be no worse than it was, clothed himselfe in his clothes, hid his body under the straw, filled his knapsacke with corne, shut the doores, moun∣ted his horse, and ranne into the desart at all adventure; two or three dayes thus fearfully wandring he knew not whither, and well it was he met not any to aske the way; being even as taking lave of this miserable world, God did direct him to the great way or Castragan, as they call it, which doth crosse these large territories, and generally knowne among them by these markes. Their guides in those Countries. In every crossing of this great way is planted a post, and in it so many bobs with broad ends, as there be wayes, and every bob the figure pain∣ted on it, that demonstrateth to what part that way leadth; as that which pointeth towards the Cryms Country, is marked with a halfe Monne, if towards the Georgians and Persia, a blacke man, full of white spots, if towards China, the picture of the Sunne, if towards Muscovia, the signe of a Crosse, if towards the habitation of any other Prince, the figure whereby his standard is knowne. To his dying spirits thus God added some comfort in this melancholy journey, wherein if he had met any of that vilde generation, they had made him their slave, or knowing the figure engraven in the iron about his necke, (as all slaves have) he had beene sent backe againe to his master; sixteene dayes he travel∣led in this feare and torment, after the Crosse, till he arrived at Aecopolis, upon the river Don, a garrison of the Muscovites. The governour af∣ter due examination of those his hard events, tooke off his irons, and so kindly used him, he thought himselfe new risen from death, and the good Lady Callamata, largely supplied all his wants. The description of Cabia, This is as much as he could learne of those wilde Countries, and his passage to Rssia. that the Country of Cambia is two dayes journy from the head of the great river Bruapo, which springeth from many places of the mountaines of Inna∣gachi, that joyne themselves together in the Poole Kerkas; which they account for the head, and falleth into the Sea Dissabacca, called by some the lake Meotis, which receiveth also the river Tanais, and all the rivers that fall from the great Countries of the Circassi, the Cartaches, and many from the Tauricaes, Precopes, Cummani, Cossunka, and the Cryme; through which Sea he sailed, and up the river Bruapo to Nalbrits, and thence through the desarts of Circassi to Aecoplis, as is related; where he stayed with the Governour, till the Convoy went to Coraguaw; then with his certificate how hee found him, and had examined with his friendly letters sent him by Zumalacke to Caragnaw, whose Governour in like manner so kindly use him, that by this meanes he went with a safe conduct to Letch, and Donka, in Cologoske, and thence to Berniske, and Newgrod in Seberia, by Rezechica, upon the river Niper, in the confines
of Littuania; from whence with as much kindnesse he was convoyed in like manner by Coroski, Duberesko, Duzihell, Drohobus, and Ostroge in Volonis; Saslaw and Lasco in Podolia; Halico and Collonia in Polonia; and so to Hermonstat in Transilvania. In all his life he seldome met with more respct, mirth, content, and entertainment; and not any Governour where he came, but gave him somewhat as a present, besides his charges; seeing themselves as subject to the like calamity.His observations in his journey to Transilvania, through the midst of Europ. Through those poore continually forraged Countries there is no passage, but with the Carravans or Convoyes; for they are Countries rather to be pitied, than envied; and it is a wonder any should make warres for them. The Villages are onely here and there a few houses of straight Firre trees, laid heads and points above one another, made fast by notches at the ends more than a mans height, and with broad split boards, pinned together with woodden pinnes, as thatched for coverture. In ten Vil∣lages you shall scarce finde ten iron nailes, except it be in some extraor∣dinary mans house. For their Townes, Aecopolis, Letch, and Dnko, have rampiers made of that woodden walled fashion, double, and betwixt them earth and stones, but so latched with crosse timber, they are very strong against any thing but fire; and about them a deepe ditch, and a Palizado of young Firre trees: but most of the rest have only a great ditch cast about them, and the ditches earth is all their rampier; but round well environed with Palizadoes. Some have some few small peeces of small Ordnance, and slings, calievers, and muskets, but their generallest weapons are the Russe bowes and arrowes; you shall find pavements over bogges, onely of young Firre trees laid crosse one over another, for two or three houres journey, or as the passage requires, and yet in two dayes travell you shall scarce see six habitations. Not∣withstanding to see how their Lords, Governours, and Captaines are civilized, well attired and acoutred with Iewells, Sables, and Horses, and after their manner with curious furniture, it is wonderfull; but they are all Lords or slaves, which makes them so subject to every invasion. In Transilvania he found so many good friends, that but to see, and rejoyce himselfe (after all those encounters) in his native Country, he would ever hardly have left them, though the mirrour of vertue their Prince was absent. Being thus glutted with content, and neere drowned with joy, he passed high Hungaria by Fileck, Tocka, Cassovia, and Vndero∣roway, by Vlmicht in Moravia, to Prague in Bohemia; at last he found the most gracious Prince Sigismundus, with his Colonell at Lipswick in Mi∣senland, who gave him his Passe, intimating the service he had done, and the honours he had received, with fifteene hundred ducats of gold to repaire his losses: with this he spent some time to visit the faire Cities and Countries of Drasdon in Saxonie, Magdaburgh and Brunswicke; Cassell in Hessen; Wittenberg, Vilum, and Minikin in Bavaria; Aughsbrough, and her Vniversities; Hama, Franckford, Mentz, the Palatinate; Wormes, Speyre, and Strausborough; passing Nancie in Loraine, and France by Paris to Orleans, hee went downe the river of Loyer, to Angiers, and imbar∣ked himselfe at Nantz in Britanny, for Bilbao in Biskay, to see Burgos-Valiadolid,
the admired monasterie of the Escuriall, Madrill, Teledo, Cordua, Cuedyriall, Civill, Cheryes, Cales, and Saint Lucas in Spaine. CHAP. XVIII. The observations of Captaine Smith; Mr. Henrie Archer and o∣thers in Barbarie. BEing thus satisfied with Europe and Asia, understanding of the wares in Barbarie, hee went from Gibralter to Guta and Tanger, thence to Saffee, where growing into acquaintance with a French man of warre, the Captaine and some twelve more went to Morocco, to see the ancient monuments of that large renowned Citie: it was once the principall Citie in Barbarie, situated in a goodly plaine Countrey, 14. miles from the great Mount Atlas, and sixtie miles from the Atlan∣ticke Sea;The three gol∣den Bals of Affrca. but now little remaining, but the Kings Palace, which is like a Citie of it selfe, and the Christian Church, on whose flat square steeple is a great brouch of iron, whereon is placed the three golden Bals of Affrica: the first is neere three Ells in circumference, the next above it somewhat lesse, the uppermost the least over them, at it were an halfe Ball, and over all a prettie guilded Pyramides. Against those golden Bals hath been shot many a shot, their weight is recorded 700. weight of pure gold, hollow within, yet no shot did ever hit them, nor could ever any Conspirator attaine that honor as to get them downe. They report the Prince of Morocco betrothed himselfe to the Kings Daughter of Aethiopia, he dying before their mariage, she caused those three golden Balls to be set up for his Monument,The description of Morocco. and vowed virginitie all her life. The Alfantica is also a place of note, because it is invironed with a great wall, wherein lye the goods of all the Merchants securely guarded. The Iuderea is also (as it were) a Citie of it selfe, where dwell the Iewes: the rest for the most part is defaced: but by the many pinnacles and towers, with Balls on their tops, hath much appearance of much sumptuous∣ness and curiositie. There have been many famous Universities, which are now but stables for Fowles & Beasts, & the houses in most parts lye tumbled one above another; the walls of Earth are with the great fresh flouds washed to the ground; nor is there any village in it, but tents for Strangers, Larbes & Moores. Strange tales they will tell of a great Gar∣den, wherein were all sorts of Bids, Fishes, Beasts, Fruits & Fountaines, which for beautie, Art and pleasure, exceeded any place knowne in the world, though now nothing but dung-hils, Pigeon-houses, shrubs and bushes. There are yet many excellent fountaines adorned with mar∣ble, and many arches, pillers, towers, ports and Temples, but most on∣ly reliques of lamentable ruines and sad desolation. A bloudie m∣presle. When Mully Hamet reigned in Barbarie, hee had three sonnes, Mully Shecke, Mully Sidan, and Mully Befferres, be a most good and noble King, that governed well with peace and plentie, till his Empresse, more cruell
than any beast in Affrica, poysoned him, her owne daughter, Mully Shecke his eldest sonne borne of a Portugall Ladie, and his daughter, to bring Mully Sidan to the Crowne now reigning, which was the cause of all those brawles and warres that followed betwixt those Brothers, their children, and a Saint that start up, but he played the Devill. King Mully Ha∣et, t the Great Zess of Barbare. King Mully Hamet was not blacke, as many suppose, but Molata, or tawnie, as are the most of his subjects; everie way noble, kinde and friendly, verie rich and pompous in Stae and Majestie, though hee sit∣teth not upon a Throne nor Chaire of Estate, but crosse legged upon a rich Carpet, as doth the Turke, whose Religion of Mahomet, with an in∣credible miserable curiositie they observe. His Ordinarie Guard is at least 5000 but in progresse he goeth not with lesse than 20000. horse∣men, himselfe as rich in all his Equipage, as any Prince in Christen∣dome, and yet a Contributor to the Turke.His great love to English mn. In all his Kingdome were so few good Artificers, that hee entertained from England, Gold-smiths, Plummers, Carvers, and Polishers of stone, and Watch-makers, so much hee delighted in the reformation of workmanship, hee allowed each of them ten shillings a day standing fee, linnen, woollen, silkes; and what they would for diet and apparell, and custome-free to trans∣port, or import what they would; for there were scarce any of those qualities in his Kingdomes, but those, of which there are divers of them living at this present in London. Amongst the rest, one M. Henry Ar∣cher, a Watch-maker, walking in Morocco, from the Alfantica to the Iuredea, the way being verie foule, met a great Priest, or a Sante (as they call all great Clergy-men) who would have thrust him into the durt for the way; but Archer, not knowing what he was, gave him a box on the eare, presently he was apprehended and condemned to have his tongue cut out, and his hand cut off: but no sooner it was knowen at the Kings Court, but 300. of his Guard came, and broke open the Prison, and de∣livered him, although the fact was next degree to Treason. Concerning this Archer, there is one thing more worth noting:The strange love of a Lyon. Not farre from Mount Atlas, a great Lionesse in the heat of the day, did use to bathe her selfe, and teach her young Puppies to swimme in the river Cauzeff, of a good bredth; yet she would carrie them one after another over the river; which some Moores perceiving watched their opportu∣nitie, and when the river was betweene her and them, stole foure of her whelps, which she perceiving, with all the speed shee could passed the river, and comming neere them they let fall a whelpe (and fled with the rest) which she tooke in her mouth, and so returned to the rest: a Male and a Female of those they gave Mr. Archer, who kept them in the Kings Garden, till the Male killed the Female, then he brought, it up as a Pup∣py-dog lying upon his bed, till it grew so great as a Mastiffe, and no dog more tame or gentle to them hee knew: but being to returne for Eng∣land, at Saffee he gave him to a Merchant of Marsellis, that presented him to the French Kng, who sent him to King Iames, where it was kept in the Tower seven yeeres: After one Mr. Iohn Bull, then servant to Mr. Archer, with divers of his friends, went to see the Lyons, not know∣ing any thing at all of him; yet this rare beast smelled him before hee
saw him, whining, groaning, and tumbling, with such an expression of acquaintance, that being informed by the Keepers how-hee came thi∣ther; Mr. Bull so prevailed, the Keeper opened the grate, and Bull went in: But no Dogge could fawne more on his Master, than the Lyon on him, licking his feet, hands, and face, skipping and tumbling to and fro, to the wonder of all the beholders; being satisfied with his acquain∣tance, he made shift to get out of the grate. But when the Lyon saw his friend gone, no beast by bellowing, roaring, scratching, and howling, could expresse more rage and sorrow, nor in foure dayes after would he either eat or drinke. Another kinde Lyon in Morocco. In Morocco, the Kings Lyons are all together in a Court, invironed with a great high wall; to those they put a young Puppy-dogge: the greatest Lyon had a sore upon his necke, which this Dogge so licked that he was healed: the Lyon defended him from the furie of all the rest, nor durst they eat till the Dogge and he had fed; this Dog grew great, and lived amongst them many yeeres after. The description of Fez.Fez also is a most large and plentifull Countrey, the chiefe Citie is called Fez, divided into two parts; old Fez, containing about 80. thou∣sand housholds, the other 4000. pleasantly situated vpon a River in the heart of Barbarie, part upon hils, part upon plaines, full of people, and all sorts of Merchandise. The great Temple is called Carucen, in bredth seventeene Arches, in length 120. borne up with 2500. white marble pillars: under the chiefe Arch, where the Tribunall is kept, hangeth a most huge lampe, compassed with 110. lesser, under the other also hang great lamps, and about some are burning fifteene hundred lights. They say they were all made of the bels the Arabians brought from Spaine. It hath three gates of notable height, Priests and Officers so many, that the circuit of the Church, the Yard, and other houses, is little lesse than a mile and an halfe in compasse; there are in this Citie 200. Schooles, 200. Innes, 400. water-mils, 600. water-Conduits, 700. Temples and Oratories; but fiftie of them most stately and richly furnished. Their Alcazer or Burse is walled about, it hath twelve gates, and fifteen walks covered with tents, to keepe the Sun from the Merchants, and them that come there. The Kings Palace, both for strength and beautie is excel∣lent, and the Citizens have many great privileges. Those two Coun∣treyes of Fez and Morocco, are the best part of all Barbarie, abounding with people, cattell, and all good necessaries for mans use. For the rest, as the Larbes, or Mountainers, the Kingdomes of Cocow, Algier, Tripoly, Tunis, and Aegypt; there are many large histories of them in divers lan∣guages,A briefe descrip∣tion of the most unknowen parts of Affrica. especially that writ by that most excellent Statesman, Iohn de Leo, who afterward turned Christian. The unknowen Countries of Ginny and Binne, this six and twentie yeeres have beene frequented with a few English ships only to trade, especially the river of Senaga, by Captaine Brimstead, Captaine Brockit, Mr. Crump▪ and divers others. Also the great river of Gambra, by Captaine Iobson, who is returned in thither a∣gaine in the yeere 1626. with Mr. William Grent, and thirteene or four∣teene others, to stay in the Countrey, to discover some way to those rich mines of Gago or Tumbatu, from whence is supposed the Moores of
Barbarie have their gold, and the certaintie of those supposed descrip∣tions and relations of those interiour parts, which daily the more they are sought into, the more they are corrected. For surely, those interi∣our parts of Affrica are little knowen to either English, French, or Dutch, though they use much the Coast; therefore wee will make a little bold with the observations of the Portugalls. CHAP. XIX. The strange discoveries and observations of the Portugalls in Affrica. THe Portugalls on those pars have the glorie,How the Portu∣galls coasted to the East Indes. who first coasting along this Westerne shore of Affrica, to finde passage to the East Indies, within this hundred and fiftie yeeres, even from the Streights of Gibralter, about the Cape of Bone Esperance to the Persian Gulfe, and thence all along the Asian Coast to the Moluccas, have subje∣cted many great Kingdomes, erected many Common-wealths, built many great and strong Cities; and where is it they have not beene by trade or force? no not so much as Cape de Verd, and Sermleone; but most Bayes or Rivers, where there is any trade to bee had, especially gold, or conveniencie for refreshment, but they are scattered; living so amongst those Blacks, by time and cunning they seeme to bee naturali∣zed amongst them. As for the Isles of the Canaries, they have faire Townes, many Villages, and many thousands of people rich in com∣modities. Ordoardo Lopez, a noble Portugall, Anno Dom. 1578.Or Edward. imbarquing him∣selfe for Congo to trade, where he found such entertainment, finding the King much oppressed with enemies, hee found meanes to bring in the Portugalls to assist him, whereby he planted there Christian Religion, and spent mst of his life to bring those Countreyes to the Crowne of Por∣tugall, which he describeth in this manner. The Kingdome of Congo is about 600. miles diameter any way,The Kingdom: of Congo. the chiefe Citie called St. Savadore, seated upon an exceeding high moun∣taine, 150. miles from the Sea, verie fertile, and inhabited with more than 100000. persons, where is an excellent prospect over all the plaine Countreyes about it, well watered, lying (as it were) in the Center of this Kingdome, over all which the Portugalls now command, though but an handfull in comparison of Negroes. They have flesh and fruits verie plentifull of divers sorts.Wilde Ele∣phants. This Kingdom is divided into five Provinces, viz. Bamba, Sundi Pango, Batta and Pembo; but Bamba is the principall, and can affoord 400000. men of warre. Elephants are bred over all those Provinces, and of won∣derfull greatnesse; though some report they cannot kneele, nor lye downe, they can doe both, and have their joynts as other creatures for use: with their fore-seet they will leape upon trees to pull downe the boughes, and are of that strength, they will shake a great Cocar tree for
the nuts, and pull downe a good tree with their ruskes, to get the leaves to eat, as well as sedge and long grasse, Cocar nuts and berries, &c. which with their trunke they put in their mouth, and chew it with their smaller teeth; in most of those Provinces, are many rich mines, but the Negars opposed the Portugalls for working in them. The Kingdome of Angola. The Kingdome of Angola is wonderfull populous, and rich in mines of silver, copper, and most other mettalls; fruitfull in all man∣ner of food, and sundry sorts of cattell, but dogges flsh they love bet∣ter than any other meat; they use few clothes, and no Armour; bowes, arrowes, and clubs, are their weapons. But the Portugalls are well armed against those engines, and doe buy yearely of those Blacks more than five thousand slves, and many are people exceeding well pro∣portioned. The Kingdome of Anchicos. The Anchicos are a most valiant nation, but most strange to all about them. Their Armes are Bowes, short and small, wrapped about with serpents skinnes, of divers colours, but so smooth you would thinke them all one with the wood, and it makes them very strong; their strings little twigs, but exceeding tough and flexible; their arrows short, which they shoot with an incredible quicnesse. They have short axes of brasse and copper for swords; wonderfull loyall and faithfull, and exceeding simple, yet so active, they skip amongst the rockes like goats. They trade with them of Nubea,A stange mony. and Congo, for Lamache, which is a small kinde of shell fish, of an excellent azure colour, male and female, but the female they hold most pure; they value them at divers prices, because they are of divers sorts, and those they use for coine, to buy and sell, as we doe gold and silver; nor will they have any other money in all those Countries, for which they give Elephants teeth; and slaves for salt, silke, linnen cloth, glasse-beads, and such like Portugall com∣modities. A snambles of mans flesh.They circumcise themselves, and marke their faces with sundry flashes from their infancie. They keepe a shambles of mans flesh, as if it were beefe, or other victuall; for when they cannot have a good market for their slaves; or their enemies they take, they kill, and sell them in this manner; some are so resolute, in shewing how much they scorne death, they will offer themselves and slaves, to this butchery to their Prince and friends; and though there be many nations will eat their enemies, in America and Asia, yet none but those are knowne to be so mad, as to cat their slaves and friends also. Their religions and Idols.Religions and idolls they have as many, as nations and humours; but the devill hath the greatest part of their devotions, whom all those Blacks doe say is white; for there are no Saints but Blacks. Divers nations yet unknowne, and the wonders of Affrica.But besides those great Kingdomes of Congo, Angola, and Azichi, in those unfrequented parts are the kingdomes of Lango, Matania, Buttua, ofola, Mozambeche, Quivola, the Isle of Saint Lawrence, Mombaza, Me∣lida, the Empires of Monomatopa, Monemugi, and Presbiter Iohn, with whom they have a kinde of trade, and their rites, customes, cli∣mates, temperatures, and commodities by relation. Also of great Lakes, that deserve the names of Seas, and huge mountaines of divers
sorts, as some scorched with heat, some covered with snow; the moun∣taines of the Sunne also of the Moone, some of crystall, some of iron, some of silver, and mountaines of gold, with the originall of Nilus; like∣wise sundry forts of cattell, fishes, Fowles, strange beasts, and mon∣strous serpents; for Affrica was alwayes noted to be a fruitfull mother of such terrible creatures; who meeting at their watering places, which are but Ponds in desart places, in regard of the heat of the Country, and their extremities of nature, make strange copulations, and so ingender those extraordinary monsters. Of all these you may reade in the history of this Edward Lopez, translated into English by Abraham Hartwell, and dedicated to Iohn Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, 1597. But because the particulrs are most concerning the conversion of those Pagans, by a good poore Priest, that first converted a Noble man, to convert the King, and the rest of the Nobility; sent for so many Priests and or∣naments into Portugall, to solemnize their baptismes with such mag∣nificence, which was performed with such strange curiosities, that those poore Negros adored them as Gods, till the Piests grew to that wealth, a Bishop was sent to rule over them, which they would not endure, which endangered to spoile all before they could bee recon∣ciled. But not to trouble you too long with those rarities of uncer∣tainties; let us returne againe to Barbary, where the warres being ended, and Befferres possessed of Morocco, and his fathers treasure, a new bruit arose amongst them, that Muly Sidan, was raising an Armie against him, who after tooke his brother Befferres prisoner; but by reason of the uncertainty, and the perfidious, treacherous, bloudy mur∣thers rather than warre, amongst those perfidious, barbarous Moores, Smith returned with Merham, and the rest to Saffe, and so aboard his Ship, to try some other conclusions at Sea. CHAP. XX. A brave Sea fight betwixt two Spanish men of warre, and Cap∣taine Merham, with Smith. MErham a captaine of a man of war then in the Road, invited cap∣taine Smith, and two or three more of them aboord with him, where he spared not any thing he had to expresse his kindnesse, to bid them welcome, till it was too late to goe on shore, so that neces∣sitie constrained them to stay aboord; a fairer Evening could not bee, yet ere midnight such a storme did arise, they were forced to let slip Cable, and Anchor, and put to Sea; spooning before the wind, till they were driven to the Canaries; in the calmes they accommodated themselves, hoping this strange accident might yet produce some good event; not long it was before they tooke a small Barke comming from Teneryf, loaded with Wine; three or foure more they chased, two they tooke, but found little in them, save a few passengers, that told them of five Dutch men of warre, about the Isles, so that they stood for Boyadora,
upon the Affrican shore, betwixt which and Cape Noa, they descried to saile. Merham intending to know what they were, hailed them; very civilly they dansed their topsailes, and desired the man of warre to come aboord them, and take what he would, for they were buttwo poore distressed Bikiners. But Merham the old fox, seeing himselfe in the li∣ons pawes, sprung his loufe, the other tacked after him, and came close up to his nether quarter, gave his broad side, and so loufed up to wind∣ward; the Vice-Admirall did the like, and at the next bout, the Admi∣rall with a noise of Trumpets, and all his Ordnance, murtherers, and muskets, boorded him on his broad side; the other in like manner on his ley quarter, that it was so darke, there was little light, but fire and smoake; long he stayed not, before he fell off, leaving 4. or 5. of his men sprawling over the grating; after they had battered Merham about an houre, they boorded him againe as before; and threw foure kedgers or grapnalls in iron chaines, then shearing off they thought so to have torne downe the grating; but the Admiralls yard was so intangled in their shrouds, Merham had time to discharge two crosse barre shot amongst them, and divers bolts of iron made for that purpose, against his bow, that made such a breach, he feared they both should have sunke for company; so that the Spaniard was as yare in slipping his chained Grapnalls, as Merham was in cutting the tackling, kept fast their yards in his shrouds; the Vice-admirall presently cleared himselfe, but spared neither his Ordnance nor Muskets to keepe Merham from getting away, till the Admirall had repaired his leake; from twelve at noone, till six at night, they thus interchanged one volly for another; then the Vice-admirall fell on starne, staying for the Admirall that came up againe to him, and all that night stood after Merham, that shaped his course for Mamora, but such small way they made, the next morning they were not three leagues off from Cape Noa. The two Spanish men of warre, for so they were, and well appointed, taking it in scorne as it seemed, with their chase, broad side, and starne, the one after the other, within Musket shot, plying their ordnance; and after an houres worke com∣manded, Merham a maine for the King of Spaine upon faire quarter; Merham dranke to them, and so discharged his quarter peeces: which pride the Spaniard to revenge, boorded him againe, and many of them were got to the top to unsling the maine saile, which the Master and some others from the round house, caused to their cost to come tum∣bling downe; about the round house the Spaniards so pestered, that they were forced to the great Cablen and blew it up; the smoake and fire was so vehement, as they thought the Ship on fire; they in the fore castle were no lesse assaulted, that blew up a peece of the grating, with a great many of Spaniards more; then they cleared themselves with all speed, and Merham with as much expedition to quench the fire with wt clothes and water, which beganne to grow too fast. The Spa∣niard still playing upon him with all the shot they could; the open places presently they covered with old sailes, and prepared themselves to fight to the last man. The angry Spaniard seeing the fire quenched, hung out a flagge of truce to have but a parley; but that desperate
Merham knew there was but one way with him, and would have none, but the report of his Ordnance, which hee did know well how to use for his best advantage. Thus they spent the next after-noone, and halfe that night, when the Spanyards either lost them, or left them. Seven and twentie men Merham had slaine, and sixteene wounded, and could finde they had received 140. great shot. A wounded Spanyard they kept a∣live confessed, they had lost 100. men in the Admirall, which they did feare would sinke, ere she could recover a Port. Thus reaccommoda∣ting their sailes, they sailed for Sancta Cruse, Cape Goa, and Magadore, til they came againe to Saffee, and then he returned into England. CHAP. XXI. The continuation of the generall Historie of Virginia; the Sum∣mer Iles; and New England; with their present estate from 1624. to this present 1629. COncerning these Countreyes, I would be sorrie to trouble you with repeating one thing twice, as with their Maps, Commodi∣ties, People, Government & Religion yet knowen, the beginning of those plantations, their numbers and names, with the names of the Adventurers, the yeerely proceedings of everie Governour both here and there. As for them misprisions, neglect, grievances, and the causes of all those rumours, losses and crosses that have happened; I referre you to the Generall Historie, where you shall finde all this at large; espe∣cially to those pages, where you may read my letter of advice to the Councell and Company, what of necessitie must be done, or lose all and leave the Countrey, pag. 70. what commodities I sent home, pag. 163. my opinion and offer to the Company, to feed and defend the Colonies, pag. 150. my account to them here of my actions there, pag. 163. my seven answers to his Majesties Commissioners: seven questions what hath hindered Virginia, and the remedie, pag. 165. How those noble Gentlemen spent neere two yeares in perusing all letters came from thence; and the differences betwixt many factions, both here and there, with their complaints; especially about the Sallerie, which should have beene a new office in London, for the well ordering the sale of To∣bacco, that 2500. pounds should yearely have beene raised out of it, to pay foure or five hundred pounds yearly to the Governor of that Com∣panie; two or three hundred to his Deputie; the rest into stipends of thirtie or fiftie pounds yearely for their Clerks and under Officers which were never there, pag. 153. but not one hundred pounds for all them in Virginia, nor any thing for the most part of the Adventurers in England, except the undertakers for the Lotteries, Setters out of ships, Adven∣turers of commodities, also their Factors and many other Officers, there imployed only by friendship to raise their fortunes out of the la∣bours of the true industrious planters by the title of their office, who
under the colour of sinceritie, did pillage and deceive all the rest most cunningly: For more than 150000. pounds have beene spent out of the common stocke, besides many thousands have beene there consu∣med, and neere 7000. people that there died, only for want of good or∣der and government, otherwise long ere this there would have beene more than 20000. people, whre after twentie yeeres spent onely in complement, and trying new conclusions, was remaining scarce 1500. with some few cattell. Then the Company dissolved, but no account of any thing; so that his Majestie appointed Commissioners to oversee, and give order for their proceedings. Being thus in a manner left to themselves, since then within these foure yeeres, you shall see how wonderfully they have increased beyond expectation; but so exactly as I desired, I cannot re∣late unto you: For although I have tired my selfe in seeking and dis∣coursing with those returned thence, more than would a voyage to Vir∣ginia; few can tell me any thing, but of that place or places they have in∣habited, and he is a great traveller that hath gone up & downe the river of Iames Towne, been at Pamaunke, Smiths Iles, or Accomack; wherein for the most part they keepe one tune of their now particular abundance, and their former wants, having beene there, some sixteene yeeres, some twelve, some six, some neere twentie, &c. But of their generall estate, or any thing of worth, the most of them doth know verie little to any purpose. Now the most I could understand in generall,Their estate 127. was from the relation of Mr. Nathaniel Cawsey, that lived there with mee, and returned Anno Dom. 1627. and some others affirme; Sir George Yerley was Governour, Captaine Francis West, Doctor Iohn Poot, Captain Roger Smith, Captaine Matthewes, Captaine Tucker, Mr. Clabourne, and Mr. Farrer of the Coun∣cell: their habitations many. The Governour, with two or three of the Councell, are for most part at Iames Towne, the rest repaire thither as there is occasion; but everie three moneths they have a generall mee∣ting, to consider of their publike affaires. Their numbers then were about 1500.Their numbers. some say rather 2000. divided into seventeene or eighteene severall Plantations; the greatest part thereof towards the falls, are so inclosed with Pallizadoes they regard not the Salvages; and amongst those Plantations above Iames Towne, they have now found meanes to take plentie of fish, as well with lines, as nets, and where the waters are the largest, having meanes, they need not want.Their condition with the Salva∣ges. Upon this River they seldome see any Salvages, but in the woods, many times their fires: yet some few there are, that upon their oppor∣tunitie have slaine some few stragglers, which have beene revenged with the death of so many of themselves; but no other attempt hath beene made upon them this two or three yeares. Their Cattle,Their increase of Cattle and Poul∣trie. namely Oxen, Kine, Buls, they imagine to be about 2000. Goats great store and great increase; the wilde Hogs, which were in∣finite, are destroyed and eaten by the Salvages: but no family is so poore, that hath not tame Swine sufficient; and for Poultrie, he is a verie
bad husband breedeth not an hundred in a yeere, and the richer sort doth daily feed on them. For bread they have plentie, and so good,Plenty of Corne. that those that make it well, better cannot be: divers have much English corne, especially Mr. Abraham Perce, which prepared this yeere to sow two hundred acres of English wheat, and as much with barley, feeding daily about the num∣ber of sixtie persons at his owne charges. For drinke, some malt the Indian corne, others barley,Their drinke. of which they make good Ale, both strong and small, and such plentie thereof, few of the upper Planters drinke any water: but the better sort are well furni∣shed with Sacke, Aquavitae, and good English Beere. Their servants commonly feed upon Milke Homini,Their servants diet. which is bruized Indian corne pounded, and boiled thicke, and milke for the sauce; but boiled with milke, the best of all will oft feed on it, and leave their flsh; with milke, butter and cheese; with fish, Bulls flesh, for they seldome kill any other, &c. And everie one is so applyed to his labour about Tobacco and Corne, which doth yeeld them them such profit, they never re∣gard any food from the Salvages, nor have they any trade or conference with them, but upon meere accidents and defiances: and now the Mer∣chants have left it, there have gone so many voluntarie ships within this two yeeres, as have furnished them with Apparell, Sacke, Aquavitae, and all necessaries, much better than ever before. For Armes, there is scarce any man but he is furnished with a Peece,Their Armes and exercise. a Iacke, a Coat of Maile, a Sword, or Rapier; and euerie Holy-day, e∣verie Plantation doth exercise their men in Armes, by which meanes, hunting and fowling, the most part of them are most excellent mark∣men. For Discoveries they have made none,Their health and discoveries. nor any other commoditie than Tobacco doe they apply themselves unto, though never any was planted at first. And whereas the Countrey was heretofore held most intemperate and contagious by many, now they have houses, lodgings and victuall, and the Sunne hath power to exhale up the moyst vapours of the earth, where they have cut downe the wood, which before it could not, being covered with spreading tops of high trees; they finde it much more healthfull than before; nor for their numbers, few Coun∣treyes are lesse troubled with death, sicknesse, or any other disease, nor where overgrowne women become more fruitfull. Since this, Sir George Yerley died 1628. Captaine West succeeded him;The present e∣state of Virginia, 1629. but about a yeere after returned for England: Now Doctor Poot is Go∣vernour, and the rest of the Councell as before: Iames Towne is yet their chiefe seat, most of the wood destroyed, little corne there planted, but all converted into pasture and gardens, wherein doth grow all man∣ner of herbs and roots we have in England in abundance, and as good grasse as can be. Here most of their Cattle doe feed, their Owners be∣ing most some one way, some another, about their plantations, and re∣turne againe when they please, or any shipping comes in to trade. Here in winter they have hay for their Cattell, but in other places they browze upon wood, and the great huskes of their corne, with some corne in
them,Masr Hathins. doth keepe them well Mr. Hutchins sath, the hve 2000.Cle, and about 5000. people; but Master Flond, Iohn Davis, William Emer∣son, and divers others,Five hosnd ple. say, about five thousand people, and five tou∣sand kine,ive thound cae. calves, oxn, and bull; for goas, hogs, ad poulty; corne, fish, deere, and many sorts of other wilde bests; and fowle in their sea∣son, they have so much more than they spend,Gas, Hoand Poulty isce. they are able to feed thre or foure hundred men more than they have; and doe oft much releeve many ships, both there, and for their returne; and this last yeare was there at least two or thee and twenty saile. They have oft much salt fih from New England, but fresh fish enough, when they will take it; Peaches in abundance at Kecoughtan; Apples, Peares, Apricocks, Vines, figges, and other fruits some have planted, that prosperd xceedinly, but their diligence about Tobacco, left them to be spoiled by the cttell, yet now they beginne to revive; Mistresse Pearce, an honest indusrious woman, hath beene there neere twentie yeares, and now returned, sait, shee hath a Garden at Iames towne,Good Hospita∣lity. containing three r sme ae, where in one yeare shee hath gathered neere an hundred bshels of xellent figges; and that of her owne provision she can keepe a bt∣ter house in Virginia, than here in London for 3. or 400. pounds a yeare, yet went thither with little or nothing. They have some tame geese, ducks, and turkies. The masters now do so traine up their servants and youth in shooting deere, and fowle, that the youths will kill them as well as their Masts. They have two brew-houses, but they finde the Indian corne so much better than ours, they beginne to leave sowg it. Their Cities and Townes are onely scattered houses, they call plantati∣ons, as are our Country Villages, but no Ordnance mounted. The Forts Captaine Smith left a building, so ruined, there is scarce mention where they were; no discoveries of any thing more, than the curing of To∣bacco, by which hitherto, being so present a commodity of gaine, it hath brought them to this abundance; but that they are so disjoynted, and every one commander of himselfe, to plant what he will: they are now so well provided, that they are able to subsist; and if they would joyne together,Commodties worth making, Blake Walnut Ash for Pes, Oke for planks, knees for Ships, Cipesse for Chests, &c. now to worke upon Sope-ashes, Iron, Rpe-oile, Ma∣der, Pitch and Tarre, Flax and Hempe; as for their Tobacco, there comes from many places such abundance, and the charge so great, it is not worth the bringing home. There is gone, and now a going, divers Ships, as Captaine Perse, Captaine Prine, with Sir Iohn Harvy to be their governour, with two or three hundred people; there is also some Bristow, and other parts of the West Country a preparing, which I heartily pray to God to blesse, and send them a happy and prosperous, voyage. Nathaniel Causie, Master Hutchins, Master Floud, Iohn Davis, William Emerson, Master William Barnet, Master Cooper, and others,
CHAP. XXII. The proceedings and present estate of the Summer Iles, from An. Dom. 1624 to this present 1629. FRom the Summer Iles, Master Ireland, and divers others report, their Forts, Odnance, and proceedings, are much as they were in the yeare 1622. as you may read in the generall History, page 199. Captaine Woodhouse governour. There are few sorts of any fruits in the West Indies, but they grow there in abundance; yet the fertility of the soile in many places decayeth, being planted every yeare; for their Plantaines, which is a most delicate fruit, they have lately found a way, by pickling, or drying them, to bring them over into England, there be∣inq no such fruit in Europe, & wonderfull for increase. For fish, flesh, figs, wine, and all sorts of most excellent hearbs, fruits, and rootes they have in abundance. In this Governours time, a kinde of Whale, or rather a Iubarta, was driven on shore in Southampton trbe from the west, over an infinite number of rocks, so bruised, that the water in the Bay where she lay; was all oily, and the rocks about it all bedasht with Parmacitty, congealed like ice, a good quantity we gathered, with which we com∣monly cured any byle, hurt, or bruise; some burnt it in their lamps, which blowing out, the very snuffe will burne, so long as there is any of the oile remaining, for two or three dayes together. The next Governour, was Captaine Philip Bell,The present estate of the Summer Iler. 1629. whose time being ex∣pired, Captaine Roger Wodd possessed his place, a worthy Gentleman of good desert, and hath lived a long time in the Country; their numbers are about two or three thousand, men, women, and children, who increase there exceedingly; their greatest complaint, is want of apparell, and too much custome, and too many officers; the pity is, there, are more men than women, yet no great mischiefe, because there is so much lesse pride: the cattell they have increase exceedingly; their forts are well maintained by the Merchants here, and Planters there; to be briefe, this Ile is an excellent bit, to rule great horse. All the Cohow birds and Egbirds are gone; seldome any wilde cats seene; no Rats to speake of; but the wormes are yet very troublesome; the people very healthfull; and the Ravens gone; fish enough, but not so neere, the shore as it used, by the much beating it; it is an Ile that hath such a rampire and a ditch, and for the quantity so manned, victu∣alled, and fortified, as few in the world doe exceed it, or is like it. The 22. of March, two ships came from thence;An evill mis∣chance. the Peter-Bonaven∣ture, neere two hundred tunnes, and sixteene peeces of Ordnance; the Captaine, Thomas Sherwin; The Master, Master Edward Some, like him in condition, a goodly, lusty, proper valiant man: the Lydia, wherein was Master Anthony Thorne, a smaller ship; were chased by eleuen ships of Dunkerk; being thus overmatched, Captaine Sherwin was taken by them in Turbay, only his valiant Master was slaine; the ship with about
seventy English men, they carried betwixt Dover and Callis, to Dunkrk; but the Lydia safely recovered Dartmouth. These noble adventurers for all those losses, patiently doe beare them; but they hope the King and state will understand it is worth keep∣ing, though it afford nothing but Tobacco, and that now worth little or nothing, custome and fraught payed, yet it is worth keeping, and not supplanting; though great men feele not those losses, yet Gardi∣ners, Carpenters, and Smiths doe pay for it. From the relation of Robert Chesteven, and others. Chap. XXIII. The proceedings and present estate of New England, Since 1614. to this present 1629. WHen I went first to the North part of Virginia, where the Westerly Colony had beene planted, it had dissolved it selfe within a yeare, and there was not one Christi∣an in all the land. I was set forth at the sole charge of foure Mer∣chants of London; the Country being then reputed by your westerlings, a most rockie, barren, desolate desart; but the good returne I brought from thence,Considerations bout the losse of ime. with the maps and relations I made of the Country, which I made so manifest, some of them did beleeve me, and they were well embraced, both by the Londoners, and Westerlings, for whom I had promised to undertake it, thinking to have joyned them all to∣gether, but that might well have become a worke for Hercules. Betwixt them long there was much contention; the Londoners indeed went bravely forward; but in three or foure yeares, I and my friends consu∣med many hundred pounds amongst the Plimothians, who only sed me but with delayes, promises, and excuses, but no performance of any thing to any purpose. In the interim, many particular ships went thi∣ther, and finding my relations true, and that I had not taken that I brought home from the French men, as had beene reported; yet further for my paines to discredit me, and my calling it New England, they ob∣scured it, and shadowed it, with the title of Cannada, till at my humble suit, it pleased our most Royall King Charles, whom God long keepe, blesse, and preserve, then Prince of Wales, to confirme it with my map and booke, by the the title of New England; the gaine thence returning did make the same thereof so increase, that thirty, forty, or fifty saile, went yearly only to trade and fish; but nothing would bee done for a plantation, till about some hundred, of your Brownists of England, Am∣sterdam, and Leyden, went to New Plimouth, whose humorous ignorances, caused them for more than a yeare, to endure a wonderfull deale of misery,The effect of niggardlinesse. with an infinite patience; saying my books and maps were much better cheape to teach them, than my selfe; many other have used the
like good husbandry, that have payed soundly in trying their selfe∣willed conclusions; but those in time doing well, divers others have in small handfulls undertaken to goe there, to be severall Lords and Kings of themselves, but most vanished to nothing; notwithstanding the fi∣shing ships, made such good returnes, at last it was ingrossed by twenty Pattenties, that divided my map into twenty parts, and cast lots for their shares; but mony not comming in as they expected, procured a Proclamation, none should goe thither without their licences to fish; but for every thirty tunnes of shipping, to pay them five pounds; besides, upon great penalties, neither to trade with the natives, cut downe wood for their stages, without giving satisfaction, though all the Country is nothing but wood, and none to make use of it, with many such other pretences, for to make this Country plant it selfe, by its owne wealth: hereupon most men grew so discontented, that few or none would goe; so that the Pattenties, who never one of them had beene there, seeing those projects would not prevaile, have since not hindred any to goe that would, that within these few last yeares, more have gone thither than ever. Now this yeare 1629. a great company of people of good ranke,A new plana∣on 1629 zeal, meanes, and quality, have made a great stocke, and with six good ships in the moneths of Aprill and May, they set saile from Thames, for the Bay of the Massachuselts, otherwise called Charles River; viz. the George Bonaventure, of twenty peeces of Ordnance, the Talbot nineteene, the Lions-whelpe eight, the May-flower fourteene, the Foure Sisters, foure∣teene, the Pilgrim foure, with three hundred and fifty men, women, and children; also an hundred and fifteene head of Cattell, as horse, mares, and neat beast; one and forty goats, some Conies, with all provision for houshold, and apparell; six peeces of great Ordnance for a Fort, with Muskets, Pikes, Corselets, Drums, Colours, with all provisions necessa∣ry for a plantation, for the good of man; other particulars I understand of no more, than is writ in the generall historie of those Countries. But you are to understand that the noble Lord chiefe Iustice Popham, Iudge Doderege; the Right Honourable Earles of Pembroke, Southamp∣ton, Salesbury, and the rest, as I take it, they did all thinke, as I and them went with me, did; That had those two Countries beene planted, as it was intended, that no other nation should come plant betwixt us. If ever the King of Spaine and we should fall foule, those Countries being so capable of all materialls for shipping, by this might have beene owners of a good Fleet of ships, and to have releeved a whole Navy from England upon occasion; yea, and to have furnished England with the most Easterly commodities; and now since, seeing how conveni∣ently the Summer Iles fell to our shares, so neere the West Indies, wee might with much more facility than the Dutchmen hav invaded the West Indies, that doth now put in practice, what so long hath beene advised on, by many an honest English States-man.Notes of incon∣venience. Those Countries Cataine Smith oft times used to call his children that never had mother; & well he might, for few fathers ever payed dea∣rer for so little consent; and for those that would truly understand, how
many strange accidents hath befallen them and him; how oft up, how oft downe, sometimes neere desperate, and ere long flourishing, can∣not but conceive Gods infinite mercies and favours towards them. Had his designes beene to have perswaded men to a mine of gold, though few doth conceive either the charge or paines in refining it, nor the power nor care to defend it; or some new Invention to passe to the South Sea; or some strange plot to invade some strange Monastery: or some portable Countrie; or some chargeable Fleet to take some rich Ca∣rocks in the East Indies; or Letters of Mart to rob some poore Mer∣chants; what multitudes of both people and mony, would contend to be first imployed: but in those noble endevours (now) how few of quali∣ty, unlesse it be to beg some Monopolie; and those seldome seeke the common good, but the commons goods; as you may reade at large in his generall history, page 217, 218, 219. his generall observations and reasons for this plantation; for yet those Countries are not so forward but they may become as miserable as ever, if better courses be not taken than is; as this Smith will plainly demonstrate to his Majesty; or any other noble person of ability, liable generously to undertake it; how within a short time to make Virginia able to resist any enemy, that as yet lieth open to all; and yeeld the King more custome within these few yeares, in certaine staple commodities, than ever it did in Tobacco; which now not being worth bringing home, the custome will bee as uncertaine to the King, as dangerous to the plantations. CHAP. XXIIII. A briefe discourse of divers voyages made unto the goodly Countrey of Guiana, and the great River of the Amazons; re∣lating also the present Plantation there. IT is not unknowen how that most industrious & honourable Knight Sir Walter Rauleigh, in the yeare of our Lord 1595. taking the Ile of Trinidado, fell with the Coast of Guiana Northward of the Line ten degrees, and coasted the Coast; and searched up the River Oranoca: where understanding that twentie severall voyages had beene made by the Spanyards, in discovering this Coast and River; to finde a passage to the great Citie of Mano, called by them the Eldorado, or the Golden Citie: he did his utmost to have found some better satisfaction than relations: But meanes failing him,Sparrow left to seeke the great Citie of Mano. hee left his trustie servant Francis Sparrow to seeke it, who wandring up and downe those Countreyes, some foure∣teene or fifteene yeares, unexpectedly returned: I have heard him say, he was led blinded into this Citie by Indians; but little, discourse of any purpose touching the largenesse of the report of it; his body seeming as a man of an uncurable consumption, short dyed here after in Eng∣land. There are above thirtie faire rivers that fall into the Sea, betweene the River of Amazons and Oranoca, which are some nine degrees asunder.
In the yeare 1605. Captaine Ley, brother to that noble Knight Sr Oliver Ley,Cpine  Ly. with divers others, planted himselfe in the River Weapoco, wherein I should have beene a partie; but hee dyed, and there lyes u∣rie, and the supply miscarrying, the rest escaped as they could. Sr Thomas Roe, well kown to be a most noble Gentleman,Sir Thm Re before he went Lord Ambassadour to the Great Mogoll, or the Great Turke. spent a yeare or two upon this Coast, and about the River of the Ama∣zones, wherein he most imployed Captaine Matthew Morton,Capan M an expert Sea-man in the discoverie of this famous River, a Gentleman that was the first shot and mortally supposed wounded to death, with me in Vir∣ginia, yet sice hth beene twice with command in the East Indies; Also Captaine William White,Captane Whe. and divers others worthy and industrious Gen∣tlemen, both before and since, hath spent much time and charge to dis∣cover it more perfitly, but nothing more effected for a Plantation, tic was undertaken by Captaine Robert Harcote, 1609. This worthy Gentleman,Capain Hne. after he had by Commission made a disco∣verie to his minde, left his brother Michael Harcote, with some fiftie or sixtie mn in the River Weapoco, and so presently returned to England, where he obtained by the favour of Prince Henrie, a large Patent for all that Coast called Guiana, together with the famous River of Amazones, to him and his heires: but so many troubles here surprized him, though he did his best to supply them, he was not able, only some few hee sent over as passengers with certaine Duch-men, but to small purpose. Thus this businesse lay dead for divers yeeres, till Sir Walter Rauleigh, accom∣panied with many valiant Souldiers and brave Gentlemen, went his last voyage to Guiana, amongst the which was Captaine Roger North, brother to the Right Honourable the Lord Dudley North, who upon this voyage having stayed and seene divers Rivers upon this Coast, tooke such a liking to those Countreyes, having had before this voyage more perfct and particular information of the excellencie of the great River of the Amazones, above any of the rest, by certaine Englishmen retur∣ned so rich from thence in good commodities, they would not goe with Sir Walter Rauleigh in search of gold; that after his returne for England, he endvoured by his best abilities to interest his Countrey and stte in those fre Regions, which by the way of Lettes Patents unto divers Noblemen and Gentlemen of qualitie, erected into a company and perpetutie for trade and plantation, not knowing of the Interest of Captaine Harcote. Where upon accompanied with 120. Gentlemen and others, with a ship,Captain Roger North. a pinace and two shllops, to remaine in the Countrey, hee set saile from Plimouth the last of April 1620, and within seven weekes after hee arrived well in the Amazones, only with the losse of one old man: some hundred leagues they ran up the River to settle his men, where the sight of the Countrey and people so contented them, that never men thought themselves, more happie: Some English and Irish that had lived there some eight yeeres, ony supplyed by the Dutch, hee reduced to his company and to leave the Dutch: having made a good voyage, to the value of more than the charge, he returned to Englangd with divers good
commodities besides Tobacco: So that it may well be conceived, that if this action had not beene thus crossed, the Geeralitie of England had by this time beene wonne and encouraged therein. But the time was not yet come, that God would have this great businesse effected, by reason of the great power the Lord Gundamore, Ambssadour for the King of Spaine, had in England, to crosse and ruine those proceedings, and so unfortunate Captaine North was in this businesse, hee was twice committed prisoner to the Tower, and the goods detained, till they were spoiled, who beyond all others was by much the greatest Adven∣turer and Loser. Nota ben. Notwithstanding all this, those that he had left in the Amazons would not abandon the Countrey. Captaine Thomas Painton, a worthy Gen∣tleman, his Lieutenant dead. Captaine Charles Parker, brother to the Right Honourable the Lord Morley, lived there six yeares after; Mr. Iohn Christmas, five yeares, so well, they would not returne, although they might, with divers ether Gentle-men of qualitie and others: all thus destitute of any supplyes from England. But all authoritie being dssol∣ved, want of government did more wrong their proceedings, than all other crosses whatsoever. Some releefe they had sometime from the Dutch, who knowing their estates, gave what they pleased and tooke what they list. Two brothers Gentlemen, Thomas and William Hixon, who stayed three yeares there, are now gone to stay in the Amazons, in the ships lately sent thither. The businesse thus remaining in this sort, three private men left of that Company, named Mr Thomas Warriner, Iohn Rhodes, and Robert Bims, having lived there about two yeares, came for England, and to be free from the disorders that did grow in the Amazons for want of Go∣vernment amongst their Countrey-men, and to be quiet amongst them∣selves, made meanes to set themselves out for St. Christophers; their whole number being but fifteene persons, that payed for their passage in a ship going for Virginia, where they remained a yeare before they were supplyed, and then that was but foure or five men. Thus this Ile, by this small beginning, having no interruption by their owne Countrey, hath now got the start of the Continent and maine Land of Guiana, which hath beene layd apart and let alone untill that Captaine North, ever watching his best opportunitie and advantage of time in the state, hath now againe pursued and set on foot his former designe. Captaine Har∣coe being now willing to surrender his grant, and to joyne with Cap∣taine North, in passing a new Patent, and to erect a company for trade and plantation in the Amazons, and all the Coast and Countrey of Gui∣ana for ever. Whereupon, they have sent this present yeare in Ianuarie, and since 1628. foure ships with neere two hundred persons; the first ship with 112. men, not one miscarried; that rest went since, not yet heard of, and are preparing another with their best expedition: and since Ianuarie is gone from Holland, 100. English and Irish, conducted by the old Planters. This great River lieth under the Line, the two chiefe head lands North and South, are about three degrees asunder, the mouth of it is
so full of many great and small Iles, it is an easie matter for an unexpe∣rienced Pilot to lose his way. It is held one of the greatest rivers in America, and as most men thinke, in the world: and commeth downe with such a fresh, it maketh the Sea fresh more than thirtie miles from the shore. Captaine North having seated his men about an hundred leagues in the Maine, sent Captaine William White, with thrtie Gentle∣men and others, in a pinuace of thirtie tun, to discover further, which they did some two hundred leagues, where they found the River to di∣vide it selfe in two parts, till then all full of Ilands, and a Countrey most healthfull, pleasant and fruitfull; for they found food enough, and all re∣turned safe & in good health: In this discoverie they saw many Townes well inhabited, some with three hundred people, some with five, six, or seven hundred; and of some they understood to be of so many thou∣sands, most differing verie much, especially in their languages: where∣of they suppose by those Indians, they understand are many hundreds more, unfrequented till then by any Christian, most of them starke naked, both men, women and children, but they saw not any such giant-like women as the Rivers name importeth. But for those where Captaine North hath feated his company, it is not knowen where Indians were e∣ver so kinde to any Nation, not sparing any paines, danger or labour, to feed and maintaine them. The English following their buildings, forti∣fications and sugar-workes; for which they have sent most expert men, and with them all things necessarie for that purpose; to effect which, they want not the helpe of those kinde Indians to produce; and many other good commodities, which (God willing) will ere long make plaine and apparent to this Kingdome, and all the Adventurers and Well-willers to this Plantation, to bee well worthy the cherishing and following with all alacritie. CHAP. XXV. The beginning and proceedings of the new plantation of St. Chri∣stopher by Captaine Warner. MAster Ralfe Merifield and others,1623. having furnished this worhty industrious Gentleman, hee arrived at St. Christophers, as is said, with fifteene men, the 28. of Ianuarie, 1623. viz. William Tested, Iohn Rhodes, Robert Bims, Mr. Benifield, Sergeant Iones, Mr. Ware, William Royle, Rowland Grascocke, Mr. Bond, Mr. Langley, Mr. Weaver, Edward Warner their Captaines sonne, and now Deputy-Governour till his fathers returne, Sergeant Aplon, one Sailor and a Cooke: At their arrivall they found three French-men, who sought to oppose Captaine Warner, and to set the Indians upon us; but at last we all became friends, and lived with the Indians a moneth, then we built a Fort, and a house, and planting fruits, by September we made a crop of Tobacco; but up∣on the nineteenth of September came a Hericano and blew it away,A Hericano all this while wee lived upon Cassada bread, Potatoes, Plantines, Pines,
Turtels, Guanes, and fish plentie; for drinke wee hd Nicnobbie. 24. The 18. of March 1624. arrived Captaine Iefferson with three men passengers in the Hope-well of London, with some trade for the Indians, and then we had another crop of Tobacco, in the meane time the French had planted themslves in the other end of the Ile; with this crop Cap∣taine Warner returned for England in September, 1625. 5.In his absence came in a French pinnace, under the command of Monsieur de Nombe, that told us, the Indians had slaine some French∣men in other of the Charybes Iles, and that there were six Peryagoes, which are huge great trees formed as your Canowes, but so laid out on the sides with boords, h e  Ind. they will seeme like a little Gally: six of those, with about soure or five hundred strange Indians came unto us, we bade them be gone, but they would not; whereupon we and the French joy∣ned together, and upon the fifth of November set upon them, and put them to flight: upon New-yeares Even they came againe, found three English going about the Ile, whom they slue. 1625 Vntill the fourth of August, we stood upon our guard, living upon the spoile and did nothing. But now Captaine Warner arriving againe with neere an hundred people, then we fell to worke and planting as before; but upon the fourth of September, came such a Hericano, as blew downe all our houses, Tobacco, and two Drums into the aire we know not whither, drove two ships on shore that were both split; all our provision thus lost, we were very miserable, living onely on what we could get in the wilde woods, enh ne. we made a small party of French and English to goe aboord for provision, but in their returning home, eight French men were slaine in the harbour. 162 Thus wee continued till neere Iune that the Tortels came in, 1627. but the French being like to starve, sought to surprize us, and all the Cassado, Potatos, and Tobacco we had planted, but we did prevent them. The 26. of October, came in Captaine William Smith, in the Hope-well, with some Ordnance, shot and powder, from the Earle of Carlile; with Captaine Pelham and thirty men, about that time also came the Plow; also a small ship of Bristow, with Captaine Warners wife, and six or seven women more.Tce Vpon the 25. of November, the Indians set upon the French, for some injury about their women, and slew six and twentie French men, five English, and three Indians. Their weapons are bowes and arrowes; their bowes are never bent, but the string lies flat to the bow; their arrowes a small reed, foure or five foot long, headed some with the poysoned sting of the taile of a Stingray, some with iron, some with wood, but all so poysoned,The arrivall of many English p. that if they draw but bloud, the hurt is incurable. The next day came in Captaine Charles Saltonstall, a young Gentle∣man, son of Sir Samuell Saltonstall, who brought with him good store of all commodities to releeve the plantation; but by reason some Hollan∣ders, and others, had bin there lately before him, who carried away with them all the Tobacco, he was forced to put away all his commodities upon trust till the next crop; in the meane time hee resolved there to stay, and imploy himselfe & his company in planting Tobacco, hoping
thereby to make a voyage, but before he coud be ready to returne for England, a Hericano hpug, his ship was split, to his great losse, being sol Mercant and owner himselfe, notwithstandng forced to pay to the Governour, the filt part of his Tobacco, and for fraught to England, three pence a pound, and nine pence a pound custome, whch amounts toge∣ther to more than threscore pound in the hundred pound, to the great dscouragement of him and many others, that intended well to those plantations. Neverthelesse he is gone againe this present yeare 1629. with a ship of about three hundred tunnes, and very neere two hundred people, with Sir William Tuffton Govenour for the Barbados, and divers gentlemen, and all manner of commodities fit for a plantation. Captaine Prinne, Captaine Stone, and divers others, came in about Christmas; so that this last yeare there hath beene about thirtie saile of English, French, and Dutch ships, and all the Indians forced out of the Ile, for they had done much mischiefe amongst the French, in cutting their throats, burning their houses, and spoyling their Tobacco; a∣mongst: the rest Tegramund, a little childe the Kings sonne, his parents being slaine, or fled, was by great chance saved, and carefully brought to England by Master Merifield, who brought him from thence and brin∣geth him up as his owne children. It lyeth seventeene degrees Northward of the line,The description of the lie. about an hundred and twenty leagues from the Cape de tres Puntas, the neerest maine land in America, it is about eight leagues in length, and foure in bredth; an Iland amongst 100. Iles in the West Indies, called the Caribes, where or∣dinarily all them that frequent the West Indies, refresh themselves; those most of them are rocky, little, and mountainous, yet frequented with the Canibals; many of them inhabited, as Saint Domingo, Saint Mattalin, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent, Granada, and Margarita, to the Southward; Northward, none but Saint Christophers, and it but latly, yet they will be ranging Marigalanta, Guardalupo, Deceado, Monserat, Antigua, Mevis, Bernardo, Saint Martin, and Saint Bartholomew, but the worst of the foure Iles possessed by the Spanyard, as Portorico or Iamica, is better than them all; as for Hispaniola, and Cuba, they are worthy the title of two rich Kingdomes, the rest not respected by the Spanyards, for want of har∣bors, and their better choice of good land, and profit in the maine. But Captaine Warner, having beene very familiar with Captaine Pain∣ton, in the Amazon, hearing his information of this St. Christophers; and having made a yeares tryall, as it is said, returned for England, ioyning with Master Merifield, and his friends, got Letters Pattents, from King Iames, to plant and possesse it. Since then, the Right Honourable the Earle of Carlile, hath got Letters Pattents also, not only of that, but all the Caribes Iles about it, who is now chiefe Lord of them, and the English his tenants, that doe possesse them; over whom he appointeth such Governours and Officers, as their affaires require; and although there be a great custome imposed upon them, considering their other charges, both to feed and maintaine themselves; yet there is there, and now a going, neere upon the number of three thousand people; where by reason of the rockinesse and thicknesse of the woods in the Ile, it is
difficult to passe, and such a snuffe of the Sea goeth on the shore, ten my better defend,The springs, temper, and seasons. than fifty assault. In this Ile are many springs, but yet water is scarce againe in many places; the valleyes and sides of the hills very fertile, but the mountaines harsh, and of a sulphurous compo∣sition; all overgrowne with Palmetas, Cotten trees, Lignum vitae, and di∣vers other sorts, but none like any in Christendome, except those carried thither; the aire very pleasant and healthfull, but exceeding ot, yet so tempered with coole breaths, it seemes very temperate to them, that are a little used to it; the trees being alwaies greene, the daies and nights alwayes very neere equall in length, alwayes Summer; only they have in their seasons great gusts and raines, and somtimes a Hericano, which is an overgrowne, and a most violent storme. A strange hat∣hung of eges or bsts. In some of those Iles, are cattell, goats, and hogges, but here none but what they must carry; Gwanes they have, which is a little harme∣lesse beast, like a Crokadell, or Aligator, very fat and good meat, she layes egges in the sand, as doth the land Crabs, which live here in abundance, like Conies in Boroughs, unlesse about May, when they come downe to the Sea side, to lay in the sand, as the other; and all their egges are hatched by the heat of the Sunne. fish. From May to September they have good store of Tortasses, that come out of the Sea to lay their egges in the sand, and are hatched as the other; they will lay halfe a pecke at a time, and neere a bushell ere they have done; and are round like Tenis-balls: this fish is like veale in taste, the fat of a brownish colour, very good and wholsome. We seeke them in the nights, where we finde them on shore, we turne them upon their backs, till the next day we fetch them home, for they can never returne themselves, being so hard a cart may goe over them; and so bigge, one will suffice forty or fifty men to dinner. Divers sorts of other fish they have in abundance, and Prawnes most great and excellent, but none will keepe sweet scarce twelve houres. ds.The best and greatest is a Passer Flaminga, which walking at her length is as tall as a man; Pigeons, and Turtle Doves in abundance; some Parrots, wilde Hawkes, but divers other sorts of good Sea fowle, whose names we know not. Roots.Cassado is a root planted in the ground, of a wonderfull increase, and will make very good white bread, but the Iuyce ranke poyson, yet boy∣led, better than wine; Potatos, Cabbages and Radish plenty. Fruits Mayes, like the Virginia wheat; we have Pine-apples, neere so bigge as an Hartichocke, but the most daintiest taste of any fruit; Plantnais, an excellent, and a most increasing fruit; Apples, Prickell Peares, and Pease, but differing all from ours. There is Pepper that groweth in a little red huske, as bigge as a Walnut, about foure inches in length, but the long cods are small, and much stronger, and better for use, than that from the East Indies. There is two sorts of Cotten, the silke Cot∣ten as in the East Indies, groweth upon a small stalke, as good for beds as downe; the other upon a shrub, and beareth a cod bigger than a Walnut, full of Cotten wooll: Anotto also groweth upon a shrub, with a cod like the other, and nine or ten on a bunch, full of Anotto, very
good for Dyers, though wilde; Sugar Canes, not tame, 4. or 5. foot high; also Mastcke, and Locus trees; geat and hard timber, Gourds, Muske Melons, Water Melons, Lettice, Prsly; all places naturally beare pur∣sline of it selfe; Sope-berries like a Musket bullet, that washeth as white as Sope; in the middle of the root is a thing like a sedge, a very good fuit, we call Pengromes; a Pappaw is as great as an apple, co∣loured like an Orange, and good to eat; a small hard nut, like a hazell nut, growes close to the ground, and like this growes on the Palmetas, which we call a Mucca nut; Mustard-seed will grow to a great tree, but beares no seed, yet the leaves will make good mustard; the Manci∣nell tree the fruit is poyson; good figs in abundance; but the Palmeta serveth to build Forts and houses, the leaves to cover them, and many other uses; the iuyce we draw from them, till we sucke them to death, (is held restorative) and the top for meat doth serve us as Cabbage; but oft we want poudered Beefe, and Bacon, and many other needfull ne∣cessaries. by Thomas Simons, Rowland Grascocke, Nicholas Burgh, and others. CHAP. XXVI. The first planting of the Barbados. THe Barbados lies South-west and by South, an hundred leagues from Saint Christophers, threescore leagues West and South from Trinidado, and some fourescore leagues from Cape de Sali∣nos, the next part of the maine. The first planters brought thither by Captaine Henry Powel, were forty English, with seven or eight Negros; then he went to Disacuba in the maine, where he got thirty Indians, men, women, and children, of the Arawacos, enemies both to the Caribes,A eseripun the l. and the Spaniards. The Ile is most like a triangle, each side forty or fifty miles square, some exceeding great rocks, but the most part exceeding good ground; abounding with an infinite number of Swine, some Turtles, and many sorts of excellent fish; many great ponds wherein is Ducke and Mallard; excellent clay for pots, wood and stone for buil∣ding, and a spring neere the middest of the Ile of Bitume, which is a liquid mixture like Tarre, that by the great raines falls from the tops of the mountaines, it floats upon the water in such abundance, that dry∣ing up, it remaines like great rocks of pitch, and as good as pitch for any use. The Mancinell apple, is of a most pleasant sweet smell,Fruits and tree. of the bignesse of a Crab, but ranke poyson, yet the Swine and Birds have wit to shun it; great store of exceeding great Locus trees, two or three fadome about, of a great height, that beareth a cod full of meale, will mke bread in time of necessity. A tree like a Pine, beareth a fruit so great as a Muske Melon, which hath alwayes ripe fruit, flowers, or greene fruit, which will refresh two or three men, and very comfortable; Plumb trees
many, the fruit great and yellow, which but strained into water in foure and twenty houres will be very good drinke; wilde figge trees there are many; all those fruits doe fat the hogges, yet at some times of the yeare they are so leane, as carrion; Gwane trees beare a fruit so bigge as a Peare, good and wholsome; Palmetaes of three severall frrs; Pa∣pawes, Prickle Peares good to eat or make drinke; Cedar trees very tall and great; Fusticke trees are very great and the wood yellow, good for dying; sope berries, the kernell so bigge as a sloe, and good to eat; Pumpeons in abundance; Goads so great as will make good great bot∣tles, and cut in two peeces good dishes and platters; many small brooks of very good water; Ginni wheat, Cassado, Pines and Plantaines; all things we there plant doe grow exceedingly, so well as Tobacco; the corne, pease, and beanes, cut but away the stalke, young sprigs will grow, and so beare fruit for many yeares together, without any more planting; the Ile is overgrowne with wod or great reeds, those wods wich are soft are exceeding light and full of pitch, and those that are hard, are so hard and great, they are as hard to cut as stone. Their numbers. Master Iohn Powell came thither the fourth of August 1627. with forty five men, where we stayed three weeks, and then returning, left behind us about an hundred people, and his sonne Iohn Powell for his Deputy, as Governour; but there have beene so many factions amongst them, I cannot from so many variable relations give you any certainty for their orderly Government: for all those plenties, much misery they have endured, in regard of their weaknesse at their landing, and long sty without supplies; therefore those that goe thither, it were good they carry good provision with them; but the Ile is most health∣full, and all things planted doe increase abundantly: and by this time there is, and now a going, about the number of fifteene or sixteene hundred people. Sir William Curtine, and Captaine Iohn Powell, were the first and chiefe adventurers to the planting this fortunate Ile; which had beene oft frequented by men of Warre to refresh themselves, and set up their shallops; being so farre remote from the rest of the Iles, they never were troubled with any of the Indies. Harbours they have none, but ex∣ceeding good Rodes, which with a small charge might bee very well fortified; it doth ebbe and flow foure or five foot, and they cannot perceive there hath ever beene any Hericano in that Ile. From the relations of Captaine Iohn White, and Captaine Wolverstone. CHAP. XXVII. The first plantation of the Ile of Mevis. BEcause I have ranged and lived amongst those Ilands, what my authours cannot tell me,The description of the Ile. I thinke it no great errour in helping them to tell it my selfe. In this little Ile of Mevis, more than twenty
yeares agoe, I have remained a good time together, to wod, and water and refresh my men; it is all woddy, but by the Sea side Southward there are sands like downes, where a thousand men may quarter themselves con∣veniently; but in most places the wod groweth close to the water side, at a high water marke, and in some places so thicke of a soft spungy wood like a wilde figge tree, you cannot get through it, but by mking your wy with hatchets, or fauchions: whether it was the dew of those trees, or of some others, I am not certaine, but many of our men became so tomen∣ted with a burning swlling all over their bodies, they seemed like seldd men, and neere mad with paine; here we found a great Poole,Te Ma. wherein ba∣thing themselves, they found much ease; and fiding it fed with a pleasant small streame that came out of the woods, we found the head halfe a mle within the land, distilling from a many of rocks, by which they were well cured in two or three dayes. Such factions here we had, as commonly at∣tend such voyages, that a paire of gallowes was mde, but Captaine Smith, for whom they were intended, could not be perswaded to use them; but not any one of the inventers, but their lives by iustice fell into his power, to determine of at his pleasure, whom with much mercy he favoured, that most basely and ujustly would have betrayed him. The last yeare, 1628. Master Littleton,A grt mispr with some others got a Pattent of the Earle of Carlile, to plant the Ile called the Barbados, thirty leagues Northward of Saint Christophers; which by report of their informers, and undertakers, for the excellencie and pleasantnesse thereof, they called Dul∣cina, but when they came there, they found it such a baren rocke, they left it; although they were told as much before, they would not beleeve it, perswading themselves, those contradicters would get it for themselves, was thus by their cunning opinion, the deceiver of themselves; for seeing it lie conveniently for their purpose in a map, they had not patience to know the goodnesse or badnesse, the inconvenience nor probabilities of the qua∣lity, nor quantity; which errour doth predominate in most of our home∣bred adventurers, that will have all things as they conceit and would have it; and the more they are contradicted, the more hot they are; but you may see by many examples in the generall history, how difficult a matter it is, to gather the tuth from amongst so many forren and severall relations, except you have exceeding good experience both of the Countries, people, and their conditions; and those ignorant undertakings, have beene the greatst hindrance of all those plantations.Their numbers. At last because they would be absolute, they came to Mevis, a little Ile by Saint Christophers; where they seated themselvs, well furnished with all ne∣cessaries, being about the number of an hundred, and since increased to an hundred and fifty persons, whereof many were old planters of Saint Christo∣phers, especially Master Anthony Hinton, and Master Edward Tompson. But be∣cause all those Iles for most part are so capable to produce, and in nature like each other, let this discourse serve for the description of them all. Thus much concerning those plantations, which now after all this time, losse, and charge, should they be abandoned, suppressed, and dissolved, were most lamentable; and surely seeing they all strive so much about this Tobacco, and that the fraught thereof, and other charges are so great, and so open to any enemie, by that commodity they cannot long subsist. And it is a wonder to me to see such miracles of mischiefes in men; how
greedily they pursue to dispossesse the planters of the Name of Christ Iesus, yet say they are Christians, when so much of the world is unpossessed; yea, and better land than they so much strive for, murthering so many Christians, burning and spoiling so many cities, villages, and Countries, and subverting so many kingdomes, when so much lieth vast, or only possessed by a few poore Savages, that more serve the Devill for feare, than God for love; whose ignorance we pretend to reforme, but couetousnesse, humours, ambi∣tion, faction, and pride, hath so many instruments, we performe very little to any purpose; nor is there either honour or profit to be got by any that are so vile, to undertake the subversion, or hinderance of any honest inten∣ded christian plantation. Now to conclude the travels and adventures of Captaine Smith;. how first he planted Virginia, and was set ashore with about an hundred men in the wilde woods; how he was taken prisoner by the Savages, by the King of Pa∣maunke tied to a tree to be shot to death, led up and downe their Country to be shewed for a wonder; fatted as he thought, for a sacrifice for their Idoll, before whom they conjured him three dayes, with strange dances and invo∣cations then brought him before their Emperor Powhatan, that commanded him to be slaine; how his daughter Pocahontas saved his life, returned him to Iames towne, releeved him and his famished company, which was but eight and thirty to possesse those large dominions; how he discovered all the se∣verall nations, upon the rivers falling into the Bay of Chisapeacke; stung neere to death with a most poysoned taile of a fish called Stingray: how Powha∣tan out of his Country tooke the kings of Pamaunke and Paspahegh prisoners, forced thirty nine of those kings to pay him contribution, subjected all the Savages: how Smith was blowne up with gunpowder, and returned for Eng∣land to be cured. Also how hee brought our new England to the subjection of the king∣dome of great Britaine; his fights with the Pirats, left alone amongst a many French men of Warre, and his ship ran from him; his Sea-fights for the French against the Spaniards; their bad usage of him; how in France in a little boat he escaped them; was adrift all such a stormy night at Sea by himselfe, when thirteene French Ships were split, or driven on shore by the Ile of Ree, the generall and most of his men drowned, when God to whom be all honour and praise, brought him safe on shore to all their admirations that escaped; you may read at large in his generall history of Virginia, the Summer Iles, and New England. CHAP. XXVIII. The bad life, qualities and conditions of Pyrats; and how they taught the Turks and Moores to become men of warre. AS in all lands where there are many people, there are some theeves, so in all Seas much frequented, there are some pyrats; the most ancient within the memory of threescore yeares was one Callis, who most re∣freshed himselfe upon the Coast of Wales; Clinton and Pursser his compani∣ons, who grew famous, till Queene Elizabeth of blessed memory, hanged
them at Wapping; Flemming was as expert and as much sought for as they, yet such a friend to his Country, that discovering the Spanish Armado, he volunta∣rily came to Plimouth, yeelded himselfe freely to my Lord Admirall, and gave him notice of the Spaniards comming; which good warning came so happily and unexpectedly, that he had his pardon, & a good reward; some few Pirats there then remained; notwithstanding it is incredible how many great and rich przes the little barques of the West Country daily brought home, in regard of their small charge;The ds∣cules of a great Na∣vie. for there are so many difficulties in a great Nvy, by wind and weather, victuall, sicknesse, losing and finding one ano∣ther, they seldome defray halfe the charge: but for the grace, state, and de∣fence of the Coast and narrow Seas, a great Navy is most necessary, but not to attempt any farre voyage, except there be such a competent stocke, they want not wherewith to furnish and supply all things with expedition; but to the purpose. After the death of our most gracious Queene Elizabeth,What oc∣asioneth Pirats. of blessed memo∣ry, our Royall King Iames, who from his infancy had reigned in peace with all Nations; had no imployment for those men of warre, so that those that were rich rested with that they had; those that were poore and had nothing but from hand to mouth, turned Pirats; some, because they became sleighted of those for whom they had got much wealth; some, for that they could nor get their due; some, that had lived bravely, would not abase themselves to poverty; some vainly, only to get a name; others for revenge, cove∣tousnesse, or as ill; and as they found themselves more and more oppressed, their passions increasing with discontent, made them turne Pirats. Now because they grew hatefull to all Christian Princes,Their chiefe rande∣vouz. they retired to Barbary, where although there be not many good Harbours, but Tunis, Argier, Sally, Mamora, and Tituane, there are many convenient Rodes, or the open Sea, which is their chiefe Lordship: For their best harbours Massalqueber, the townes of Oran, Mellila, Tanger, and Cuta, within the Streights, are possessed by the Spaniards; without the Streights they have al∣so Arzella, and Mazagan; Mamora likewise they have lately taken, and forti∣fied. Ward a poore English sailer, and Dansker a Dutchman, made first here their Marts, when the Moores knew scarce how to saile a ship; Bishop was An∣cient, and did little hurt; but Easton got so much, as made himselfe a Mar∣quesse in Savoy; and Ward lived like a Bashaw in Barbary; those were the first that taught the Moores to be men of warre. Gennings, Harris, Tompson, and divers others, were taken in Ireland, a Coast they much frequented, and died at Wapping. Hewes, Bough, Smith, Walsingam, Ellis, Collins, Sawkwell, Wol∣listone, Barrow, Wilson, Sayres, and divers others, all these were Captaines a∣mongst the Pirats, whom King Iames mercifully pardoned; and was it not strange, a few of these should command the Seas. Notwithstanding the Mal∣teses, the Pope, Florentines, Genoeses, French, Dutch, and English, Gallies, and Men of Warre, they would rob before their faces, and even at their owne Ports, yet seldome more than three, foure, five or six in a Fleet: many times they had very good ships, and well manned,Their conditi∣ons. but commonly in such factions amongst themselves, and so riotous, quarrellous, treacherous, blasphe∣mous, and villanous, it is more than a wonder they could so long continue, to doe so much mischiefe; and all they got, they basely consumed it amongst Iewes, Turks, Moores, and whores. The best was, they would seldome goe to Sea, so long as they could
possibly live on shore, being compled of English, French, Dutch, and Moores, (but very few Spanyards, or Italians) commonly running one from another, till they became so disjoynted, disordered, debawched, and mise∣rable, that the Turks and Moores beganne to command them as slaves, and force them to instruct them in their best skill, which many an accursed run∣nagado, or Christian turned Turke did, till they have made those Sally men, or Moores of Barbary so powerfull as they be,Rnna∣d. to the terror of all the Straights, and many times they take purchase in the maine Ocean, yea sometimes even in the narrow Seas in England, and those are the most cruell villaines in Turkie, or Barbarie; whose natives are very noble, and of good natures, in compari∣son of them. Advertise∣ment for wilde heads.To conclude, the misery of a Pirate (although many are as sufficient Sea∣men as any) yet in regard of his superfluty, you shall finde it such, that any wise man would rather live amongst wilde beasts, than them; therefore let all unadvised persons take heed, how they entertaine that quality; and I could wish Merchants, Gentlemen, and all setters forth of ships, not to bee sparing of a competent pay, nor true payment; for neither Soulders nor Sea-men can live without meanes, but necessity will force them to steale; and when they are once entered into that trade, they are hardly reclaimed. Those titles of Sea-men and Souldiers, have beene most worthily honoured and esteemed, but now regarded for most part, but as the scumme of the world; regaine therefore your wonted reputations, and endevour rather to adventure to those faire plantations of our English Nation; which how∣ever in the beginning were scorned and contemned, yet now you see how many rich and gallant people come from thence, who went thither as poore as any Souldier or Sailer, and gets more in one yeare, than you by Piracie in seven. I intreat you therefore to consider, how many thousands yearely goe thither; also how many Ships and Sailers are imployed to transport them, and what custome they yearely pay to our most Royall King Charles, whose prosperity and his King∣domes good, I humbly beseech the im∣mortall God ever to preserve and increase. FINIS.
Part of the Trauels of Capt IOHN SMITH amongst TVRKES, TARTARS and others extracted out of the HISTORY by IOHN PAYN Capt. SMITH throwne into the Sea, gott safe to Shoree, and was releeued Chap 2 How hee releeued OLVMPAGH by a stratagem of Lights Chap. 4 The Siege of REGALL in Transiluania Chap. 7 His three single Combats Chap. 7. His Encounter with TVRBASHAW Chap. 7. His Combat with GRVALGO. Capt of three hundred horsmen. Chap. 7. How he slew BONNY: MVLGRO. Chap. 7. Capt SMITH led Captiue to the BASHAW of NALBRITS in TARTARIA. Chap. 12. Three TVRKS heads in a banner giuen him for Armes. Chap. . How he was presented to Prince SIGISMVNDVS. Chap. 8. Capt SMITH Killeth the BASHAW of Nalbrits and on his horse escapeth. Chap. 17.
