23630 S101974 99837777 2119
THE VVHETSTONE OF REPROOFE. OR A REPROVING CENSVRE OF THE misintitled safe way: declaring it by discouerie of the authors fraudulent proceeding, & captious cauilling, to be a miere by-way drawing pore trauellers out of the royall & common streete, & leading them deceitfully in to a path of perdition. Errare fecit eos in inuio, & non in via. Psal. 106. WITH A POSTSCRIPT OF ADVER∣tisments, especially touching the homilie & epistles attributed to Alfric: & a compendious retor∣tiue discussion of the misapplyed by-way. AVTHOR T. T. Sacristan & Catholike Romanist. CATVAPOLI, Apud viduam MARCI WYONIS. Anno M.DC.XXXII.
THE PREFACE. I Haue viewed & perused exactly a certaine smale vollume publi∣shed by Sir Humfrey Linde. He intituleth it the safe way, but I finde it containes nothing either safe or sound. To make it more plausible he giues it a Latin inscripton printing in the front of it, via tuta, not much vnlike to the practise of Mountibanks, who to make their pouders more vendible set on their boxes strange titles to persuade the ignorant, they are farre fet∣ched & of care vertue. He calleth it a waie lea∣ding alle Christians to the true Catholike Church. But indeede it is no waye but rather a diuer∣ticle, or diuersion: or if it be a way, its onely a by-way leading sinple soules into woods & deserts & leauing them there vnmercifully to be deuoured by rauenous beasts. If it be any way at all, it is not via tuta, but rather via torta, & a Kinde of negatiue way consisting in nega∣tion of the true Catholike way, & therefore as according to the doctrine of Aristotle, negatio est malignantis naturoe, negation is of a malignant
nature, so it being a negatiue way, it cannot possible be any other then via, malignantium, the way of the malignant & reprobate people. He addes it leadeth to the true auncient & Catholike faith now professed in the Church of England, but this confirmeth that which I said before, that his way is no true way but a by-way as leading to a by-place, to a Countrie & people separated from the rest of the world, Tote diui∣sus orbe Britannus. conducting to a na∣tion diuided from the rest of the earth, as in si∣tuation so is it separated in Religion from o∣thers, yea from it selfe, from the trueth, from antiquitie, as being no more auncient in all poynts then the daies of Queene Elizabeth as her 39. articles plainely testifie, diuerse of them being first proclaimed by her & her parliament: hither the way leadeth & there it leaueth the poore traueller at a non plus, without any meanes to passe vnto Christ & his Apostles. He saith farther in the title that euen the Romanists his aduersaries doe testifie, the safety of his way: but this is most ridiculous & most false of all the rest of his inscription; he citeth indeed greate tropes of authors in pretense of his positions, some of which are true Catholike writers, but others not acknowledged for such by vs, others manistly knowen to be his owne consectaries: & all those that are truly ours, he doth eyther malitiously, or ignorantly abuse, & so doth but make checker-worke or Crosse
lines of them alto gether for his ministers to play in the pulpit with their parishioners at fox & geese. I imagin'd his name had bene Line, but now I perceiue certainely it is not, for he vseth nei∣ther line nor square in his booke, I meane nei∣ther method nor square dealing. For setting aside his prologue & Epilogue, his first chapter, or section might aswell haue bene the last & the laste his first as otherwise, & as for his sin∣ceritie, it is not to be found, either in the begin∣ning, midle or ending: wherefore if his name be Linde as he subscribeth, it is more agreeable to the inside of his worke, which is very well linde indeede I meane with lies. And the trueth is the greatest part of his pamphlet is but ouer∣worne brokery stuffe, dropped from whites way & B. Mourtons patched Appeale, forged Imposture, & vshers outrages, excepting some frenchwares taken out of the corrupted store house of that famous mountibanke Daniel Chamiere, with whom I perceaue his worship hath had no smale corespondence. He stileth himselfe knight which no doubt he is, but as that title soundes honestie, honor, and nobillitie, so none of that I finde in his booke, which is so replenishsd with bragges, boasts, and protestations, as one would sweare him rather to be a protesting puritan, then a pure Protestant.
Which with other reasons moue me to sus∣pect the booke is not his, but a ministerial ba∣stard fathered vpon his nobilitie for the grea∣ter authoritie of the worke: but that I will not much examine: onely this I say that when I had read it, I did soma't doubt whether the knight could be so versed in our Roman di∣uines as (thou' to little purpose) the penner ap∣peeres to be: which caused me to suspect the true authour is some one of greater reading and industrie then I imagin Sir Humfrey is: Spuria multorum patrum proles. yet on the other side I am verelie perswa∣ded, that considering the multitude of ignorant absurdities it conteines; the authour of it can∣not be a man of any sollide learning in diuinity, which being supposed, I cannot absolutely con∣demne Sir Humfrey for taking vpon him the name, yet he cannot be iudged wholely excu∣sable in his honor for that he consented to be the putatiue Father of so base a bratte. This which I haue is the third edition, & the fourth may be dailie expected, in regard the booke is so full of matter, I meane of corrup∣tion: Yet after the contents come once to be exactely discussed & discouered, I persuade my selfe it will quikly loose it vndeserued credit, & the dubtlesse if the leaues were larger it would ride poaste to Tobaconistis, & grossers shops. I confesse Sir Humfrey I am Tom. Teltruth who cannot flatter or dissemble: yet may you
assure your selfe that altho' my speeche be or∣dinarily directed vnto your selfe, my intent is directly to reprooue those onelie who in their contriuing of the worke for you, & in your name, haue so profanely misapplyed, & abused sacred scriptures, ancient Fathers, & an num∣ber of other graue & Catholike authors so corruptedlie produced against their owne pro∣fessed faith. Neyther yet haue I anie meaning by my words to offēde the dignitie of your per∣son which I respect in the highest degree of de∣sert, as neither the persons of those who truely are the authors of the worke, & haue deceiued both you & others: but rather with charitable S. Aug. I chiuse to say of you & euery one of my aduersaries in religion: Homo viuat, moriatur error. Let the man liue, the error dye. But now I will descend to particulars, & af∣ter due examine passe my sentence vpon euerie seuerall section, cheefelie insisting in discussion of the citations of the aduersarie, dedicating my whole censure not to the gentrie of my Coun∣trie as Sir Humfrey doth, and of whose mature Iudgments I can not conceiue so basely as once to imagin they will be dangerouslie enamored with his booke, but I will cheefelie offer it to the more vulgar ranke of people who by rea∣son of their smaler tallents may more easely be circumuented, whom if by conferring the one booke with the other I shall vnderstand they
come to be right informed of the trueth, I shall hould my selfe sufficientlie rewarded by them as by those whose wauering mindes I onely intend to rectifie by my labors, which other∣wise for anie matter of substance I finde in the booke, I professe I should neuer haue esteemed it worth the paines I haue taken in the confu∣tation of it.
A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS. PERIOD 1. THE proceeding of the Roman Church with the sectaries clered & defended from the in∣iurious impositions of the aduersarie. Father Cam∣pian & other authors ill alledged. Where likewise the Romanists are freed from all cause of contention betweene themselues & the pretended reformers, who are truelie the cause of all dissention in the Church by there Preposterous pretended reforma∣tion. PERIOD 2. Neyther are there any corruptions in either faith or generally approued manners in the Roman Church. Nor anie want of care, & zeale in the Popes in procuring all necessarie reformation in the Church. But the aduersaries abuse of the Councels of Trent & Pisa, & his lyes & equiuocations dis∣couered. His calumniations against Purgatorie, indulgences prayer to Saints reproued. PERIOD 3. No true Romanist euer renounced Poperie either in his life, or at his death: yet some formerly Roma∣nists for desire of licentious libertie, & other tem∣poral motiues, haue apostated from the Catholike
Roman Church. Witnes, Luther, Caluin, & other founders of the misreformed Churches, to omit those of smaler note. Some cited for Romanists which are not such, with abuse of some other authors. PERIOD 4. An idle & calumnious discourse of the aduersa∣rie foolishly affirming that the Roman Church is hinderd frō reformation by bumane Police, reproued. PERIOD 5. The irrefragable argument of Catholikes that the pretensiue Reformers cannot assigne a time in which anie one point of the Roman faith was by anie pu∣blike authoritie before the dayes of Luther con∣demned for erroneous, maintained & fortified against the friuolous euasions of the aduersarie. Some Romanists by him impertinently alledged others cited for Romanists which are not such. PERIOD 6. The Catholike Roman doctrine cleared in it suc∣cession from all touche of heresie. But contrarily the pedegree of the misreformers much stained with the same where diuers ancient Fathers are abused & corrupted at the least in sense & meaning. PERIOD 7. The pretensiue reformed doctrine is not proued, ey∣therby testimonie of Romanists, or otherwise, to haue
eyther vniuersalitie or antiquite, but conuinced to be quyte voyde of them both. And the aduersarie promissing to proue the antiquitie & vniuersallitie of his faith by testimonies of Romanists, onelie pro∣duceth two or three & in two or three onely points & yet those impertinentlie. PERIOD 8. Neyther iustification by faith, nor the deniall of the reall presence or transubstantiation, or priuate Masse: not the dual number of Sacraments, not anie vnlawfulnes of communion in one kynde, of prayer or seruice in an vnknowne langue, of due honor of ima∣ges or Indulgences proued by testimony of Romanists, or by anie other apparent argument: but all the ad∣uersarie alledgeth is discouered to be faultie, friuo∣lous, or forged. PERIOD 9. Not one testimonie of Romanists for the certain∣tie of the pseudo-reformed faith, or vncertaintie of the Roman, as the aduersarie idlely pretended. But diuers of them abused & detorted. PERIOD 10. No safetie, comfort, or benefit for the soule, but much for the bodie, in the pretensiue reformed faith: neyther did anie Romanists euer confesse more then this second parte of saftie, comforte, or benefit to be in the new Religion. Where diuers authors are de∣praued & abused by the false aduersarie.
PERIOD 11. It is conuinced to be absolutelie false, & calum∣nious that the Romanists eyther elude, or reiect the ancient Fathers, but contrarilie esteeme much more of them then anie of the misreformers euer did. Where diuers authors are falsely accused & abused. PERIOD 12. No true recordes euer razed by the Romanists, but manie by the false reformers partelie razed, & partely exauthorized, or destroyed. With discouerie of some false dealing in the aduersarie. PERIOD 13. It is a miere calumnious accusation of our mali∣tious aduersarie to affirme that the Romanists blasphemie the scripture: where it is conuinced that the Romanists vse the scriptures with much more reuerence then the Nouellists doe. And di∣uers Catholikes are traduced & corrupted touching this matter. PERIOD 14. It is miere phrensie to imagin that Bellarmine te∣stifies the trueth of the misreformed doctrine eyther in ihe principal points of controuersie, or in anie other point of their newe tenets. And the same Cardinal is much abused by the aduersarie in this passage.
PERIOD 15. Ancient martyrs not pretended but defended to haue shed their blood not for defense of the newe pretended reformation, but in defense of the ancient Catholike & present Roman faith. And the wea∣kenes and folie of the aduersarie discouered in his proceeding. PERIOD 16. The Romanists haue no need to drawe any argu∣ment for proofe of their Religion from the confession of the sectaries. And to treate of this was imper∣tinent to the aduersaries proiect. PERIOD 17. It is demonstrated to be plainely false that the aduersarie hath proued by confessions of Romanists that his Religion is safer then theirs. And this is founded onely in his owne crasie iudgement fay∣ling & miscarying in the verie foundation of his worke.
APPROBATIO. VIso testimonio, cuiusdam viri docti mihi∣que de fide & doctrina probè cogniti, quo testatur hanc Censuram cuiusdam libelli qui in∣scribitur Viatuta, nihil continere fidei vel bo∣nismoribus aduersum sed multa Catholicae re∣ligionis dogmata subtiliter explicata, orthodo∣xorumque scripta vindicata diligenter, Dignam censui quam & ego approbarem Duaci 28. No∣uembr. 1632. GEORGIVS COLVENERIVS &c.
Correction of faultes, & supplie of omissions. PAge 60. line 13. reade Church Apostacie. p. 114. l. 18. for them, reade it. p. 116. for be reade were. & for there formers reade the Reformers. p 127. omit real presence. l. 134. for sainte reade smarte. p. 142. for to dissent reade not to consent. p. 154. for to such contrarie reade contratie to such & in the same page l. 23. for which is true, reade which in his opi∣nion is true. & p. 155. touching the same matter. l. 15. for none of which is contrarie, reade none of which abstracting from the institution is contrarie. p. 145. for but hath, reade but since it & the rest were there included hath. pag. 156. line 2. for the manner reade the whole & intire manner. p. 158. for declaredly & vniuersally reade, so declaredly & vniuersally. page 226. for the worde of God, reade either the vnwrit∣ten worde of God, & in the same p. l. 14. adde althou' there were no other Councell for it. pag. 208. l. 20. to people, adde as euer so to receiue it by Christs com∣maunde. p. 265. for thrice, reade once. p. 240. lin. 6. to Christ, adde humane nature. p. 239. for reconciliatiōs, reade reconciliationis. p. 287. for dignitie reade decorum. p. 202. l. 7. omit other. l. 27. to exhibited add by it selfe. page 307. to not determined by the Church, adde in euerie particular. pag. 317. to illegitimate, adde con∣cerning the doctrine of images. p. 371. to diuine wors∣hip, add in spirit. pa. 447. l. 16. for in, reade since. pa. 463. for thim, reade him. & in the next l. 10. for may chalenge, reade may in that respect chalenge. p. 467. l. 17. adde in respecte of the people. p. 433. lin. 16. for able, reade agreable. & omit su. pag. 438. lin. 13. for to whome reade, & yet. p. 475. for conference reade cō∣fidence. p. 485. l. 16. for heresie, reade material heresie. p. 480. for martyrs reade examples. p. 493. l. 26. con∣sequence. adde to this purpose. p. 566. l. 24. to soun∣des, adde including the prayers. p 546. l. 8. to glorious,
adde flashe. & l. 26. for gaspell, reade Gospell. p. 545. l. 2. reade Pamphleter. p. 421. l. 18. omit in a vi∣sible maner. In the introduction to the Appendix. Page 73. line 10. adde defined. l. 3. for false, reade safe. p. 19. l. 20. omit either, & in the next. l. reade wor∣kes. & l. 24. to some of, adde them. Besides these neglects I aduertise the reader of an other faulte committed in the omission of titles for the distinct matters. Neuerthelesse this defect is sufficiently supplied in regarde that in the commencement or entrance of eue∣rie seuerall period, the contents are breefely de∣clared. There be manie other errors of lesse im∣portance committed by the printer as being a strāger as Nice with a great letter & the like, which the discretion and iudgement of the rea∣der will easily correct. In like manner he will perdone the rudnes of the style as penned by one whoe by reason of his absence & daylie conuersation with strangers ignoreth the pro∣pertie of his natiue language. As also he will conniue his tardance in the publication of the worke, which if it had not incountered vnima∣gined impediments might haue appeared manie monethes paste.
THE FIRST PERIOD. THIS Period shall containe the first and second sections of S. Humfreys way, and I re∣solued to ioyne them toge∣ther, by reason I finde litle matter of doctrine in them, as being rather in the nature of preamble or in∣troduction, and consequently of too small sub∣stance for a scholler to insist vpon. In his first section he purposed to prooue and disprooue the bitternesse of the Church of Roome towards the reformed Churches, but he bringeth verie little or nothing to that purpose, onely citing for his de∣monstration of the same some vnchristian speeches as he tearmeth them, vttered by father Campian in his first reason. She tearmes vs (saith S. Humfrey, meaning the Roman Church) Heretiques, Hellhounds of Zwinglius, Luthers whelpes, Turkish Hugonotes, damned persons, and worse then Infidells, which wordes if they weare truly related I must ne∣edes
confesse include no small acrimony, but I hauing diligently read ouer on purpose Cam∣pians first reason, I finde not them all there, nay nor yet the greater part of them, nor any other equiualent vnto them. I finde indeede he spea∣keth sharpely against Luther and Caluin and he tearmeth them and others whom he citeth, Quid ille nunc di∣ceret, si vi∣ueret in terris, & Lutheros Caluinos∣que con∣cerneret opifices Biblio∣rum, qui sua lima politula & elegan∣tula, vetus nouum∣que testa∣mentum esse rase∣rint. Quid Lu∣theri Ca∣tulis vt Tobiam, Ecclesia∣sticum, Macha∣baeos, & horum o∣dio com∣plures a∣lios ea ca∣lumnia compre∣hensos è syncero canone repente dispunge∣rent? &c. Quae qui∣dem Ec∣clesia cu∣stos huius depositi non magi∣stra (quod haeretici cauillna∣tur) the∣saurum hunc vul∣uersum quem Sy∣nodus Tridenti∣na est am∣plexa ve∣tustissi∣mus olim concilij publicitus vendica∣uit. &c. Castatio mysticum illud Sa∣lomonis Canti∣cum. &c. Nihilo pluris quam cantile∣named a∣micula & cum pe∣dissequis autor col∣loquium amato∣rium ve∣nereus furcifer aestimauit. Camp. rat. 1. heretiques for their mangling the holy scriptu∣res according to their owne priuate Spirits, but he hath not one bitter worde against the per∣sons of any sectaries of his owne Countrie, but onely iustly reprehendeth the Nouelists in ge∣nerall for rheir abuse of the worde of God. But suppose Father Campian had vsed such spe∣eches indeede, what then? do not the refor∣mers themselues most frequently both in their writings and pulpits vse farre worse tearmes both against the Romanists and the Roman Church, do not they accuse both her and her members of Idolatrie, Superstition, and Anti∣christianity, exaggerating matters with all the satyricall phrases they can inuent, as euen in this very place doth appeere where S. Hum∣frey himselfe rayling not onely against the par∣ticular members of the Roman Church, but also against her sacred selfe, charging her to haue lost her breasts or at least to giue her chil∣dren little or no sincere milke out of her two breasts, the two testaments, and that she doth dayly practi∣se spirituall fornication, and that she hath plaid the
Harlot with a greate H. and finally taxing her that she mainetayneth and practiseth manifest and manifould Idolatry, and that her title is vsurpa∣tion her deuotion is superstition, and she her selfe a professed enemy to the ghospell, from whence you may inferre what a sencelesse blindenesse this was in the knight, to dedicate the first chapter of his booke to the disproouing of the bitternes of the Roman Church, he himselfe hauing spent a greate parte of it in rayling a∣gainst her, and also you may perceaue how im∣portunely he accuseth her of malignitie and want of desire to quench the vnquenchable broyles of the Church as he tearmeth them, whilest he himselfe through his exasperating speches, asmuch as in him lyeth, putteth no small impediment to the extinguishing of the same, as the reader may plainely perceaue, and notwithstanding he compareth the Roman Church and his owne to two sisters (which comparison allthough it be very fond and ab∣surd in it selfe for that the true Church being but one onely spouse of Christ, she can admitte no sister nor Corriuall according to the mea∣ning of the holy Spirit in the Canticles affir∣ming his spouse to be one, (VNA ES SPONSA MEA) neuertheles he must needes be conuin∣ced to haue proceeded most preposterously in this matter, and contrary to all reason, in that hee intending or at least pretending to shew
there ought to be loue & vnion betwene them as betwene two sisters descending from one and the same catholique and vniuersall mother as he calleth her, yet as it were with one & the same, breath he accuseth the same Roman Church to haue beene the onely cause of separation; and carrieth the busines in such a rough and vncivill fashion towards her, giuing her such greate occasions of new disgusts, that it plaine∣ly appeereth he doth rather demonstrate his owne bitternesse & rancour towards her, then with any probable argument shew any such disposition to remaine in her against any such vnion as hee pretendeth to desire. Why then doth S. Humfrey complaine of that which is in a farre worse manner practised by himselfe and his owne brothers? besides this I pray you doth the supposed bitternesse of F. Cāpian proue the bitternesse of the Roman Church? could he alone bee the whole Roman Church who was but one onely member of it? Or are his spe∣eches or priuate positions to be attributed to the whole Church, he being but one parte the∣reof and yet not the greatest? what a false Me∣tonymie is this? if the head of the Church had vsed such speeches you would haue seemed to haue had some reason to haue attributed them to the whole, because that which the head doth may induce a denomination vppon the rest of the body, of which examples may be found e∣uen
in nature, but whatsoeuer any other mem∣ber doth, it cannot rightly be attributed to the whole. So that we now see that in this allega∣tion S. Humfrey himselfe doth so carrie the matter, and giueth the Church of Roome euen in this same section, so much occasion of new disgusts as besides the rehearsed calumnies ta∣xing her with creation of 12. new Articles and coyning of new expositions vpō the ould, farre diffe∣rent from the doctrine of the Apostles, and that she mayntaineth and practiseth manifest idolatry. And the like most false and slanderous expro∣brations, that as I said before, it plainely appee∣reth that he hath rather demonstrated his owne bitternes, and rancour towards the Ro∣man Church, then shewed any such defect in her, by any argument drowen from Father Campians wordes by him produced, which wordes allthough by his quotation of Iewell in the margent he will seeme to haue taken them at secōd hand, yet certainely it is a plaine imposture, and so let them diuide it as they please betwixt themselues, it being euer suppo∣sed that S. Humfrey, and his Iewell, are of e∣quall authoritie with the Catholiks, I meane of none at all. Moreouer S. Humfteys whole drift in this section being to cleere his owne Church from the infamous brand of Apostacy, he imposeth the whole cause of separation vpon the Roman Church, and produceth Eras∣mus
for a wittnes of the same, who being dema∣unded (for sooth) of the duke of Saxonie what was Luthers capitall offence that stirred vp so many opposites against him, made answer that Luther had committed two greate crimes, for he had taken away the Crowne from the Pope, and had taken downe the belly of the monkes. To which saying of answer that Eras∣mus is no competent wittnes against the Roman Church, especially in a case where his sole testimonie is interposed. And if S. Hum∣frey had ben circumspect he would not haue cited Erasmus his answere for this purpose, as containing one manifest lye if not twb. For neither did Luther euer take the Crowne from the Pope, which as the world knowes, he still enioyeth maugre him and all his adherents: neither did Luther euer take downe the bellies of the monkes, except it was by iniuste vsurpa∣tion and rapin to fill his owne, and to leade his lyfe in luxurious concubinate with breach of his vowes to god and man. Immediately before this momicall passage of Luther out of Erasmus (which although S. Humfrey produced to colour the pretended Reformers diuisiō from the Church of Rome, yet doth it farre more strongly argue a cause in the Pope iustely to reiect them, then anie ex∣cuse of their preposterous separation) before this I say he cited a place out of the Prophet
Ose which because it makes nothing to this purpose, Cap. 4.15.17. but onely vpon his owne false suppo∣sition, that the Roman Church is wicked and idolatrous; therefore vntill I see him prooue his supposition, which yet I know he will neuer be able to performe, I leaue it as impertinent: as also I omit the examples he brings of Abra∣hams departure out of Caldea, and of the Iewes out of Egypt; which are as farre from the case we treate of, as Egypt is from Europe or Chri∣stendome from Iewrye. Therefore I will one∣ly giue notice to the reader how grossely he abuseth certaine authours he cytes, to testifye that by Babylon is meant the Christian Rome. For ther is not one of those authours that affir∣mes that after it was conuerted to the Chri∣stian faith, it was called Babylon, according as the scripture vsually speakes of Babylon either properly or Metaphorically. Neither is ther likewise anie of the same authours which teach, that since the conuersion of that Citye to the faith of Christ, Christians ought to de∣parte from it, as out of a spirituall and idolatrous Babylon, which is that our aduersarie here in∣tendes to proue, or at the least ought to proue, if anie thing he meanes to prooue against the Romanists. And to speake first of the ancient authours here cyted by the kinght, which are Tertulliā, S. Hierome, and S. Augustin, it is directly im∣possible
that they should meane by Babylon, the Roman Church depraued by anie idolatrie of Christian people, for that they were all de∣parted out of the world, before the supposed departure of the Roman Church from the true Religion, is affirmed by our newe sectaries to haue begun, which as they most commonly teach was not before the 600. yeare after the tyme of Christ our Sauiour. Now as for the moderne authours to wit Orosius, Viues, Bellarmin, and Baronius, and Ribera, they are all knowne Romanists yea and some of them cheefe defendours of the Ro∣man Church and faith, and so it is euident by this reason alone that they had not such a thought as to meane by Babylon the Roman Church. Cap. 22. Viues vpon the 18. booke de cuit. Dei, explicates him selfe plainely saying: Pe∣trus Apostolus Roman Babylonem appellat, vt etiam Hyeronymus in vita Marci interpretatur, qui ad Marcellam scribens, non aliam existimat des∣cribi à Ioanne in Apocalypsi Babylonem, quam Vr∣bem Romam. Bellarmin also speakes yet plainer in the verie place cited by S. Humfrey viz. lib. 2. de Rom. Pont. cap. 2. for he saith. Respondeo Babylonem vocari non Romanam Ecclesiam sed Romanā vrbem, qualis erat Ioannis tempore. Oro∣sius I haue not. But let Baronius speake for him selfe and others. Baron. Adam. 45. Nec per somninm quidem quis vnquam inuenit Romanam Ecclesiam esse Ba∣bylonis
nomine nuncupatam, sed ipsā tantummodô ciuitatem; ac id quidem non semper, sed cum impie∣tate referta aduersus ipsam Ecclesiam bellum gere∣ret. Ribera vnderstands by Babylon perse∣cuting Rome, not as it is nowe, I need not cite his wordes in a case so cleare. So that nowe I doe not see why S. Humfrey produced these authors, except it were by corruption of them, to make them precursors of his corrupted way. And hence also the reader may gather how weakely the knight proceeds in this his first section, which is the introduction to the rest, in regarde that by indeuouring to reprooue his aduersarie, he doth vnaduisedly prooue his owne imperfections, and so doubtlesse he had better beene idle thē so ill occupyed. And I ve∣rily persuade my selfe, that if the Archflamen had duely examined the contents of this se∣ction, he doubtlesse would haue marked it with a, non imprimatur. In his second section S. Humfrey pretends to prooue the cause of contention betwixt the Re∣man Church and his owne, originally to haue pro∣ceeded from the Romanists by their owne confes∣sion. Thus much he promiseth in the title, but performeth nothing. For he cytes but three onely authours, that is, Cassander, Camdē, and Cesenas, in fauor of his position, and yet none of them are acknowledged by vs for sounde
Romanists, at the least if we respect their wri∣tings here produced. And of Cassander both the inquisitors in their Index, and Bellarmin in his Controuersies, sufficiently declare the vn∣soundnes of his doctrine and religion. Cam∣den I hope is well knowe. Now for Cesenas notwithstanding S. Humfrey stiles him Gene∣rall of the Franciscans, as indeed once he was though afterwards deposed by his owne order and excommunicated by Pope Iohn the 2 for his pertinacie and malapert manner of de∣fending, that the Fryes of his order could haue no rents or possessions, yet if he writ against the Tyrannie of the Pope, as he is quoted by the kinght, it is most manifest he could not be a perfect Romanist: or at least that worke could not be his, as in truch I am persuaded it was not, but falsely fathered vpon him, through the iniquitie of him who malitiously compo∣sed the mysterie of iniquitie, against the Pope and Roman Church. And hauing now examined the matter I perceiue that which Cesenas writ or Ockam for him was not against the Popes in generall: but he writ onely an epistle or trea∣tise (if anie thing he writ him selfe) against the errors (as he termes them) of Pope Iohn in particular, with whome he was much disgusted by reason of the foresaid busines and excom∣munications. And as for the wordes which S. Humfrey cites touching two Churches, one
good, and an other euill, I fynde none such, nor anie others to that sense in Cesenas. And if euer he vttered anie such wordes, which according to his whole discourse is wholely improbable, yet doubtlesse he could not meane, that the euill Church was the Roman Church intirely and absolutely, in regarde his owne wordes in his foresaide worke doe euidently declare, that he subiected him selfe to the same euen in this same busines, saying in his letters to the Generall Chapter of his Order:  Ad Sanctam Romanam Ecclesiam publicè & solemniter appel∣laui, & me & mihi adhaerentes, & dicta nostra sup∣posui correctioni, & emendationi, & protectioni, & defensioni sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae. Et sum semper protestatus me illam fidem tenere & ser∣uare velle perpetuo, quam tenet & seruat sanctae Romana Ecclesia, quae est omnium Ecclesiaram ma∣ter & magistra. So that this passage is a mani∣fest imposture either of S. Humfrey or Plessis choose them whether, who out of an vnsa∣tiable desire they haue to fynde out some track or step, though neuer so obscure, of their ima∣ginarie Church before the dayes of Luther, care not what they forge or faine. And yet more then this touching the smale authoritie which Cesenas ought to haue, if he had done or spoken anie thing against the Ro∣man Church, if S. Humfrey had looked well aboute him, or had beene carefull to knowe
the truth, he migst easily haue founde him re∣gistred in the expurgatorie Index, euen in the first Classe for a prohibited authour. And so a man may iustely demaunde of our aduersa∣rie with what face then he can affirme his po∣sition to be confessed by the Romanists? Or what truth or sinceritie can anie one imagin to be in him? and what credit can prudently be giuen by the Reader to the rest of the allega∣tions of his whole booke, who deales in this manner euen in the frontispice of his worke. And in truth I wonder that at the least in hu∣mane policie, he was no more circumspect, then to prostitute his reputation so lauishly euen then, when he ought in reason to be most ca∣refull of it. And now this may suffice for the censure of this second section as conteyning nothing in particular wich deserueth rehersall, or which may any wise redound, eyther to the authours credit, or serue for the confirmation of his tenets specified in the former section, the proofe as you see being heere as weake and sillie as the matter calumnious before, and con∣sequently deseruing no milder sentence of condemnation, then the contents of the former section.
THE II. PERIOD. NOw I will passe to a view of the third sectiō of Sir Humfreys booke which is, in effect a continuation of the same matter treated in the two first sections, his chiefe drift being to shew the Pope and Roman Church to be in fault for refusing reformation.  And because he persisteth in the same manner of proofe videlicet, by the confession of the mem∣bers of the Roman Church, I will examine briefly how exactly he prosecuteth the same, and whether he recouereth in this se∣ction the credit which he lost in the for∣mer. He laboureth to shew corruption both of faith and manners in the Church of Rome, and that by confession of Roman Au∣thours; and for the proofe of this confes∣sion he produceth Pope Alexander the fift out of the Councell of Pisa ses. 20. the Councell of Senes, the Councell of Trent in diuerse places. Moulin the 21. chap. of his Eucharist. Agrippa de vanit. Scient. chap. 17. the Bull of Pius the 4. Philippus Mornaeus. Card. Caraph. Consill. de emendanda Ec∣clesia. Paulus Vergerius in opusculis, & de Idolo Lauret. hist. of the Councell of Trent in English.
These are all the writers he alledgeth, which are ten in number. And although he citheth them all as if they were Romanists (for that he rehe∣arseth them all to the same purpose and in one tenour or sequele of words) neuerthelesse it is well knowen that fiue of the ten are so farre from being Romanists, as three of them are professed enemies to the Roman Church, to wit Moulin, Vergerius, and Mornaeus, and the o∣ther two that is Agrippa, and the Tridentine hi∣story in English, are of no authority, nor credit amongst the Romanists, as being either plaine heretikes, or suspected of heresie. And as for the other fiue Catholike testimonies, they con∣taine not one word whereby it may be proued that either the Pope, or the rest, of the Ro∣man Church did refuse to admite of due refor∣mation, as Sir Humfrey affirmeth, but the con∣trary is most manifest out of the Councell of Trent it selfe, euen in the same places which he citeth, where speciall decrees of diuerse parti∣cular abuses to be reformed by the Pastors of the Church are extant. True it is that where abuses are decreede to be reformed, those same abuses are of necessity supposed to be, either in times past, present, or future, and so farre I graunt the testimonies cited by the K. out of the two Councels and other Catholike Au∣thors be of force: but to prooue that those abuses be corruptiōs in faith, or yet in manners,
except we meane of the euill faith and māners brought into the Church by Luther & his fol∣lowers) or that they being truly knowen to be in the Church, yet the Pope will not haue them reformed, this I say is a meere calumnia∣tion diuised by Sir Humfrey in disgrace of the chiefe Pastour of the Roman Church, and can∣not possiblie be deduced out of the foresaid te∣stimonies, but rather the quite contrary is ex∣pressely to be found, and lastely in the decrees of the Tridentine Councell, as we haue alrea∣dy said. Decret. de Refor. That which Sir Humfrey affirmeth in the beginning of his 20. page, is conuinced to be a manifest vntruth, to wit that the day of the Roman reformation is not yet come. And al∣though the Knight out of the aboundance of his wit, is not content onely to saye that the Romanists confesse there are corruptions in their Church onely in manners, but alsoe, that they confesse the same in doctrine: neuerthe∣lesse of the poynt of doctrine he bringeth not any proofe at all, eyther out of Romanists, or any other waye, but insteede of proofes he vt∣tereth diuers vntruths, mingled with some impertinences and equiuocations. Hee telleth his reader in the 20. page that the Councell of Trent, in Paul the thirds time, complained of Indul∣gences, but this is most false, for the Councell doth not in anie sorte complaine of the Indul∣gences them selues, but onely that the Popes
officers in collecting the almes or contribution of the people vppon the graunt and gayning of them, gaue scandall to faithfull Christians, as appeareth by the very same wordes which he himselfe citeth, Vide Con. Trid. sess. 21. cap. 9. among which there is not any one repugnant to the doctrine of In∣dulgences but onely to the abuses of the que∣stours; as also the same wordes cited in Sir Humfreys margent in lattin, do yet more plai∣nely declare, so that this is no lesse then an in∣excusable falsitie vttered by the knight for want of an argument, as it seemes, to prooue corruptions in doctrine in the Roman Church. Another vntruth he hath in the 22. pa. where he saith thus: neither did those men (meaning the Fathers of the Councell of Trent) seeke a reformation in manners onely, but in the doctrine it selfe. Whereas they in that very place by the knight alledged, wish onely that the priuate masse might be restored to the auncient cu∣stome of the communion of the people, toge∣ther with the priest, which as you knowe is no matter of doctrine in cōtrouersie betweene the Romanists and the reformers, but onely of practise, and consequently it proueth not the knights intent in this place, but rather his igno∣rant mistaking of the true state of the question in that pointe of controuersie about priuate masse. Now that which he addeth of the La∣tin seruice in the Roman Church to wit that
the Councell commaunds all Pastours that they at the Masse doe frequently interpret and declare vnto the people the mistery of the Sa∣crament, who doth not see how impertinent it is to the matter of doctrine, and how vnapt a medium it is to proue that the Doctours of the Councell either did seeke reformation in the same, or to shew how neare the same doctours came to the doctrine of the reformed Churches, as he presently addeth, affirming them so to doe, since the Councell proceedeth not there, by way of definition or decree in matter of do∣ctrine, but onely by way of ordinance and cō∣maund as the wordes by him selfe rehearsed doe plainely specifie; & yet not so but that the same Councell, and in the same place doth ei∣ther expressely commaund, or at the least sup∣pose that the Masse ought to be for the most part celebrated in the lattin tongue. Moreouer touching equiuocations, certaine it is that he doth equiuocate in his allegation of Pope Alexander out of the Councell of Pisa, where he saith that the Pope promised solemnely to intend the reformation of the Church, whereas in truth Alexander meaneth not of the faith of the Romā Church, as the knight would haue it, but of the reformation of manners, or of some abuses practized in the Church by parti∣cular persons. Besides this, it is not probable that the Pope would meddle himselfe in mat∣ters
of doctrine in such a Councell as was as∣sembled purposely for the taking away of a schisme. But cōcerning manners I finde that in the laste period of the same Councell of Pisa which Sir Humfrey cites ther is expresse men∣tion both of some reformatiō already made by the Pope & Cardinals, & also of more referred to the next generall Sinod: the words of which determination are these. Item cum Dominus no∣ster Papa cum consilio Concilij intendere reformare Ecclesiam in capite & membris, & iam multa per Dei gratiam sint expedita per ipsum Dominum no∣strum Papam, moreouer in the same Councell of Senes which the knight also here produceth I finde no mention of corruption in faith ex∣cept by faith Sir Humfrey will vnderstand the corrupted faith of the wiclefists, Hussits, or the Grecians, the reformation and reduction of all which both the Pope and Councell indeuored so farre to effect and compasse, as they declared the first two sectaries to be heretikes and that so earnestly as they threatened all those with excommunication who should any way fa∣uore them euen with as much onely as to giue them salte to their pottage, & as for reformatiō of manners there is not a word which proueth that the Pope made anie resistance therein but rather expressely laboured for the same, tho by accident of impediments incident it was a∣ctually hindered at that present. Sacrosancta
Synodus vniuersalem Eccles. representans nuntijs sanctissimi in Christo Patris ac Domini nostri Mar∣tini quinti summi Pontif. specialiter deputatis ip∣sius reformationem intentus, incipiens à fidei fun∣damentō praeter quod nemo potest aliud ponere dam∣nationem haeresum Wiclefistarum & Hussitarum suorumque sequacium &c. In decret. Cōtra Hussi∣tas haereticos. Con. Sen. By which it is manifest how great the impudencie of Sir Hunfrey is in alledging these two Councels to proue want of reformation in the Pope or Roman Church they standing both so plainely for the contrary to his positiō or rather impositiō. He equiuoca∣teth also in that allegation of Card. Schomberg whom he affirmeth to haue opposed the reforma∣tion made in the Councell of Trent. Whereas yet he citeth no wordes of the Card. but onely a bare relation taken out of a certaine history of the acts of the Coūcell published in English touching the foresaid Cardinals oppositiō or ra∣ther proposition onely, in the point of reforma∣tion. Which fact being related onely by an vn∣authēticall history, the allegation can be of no more authority thē is the relatour himselfe who was then a Caluiniā sectary called Suauis who hath writ a very corrupted narration of that which passed in the Coūcell as relating the cō∣tentions or cōtrary opiniōs which the Fathers & Doctours held whiles matters were in debate & vnconcluded, as if they had continued after
the definitions and decrees were made, and so abusing both the Councell & his reader egre∣giously. And yet more then this suppose the relation were most true and authenticall, yet doth it not proue Sir Humfreys intent, videli∣cet that the Pope denieth reformatlon of Cor∣ruptions in faith and manners, for that in the wordes related out of the foresaid history, there is no mention of any corruptions of that nature, but onely of abuses in generall tearmes, which Schomberg was of opinion that it had beene better to let them alone, yet that was onely his particular dictamen and proposition, to which neither the Pope nor the rest of the Councell agreed, but resolued, vpon a course of reformation as the decrees themselues doe testifie: so that this passage of the related historie is impertinentlie alledged by the Knight. Finally S. Humfrey doth equiuocate not onely in that which we haue said, but alsoe in the very substance of this his whole section. For his cheefe or rather whole scope being not onely to proue corruptions in doctrine and manners to be confessed by the Romanists to be in their Church, but also that the Pope re∣fuseth to take them away, he by his allegations of the testimonies of some Romanists proueth in parte that there were corruptions in man∣ners both before and when the Councell of
Trent was assembled, but he quite dissembleth the other parte, to witte, that they were refor∣med allso by the same Councell; and yet not withstanding the very same places which he produceth out of the Romanists doe as plai∣nely auerre the one as the other. And so out of those proceedings of Sir Humfrey and the rest which hath bene said it may plainely appeere that he is so farre from recouery of that honour which he lost in the former sections, that he hath now stained the same not a little more, and so we may conclude this section and in∣clude it in the former censure. THE III. PERIOD. IN the fourth section the knight proceedeth to greater matters, to matters I say of life and death; for he affirmeth that manny learned Romanists conuicted by the euidence of truth either in parte or in whole haue renounced Popery before their death, But let vs see how exactly and sollidly he proceedeth in so weightie a matter. He citeth Medcir.  celeberri∣mus profes∣sor D. Ve∣nerandus Gablerus, tanti comi∣tis exem∣plum secu∣tus redijt ad Catho∣licismum. Adfuerat is Petro Paulo ver∣gerio è cor∣pore mi∣granti apud quem minor quae dam vide∣rat quae illi animum videban∣tur perfre∣gisse vt non modo Ca∣tholicus sed pientis∣simus quo∣que Catho∣licus fieret. Sane aiunt viri graues hunc Apo∣statam Vergerium sub mortem teterrimos exhalasse faetores ac bouis instar horrendos edidisse boatus &c. anno 1567. Surius Com. pag. 733. the Councell of Basill out of Gene∣brard. Aeneas Syluius out of Platina. Harding out of Iewell. The Rhemish testament out of Cau∣sabon. The lord Cooke. B. Gard. out of Iohn Fox. Bellarmins Controuersies. And his last will or te∣stament.
Albertus Pighins. Paulus Vergerius and his brother Baptist. These are all the au∣thours hee citeth in this section. For the proofe of his vast assertion, which authours being but ten in number yet three of them are knowen to be no Romanists except he will haue L. Cooke and the two brother Bishops to be Ro∣manists, which neuerthelesse he confesseth to to haue protested against the Romish doctrine; so that now according to his owne confession the whole number of Roman authours he citeth heere is reduced to seuen, which small number I cānot imagin according to what Arithmetick it can truly be accounted many, especially if we compare them to the infinite number of the Romanists which haue bene & yet are extant in the Christian world constant maintainers of Popery. And this I say euen in case it were true that all those seuen had euer renounced the Romish faith either in part or totally, as the knight affirmeth; which neuerthelesse I will make apparent to be otherwise. And first touching the Councell of Basil, the very same wordes which Sir Humfrey ci∣teth do conuince the same, for saith hee the Councell did allow the cup to the Bohemians vpon this condition: that they should not find fault with the contrary vse, nor seuer themselues from the Catholike Church. Now what is heere to be found in these wordes of the Councell which
is any kinde of renuntiation of the Romish faith? nay what is there which concerneth the Romish faith at all? that which the Councell determineth being but onelie a graunt to one particular nation vpon particular reasons, and that in a point of practice not of doctrine, which also, if our English protestants were as conformable to the Roman Church in all o∣ther points of faith and manners as the Bohe∣mians then were, might perhaps vpon the like iust reasons and vpon the same condition be graunted in the realme of England, and that without any preiudice to either faith or man∣ners. But our English sectaries are so farre from conformitie to the Romanists not onely in diuerse other points but euen in this particu∣lar that they cōtinually exclaime against them both in their bookes and sermons as violatours of Christs institution in that they do not all∣wayes and in euerie countrie communicate the people in both kindes, Con. Basi∣liense initio legiti∣mum po∣stea Con∣ciliabu∣lum Scis∣maticum, & nullius authorita∣tis. Con. lat. sess. 11. ex Bell. non refe∣ro verba. accusing them also that they mangle the Sacrament and vniustlie de∣priue the laytie of one part there of, iudging the same for a laufull cause, at the least in parte, of their separation from the Roman Church, none of which particulars are proued by the testimonie of the Councell of Basil to haue concurred in the case of the Bohemians, but rather the contrarie is most plainelie specified: so that the knight hath laboured in vaine or
rather against himselfe by producing the fore∣said testimonie, of the Councell of Basil in which noe renuntiation of Popery is to be founde nor anie agreement in doctrine or manners with the pretensiue reformed Chur∣ches. From whence it is also consequentlie in∣ferred that to be clearelie false which our ad∣uersarie affirmes in the beginning of this se∣ction, to wit that the reformed Churches haue done nothing in this otherwise then former Coun∣cels had anciently decreed. He citeth in the second place Aeneas Syluius, who was afterwardes Pope Pius the second, as if he had renounced the Romish religion in that he saith, that as marriage vpon weightie rea∣sons was taken from the Priests, so vpon weightie reasons it were wished to be restored. But what is this to the purpose? is a wish of an alteration in one particular point, & that not in faith but manners or rather in practice of the Church a renuntiation of religion either in parte or in whole? or is the prohibition of marriage, or the celibate or single life of priests anie of the twelue articles which the knight is pleased to tearme the new creede of the Roman Church? no suerlie. How then is it a matter of faith, or the renunciation of it the renuntiation of Po∣perie? and not rather a renuntiation onelie of a precept of the Church in case it were truelie renounced by anie Romanist what∣soeuer
he is. Which renuntiation neuerthelesse was neuer made by the authour cited as his wordes rehearsed out of Platina by Sir Hum∣frey himselfe doe make manifest to anie syn∣cere and vnpartiall reader. In which not by way of wish or as giuing his reall assent with the reformers as Sir Humfrey doth corrupted∣ly relate, but onelie by a doutfull deliuerie of his owne priuate dictamen that present tyme occurring vnto him. Sacerdotibus magna ra∣tione sublatas nuptias, maiori restituendas vi∣deri. Plat. in pio 2. And yet more then that after he was Pope and making reflection vpon his former writings published in his greener yeares, to the imitation of S. Augustin and others he framed are tractation of diuers par∣ticulars passages of his owne workes among which this is one, as appeares by the tenor of the same which in his later editions in force of a breefe or Bull is vsually prefixed to his boo∣kes. To omitte that if the foresaid Syluius had bene a renouncer of anie point of Poperie it were too ridiculous to imagin that euer he would haue bene elected Pope, as neuer∣thelesse the knight confesseth him to haue bene afterwardes. And thus the reader may plainelie see that this allegation is of no more force then the former towards the proofe of Sir Humfreys intent.
In the next place is master Harding brought in for a renoncer of Popery. For that as Iewell reporteth, he saith that godly and faithfull peo∣ple haue since the time of the Primitiue Church much complained of Priuate Masse. But suppose it were true, what is this to the purpose of re∣nouncing of Popery? For what zealous and re∣ligious Papist is there in the world who doth not iustly complaine of want of deuotiō in the laity for that they haue not that feruour in fre∣quenting the communion which those of the Primitiue Church had? and if this could be re∣medied what Romanist would not much de∣sire it, yea and by all meanes possible procure it? but is this to condemne as vnlawfull or con∣trary to Christs institution (as you sectaries doe) all Masses as be celebrated without Cō∣municants? no such matter. No more, nay much lesse then if for complaining that Sir Humfrey Linde doth not deale so sincerely in the citations of his aduersaries as becometh the reputatiō of a knight, a man should there∣fore presently be thought to haue quite con∣demned him of dishonest proceeding in that nature euen in the highest degree of false dealing and corruption. Which collection if he please to graunt, I know not who will be so vnciuill as to contradict him. Especiallie con∣sidering that euen in this verie citation he hath corrupted doctour Harding most vnconscio∣nablie
by applying against priuate masse that which he speakes onelie against the negligen∣ce of the laye people for that they so com∣monlie omit to communicate at masse, as if that authour disalowed of the priuate masse it selfe, whose wordes neuerthelesse truelie cited as he hath them in the beginning of the ninth leafe of his answer to Iewels chalēge will cleare the busines and manifestlie discouer where the fault lyeth: that others do commonlie forbeare saith hee, to communicate with the preist it is through their owne faulte and negligence not regarding their owne saluation whereof the godly and care∣full rulers of faithfull people haue since the tyme of the primitiue Church allwayes much complained. And thus you see how nimblie the subtil knight hath abused both that worthy doctour & his owne reader. Wherefore it being by this which we haue said apparent that M. Harding was no condemner of priuate masse as either vnlawfull or against the institution of Christ, it also is thence manifestlie consequent that he was no renouncer of Poperie euen in that par∣ticular point, and so the proofe which the knight would draw from him is of no force, nor auaileable to his cause; nay it is in trueth so disagreeable to the state of the question that it is no small wonder how either mallice or ignorance could so much blinde him as to make vse of it in this matter.
The fourth restimonie is out of the Rhemes Testament the authours of which (as hee affir∣meth out of Causabon) auouch the scriptures to haue bene translated into English by the impor∣tunitie of the heretiks. And he addeth that the Ro∣manists haue of late graunted a dispensation to some men and woemen also to reade scriptures, and this also was done (saith hee) by the importunitie of the heretiks. Moreouer as it were in confirma∣tion of the same, he addeth that most of the Ro∣mish proselites, (as he tearmeth them) did fre∣quent their Church and seruice for the first eleuen yeeres of Queene Elizabeth: neither (saith he) was it forbidden by any lawfull councell. Thus he discourseth touching this point. Heere is much a doe and little to the pur∣pose. And indeede after a greate deale of stu∣die a man shall hardlie collect anie thing out of the whole discourse which may seeme to haue anie shewe of proofe for the knights assertion, videlicet. That many Romanists haue renounced Popery before their death. Yet it seemes to me, his whole drift may be reduced to these two arguments. The first thus: The Romanists haue translated the bible by the importunitie of the reformers, & giue dispensations to some men and woemen to reade it; therefore many Romanists haue renounced Popery. The se∣cond thus: most of the Romanists did frequent the reformed Church and seruice for the first
11. yeeres of Queene Elizabeths reigne, neither was their communication with them prohibi∣ted by anie lawfull Councell, therefore manie Romanists renounced Popery before their death. Loe heere two learned Enthymems: they march like two march hares and runne starke wilde. I wonder what nimble vniuersity man hath taught the knight to choppe Logike so minshingly, or what polipracticall Alchymist hath instructed him in the art of extra∣ction so exactly, that out of the importu∣nity of his reformed consorts, he is able to drawe the translation of the Rhemish Testa∣ment, and that with a dispensation for some men and woemen to reade it. So skilfull he is in extracting oyle out of stones and milke out of mountaines. Neither doth his exquisite knowledge stay heere, but he will needes persuade his reader he can extract also out of the same, that many Romanists haue renounced their Popery by translating the Bible into En∣glish and by giuing a dispensation to reade the same; nay and that which is yet more marue∣lous he seemeth to glory not a little that this hath beene all effected by the importunity of his reformed brothers; as if forsooth, they had exercised an act of some heroycall virtue therein. Whereas in truth, importunity is so farre from desert of commendation as it may
be much more iustly registred in the list of vices then of virtues: and soe we see that in the Scripture it selfe the importunitie of a beggar is branded with the marke of improbity, that which I maruell, the knight being so greate a Biblist as he is, did not reflect vpon it. And ad∣mitte it were true that the Romanists moued by the importunity of the sectaries did tran∣slate the Bible into the vulgar tongue for the laitie to reade, by what rule of Logike I pray you Sir Humfrey doth it follow that many Romanists haue renoūced Popery before their death? proue but this one consequence and I yeeld you the victory. And pray tell me what article of faith is that which teacheth the Ro∣manists to beleeue that the Bible ought not to be read by the laytie in no case, or vpon no reasons neuer so weighty? or if you can finde no such article, as I know you cannot, then confesse you haue lost the victory in the point, confesse you haue proceeded weakely, confesse you haue by your first argument proued nothing: and so I will take that for graun∣ted, and passe to the second, which all∣though it hath some more sense in it then the other, yet it is senselesse enough as shall presently appeare. For that being to proue your antecedent or first proposi∣tion you onelie produce L. Cookes report, that most of the Romish proselytes did fre∣quent
your Church or seruice for the first eleuen yeares of Queene Elizabeth. But you must knowe that this authour is no competent wit∣nesse against the Romanists, he is one of your owne crue, we care not for his reportes, we leaue them to the lawyers: He indeed (as you do now) presumed to write matters of diuinity, but in that he plaied the Sutor vltra crepidam, as you doe, and so laboured onely to make him selfe ridiculous, as you doe. But let vs admit that which he reporteth, to be true, and that fome frequented your Church and seruice in those times (as I my selfe haue heard they did at the least in exteriour shewe, yet priuately at home frequenting Masse also,) doth it thence follow that in their minds they renounced Po∣pery? no such matter. No more then doe di∣uerse of his maiesties subiects, who euen at this day goe to your Churches, whom neuerthe∣lesse you your selues hould for none of yours: but therefore doe commonly terme them Church going Papists. So that according to this and euen ad hominem, that is, vpon your owne Principles, your sequel is to be condemned to be of noe force; or at the most out of that fact of those Romanists which you speake of, it can onely be inferred that they proceeded contrary to the profession of their faith, but not that they renounced the same, which two things if you could haue duely distinguished, I
verily persuade my selfe you would neuer haue discoursed so friuoluslie as you doe in this point. But now I greeue I haue spent so much time in ventilating so largelie such chaffie stuffe. After this wise discourse Sir Humfrey pas∣seth to his owne persuasions, for the proofe of his assertion. I am verily persuaded (saith he) that many at this day in the Church of Rome doe assent to our doctrine that dare not communicate with vs openly in the Church; adding an appeale to their consciences how many of the Roma∣nists haue renounced Popery in those diuerse points in this place. But to this I answer that if Romanists would haue bene persuaded by this wise knights motiues they had lōge ago all re∣nounced Poperie and turned Puritans indeed, but God be praised they neuer were, nor I hope euer will be persuaded by him and his workes, if they haue anie branies in their heads. No suerlie. And if they come but once to examine this his booke and get a view of the discouerie of his deceipts, they will be so farre from being moued either by his reasons or by his authority to relinquish their owne faith, that doubtlesse they will rather be quite out of loue both with him & his religion. And euen in this particular persuasion of his he she∣weth himselfe so ridiculous as no man of iudg∣ment if he marke his proceeding can euer esteeme him as a man worthy either to be
heard or followed. For what man in the world will be moued by him who in steede of proofes bringeth his owne persuasions onely of the te∣stimonie of the conscience of those whom he houlds for aduersaries, and whose consciences if he proceedes consequently, he must either hould for bad, or at the least for vnknowne to himselfe. What is this but absurdum per absur∣dius? and yet he is so confident in this his vaine persuasion that he cometh to specifie diuerse points of Popery which he affirmeth to haue beene renounced by many Romanists, some of which pointes are no Poperie at all, but either his owne lies, or els his ignorant mistake of the true doctrine of Papists in those particulars. For example in his page 32. he demaundeth of vs how many Romanists doe smile at fained miracles, at diuine vertue ascribed to medals, beades, Agnus deis, and the like which saying of his is meerely grounded vpon a false supposi∣tion or rather a slanderous falsitie of his owne coyning, as if it were true that the Romanists in generall did both approue false miracles, and hould diuine vertue to be in medals, beades, and Agnus deis, neither of which is true or was euer defended by any Romanist in the world, it being both true and manifestlie knowen that though all Romanists hould the foresaid things for holie, and do assure themselues that God doth sometimes please to worke strange ef∣fects
by them, yet do not they beleeue that any diuine vertue doth reside in them, no more then they hould to haue resided in the sha∣dowe of S. Peter which neuerthelesse wrought strange and miraculous effects. So that by this discourse Sir Humfrey doth onelie proue his owne ignorance and malice, as also he doth most manifestlie in the next lines, and that more subtillie then before, where he demaun∣deth how many (Romanists) do preferre the law∣fulnesse of Priests mariage before the keeping of a concubine; although saith hee, the contrarie be the common doctrine of the Church of Rome? In which wordes he doth indeauour craftilie to insinuate to his reader that it is a poynt of Poperie, and that the Roman Church doth approoue the keeping of a Concubine by a Priest rather then he should marrye, whereas the Church doth not in anie case allowe eyther of the one or the other; but onelie houldes that, that Priest offendeth God more grieuouslie who marrieth to wit after his preisthood and vowe of cha∣stitie, Saecerdos si fornicetur aut domi concubi∣nam fo∣ueat, tam∣metsi graui sacrilegio sese obstin∣gat: gra∣uiùs tamen peccat si contrahat matrimo∣nium. &c. Costerus. Enchir. cap. 17. de caelib. prop. 9. then he who keepeth a concubine at home, as Costerus though incompletlie cited and vniustlie taxed by the knigth, doth most truelie affirme. And this is a cer∣taine knowen trueth among diuines con∣sequent to the prohibition of Priests mar∣riage which prohibition once supposed he that should marrie should not onelie com∣mitte
a scandalous sinne of the flesh, as that Priest doth who should be a Concubinarie, but also he should in that case comit a Speciall irre∣uerence against the Sacrament of marriage by his sacrilegious frustration of the same which sacrilegious action and violation of his now is of it selfe a more grieuous sinne then is the keepinge of a concubine, as all men, Aug. de bono vide cap. 11. except the reformed brothers, doe easilie apprehend, con∣formable to which S. Aug. saith that mariage after a vowe of continencie is worse then adul∣terie. Planè non dubitaue∣rim dicere lapsus & ruinas à castitate sanctiore quae no∣uetur Deo, adul∣terijs esse peores. ibidem. To omit, that for a Preist to marrie in that manner besides the foresaid crimes it in∣cludes also the scandall of Concubinate it selfe. But now Sir Humfrey for conclusion of his former discourse passeth to the poynt of me∣rits. Lastly (saith hee) how many for feare of vaine glorie and presumption and by reason of the vncer∣tainetie of their owne workes doe relie wholie vpon the merits of Christ Iesus? shewe me that learned man that liueth a professed Papist in the Church of Rome and dyeth not a sounde Protestant in this prime foundation of our faith. Thus the knigth; who as you may easilie perceiue by way of a glorious Epiphonema goeth about to per∣swade his reader that all the learned Roma∣nists before their death renounce that article of the Roman Church which affirmeth that a man iustified by the grace of God can merit the Kingdome of heauen by the good workes
he doth by vertue of the grace of God and me∣rits of Iesus Christ, because forsooth, many for feare of vaine glorie and presumption, and by reason of the vncertainelie of their owne workes at their death doe relie wholie on the merits of their Sauiour; whereas indeede these are two farre different poynts of doctrine, the first, that is, the trueth of mans merit in the sense declared being a matter of faith in the Roman Church; the second which is the confidence in merits, being none; the one being about the substance of merits, the other onelie about the qualitie; the one about the absolute acknowledgment of merits, the other onely about the ouergreate confidence or presumption in them: And so he that renounceth the first, renounceth Poperie indeede, but he that renounceth the second doth not; neither can he be called a Protestant as the knight would haue him to be, for the onelie deniall of confidence in merits, as in it selfe it is most manifest. By all which, because Sir Hūfrey with all his diuinitie had not iudge∣ment to distinguish, he proueth nothing but doth onelie hallucinate betweene trueth and falsehood. Neither doth the example of B. Gardiner which he alledgeth anie whit auaile his cause; for suppose that be true which he af∣firmeth of him, to wit, that in his sicknes he set the merits of Christ in the gap to stand betwixt Gods Iudgment & his owne sinnes, yet cānot he thence
inferre that therefore the Bishop renounced the trueth of the doctrine of merits in generall, nay nor his owne merits in particular, but one∣lie the presumption of them, or the confidence in them by reason of the vncertainetie of them, as I haue alreadie declared. Besides that, this which he is affirmed to say of himselfe being but onelie a relation of Fox, we may iustlie doubt of the trueth of it. For he hath bene long since hunted to his hole by a learned Ca∣tholike and his vnright Reuerence manifestlie conuinced to be a Father of lyes. Wherefore he is of no credit with vs; neither can his testimonie preuaile against vs. We care not for him, his acts and monuments are of no moment among vs, his testimonie is not the cō∣fessiō of a Romanist which is that our aduersary promised in the title of his booke, and we ex∣pect he should performe: and to omit the smale credit which I and all Catholikes giue to the relations of Master Fox, yet I fynde that he who hath dealt so falsely with others, hath now founde one of his owne profession who dealt not verie sincerelie with him in recoun∣ting out of his relation the passage of B. Gardi∣ner at his death, for whereas Sir Humfrey will needs proue by the testimonie of Fox, that this Bishop renounced Poperie at his death in the pointe of merits: yet Fox in his 2622. page onelie saith thus: That according to the reporte of
one whome he will not name (perhaps he could not) when D. Day Bishop of Chichester came to him and began to conforte him (great comfort I warant you) with wordes of Gods promisse and free iustification in the blood of Christ our Sauiour repeating the scriptures to him. Winchester hearing that. What my lord, quoth he, will you open that gap now, then farewell altogether: to mee and such other in my case you may speake it, but if you open this window vnto the people then farewell all. And now according to this speech of B. Gar∣diner let the iudicious reader imagin if he can how Sir Humfrey can possibly gather that he renowced Poprietie and that a wiser man will not rather collect the contrarie: to wit that al∣tho' dayes wordes might be vttered to him & others of learning and vnderstanding without danger of peruersion, but not perhaps to the cō∣mon people who by their ignorance and fray∣letie might easilie misinterpret them (as he did that vttered them) and so easilie receiue harme by them not withstāding that they of themsel∣ues in a founde fense include nothing but truth. The knight also citeth to the same pur∣pose (yet to no purpose) Bellarmine in his sixte booke of Iustif. 7. chap. and his testament or last will. Saying in the first place that it is the safest way to rely wholy on the merits of Christ Iesus. But this according to that which hath bene already said of this matter, is at the
most but onelie a renuntiation of presumption or ouermuch confidence in our owne vncer∣taine merits, as is most apparent out of Bellar∣mines owne doctrine euen in the verie same chapter where the wordes cited by Sir Hum∣frey are found thoug much otherwise then by him they are related as afterwardes I will de∣clare. Now in the second place, the wordes are these. I beseech him (that is God) saith Bel∣lar. that he would admitte me into the companie of his Saints and elect, not as a valluer of merits, but as a giuer of mercie; which wordes, if the knigth had not bene ouermuch distracted, he would easilie haue perceiued that they fauour his in∣tent nothing at all, as not cōteyning any kinde of renuntiation of the due estimation of me∣rits in themselues, but onelie signifie a certaine negatiue renuntiation of confidence in his owne particular deserts at the hands of God, which is both most conformable to the same most learned and virtuous Cardinalls owne doctrine in his booke of Iustification before ci∣ted, and also most pious in it selfe. But it seemes our learned Knigth, was either ignorantlie or malitiouslie deceiued in the true meaning of Bellarmines wordes, imagining verie sillilie, that because the Cardinall at his death prayed God to receiue him into glorie, not as a valuer of merits, he had held God for no valuer of me∣rits at all, whereas God knowes, the pious
Prelate had no such meaning; neither doe his wordes rightlie cōstrued, carrye anie such sense rather doe expresse the contrarie by tearming God a valuer of merits in generall: although on the otherside considering his owne wea∣kenes, Non aesti∣mator me∣riti sed ve∣niae quaesu∣mus Largi∣tor admit∣to. Can. Miss. and the vncertainetie of his owne parti∣cular deseruinges, out of an humble mynde, he feared to put himselfe vpon God as vpon an esteemer of the same (which in case he had had no merits at all might haue failed him) but rather made choyse at the houre of his depar∣ture to cast himselfe vpon the mercie of God which hee assured himselfe could neuer be wanting to those who duelie relie vpon his goodnes and bountie. And put the case a poore distressed creature should begge an almes of Sir Hūfrey intreating him to take pitty on him, not as a learned man but as a liberall knight, could he therefore iustelie say the beggar de∣nied him to be a learned man? no suerlie, and why? marie because the beggar although he knew him well enough to be a learned man, yet he knew also it was not his learning that could releeue his necessity, but his money. Af∣ter this māner it happeneth in the case we treate of: for as such a begger could not trulie be said to haue renounced the knights learning in that case, so neither could Cardinall Bell: be iustlie supposed to renounce God as a valuer of me∣rits in the state he was in by recurring vnto
him onely as to a bestower of mercie. And thus we see that Bell: dyed as greate a Romane Ca∣tholike as he liued, notwithstanding all Sir Humfrey can say against him he can no sooner make Bellarmin a Protestant thē he can make a Protestant of the Canon of the Masse it selfe which hath the verie same wordes which the Card. Piously, vsed at the houre of his death. Next after Bellarmine Sir Humfrey hath pla∣ced Albertus Phigius, who if we will credit him, telleth vs he became a Caluinist euen in this verie poynt by reading of Caluins institutions. Thus he relateth this storie and will haue vs take it on the worde of a knight, but he must pardon vs Romane Catholikes if we refuse to beleeue it vpon the bare relation of an aduersarie, as houl∣ding our selues to haue full as greate authoritie at the least, to denie it as he hath to affirme it. True it is he quoteth a place of the authour in the margin, but citeth not a worde of his in the text, as in the like occasion he vseth to doe, which causeth me to persuade my selfe there is no such matter to be founde, or at least some mistake in Sir Humfrey in the true meaning of his wordes, as he mistooke in Bellarmine. Especiallie considering that Pighius is noto∣riouslie knowen to haue bene a professed ene∣mie both to Luther and Caluin as his workes doe testifie. And that Pighius differeth both from the Lutherans & Caluinists in the maine
paint. Of iustification it is most manifest by his whole discourse, and particularlie in that he absolutelie affirmes in his 53. page of his Controuersie of iustification, that faith alone though it be neuer so perfect is not sufficient to iustification, saying: Sed fidem hanc solam non sufficere nobis &c. in which place although he doth not name or mention Caluin, yet doth he expresselie and professedlie dispute against that doctrine of his and Luther which putteth iu∣stification in faith onelie, so that it hence plai∣nelie appeareth that if Pighius did read Cal∣uins Institutions as Sir Humfrey affirmeth, it was not to follow them but to confute them. He quoteth also Ruardus Tapperus to what purpose I know not except it be to fill his mar∣gent for ostentation, and so I leaue it till he shall further please to declare his meaning, touching that citation which may be he reser∣ueth for a fourth edition: in the interim that Taperus was a professed papist his bookes do witnes. And now hauing made it plainelie ap∣peere that not one of the Romanists which the knight citeth in this section euer renoun∣ced anie point of Poperie before his death, or at the least that no one, nor all the testimonies which he produceth out of Romanists doe proue anie such renunciation, as he auerreth: and also that some of those which he alledgeth for proofe of his assertion, as true Roma∣nists,
were not as much as in externall showe of the Catholike religion long before their death, and some of them in no parte of their whole life as is manifest in Iewell, Fox, and Cooke, and consequentlie could not in reason be produced by him as witnesses in fauour of his cause noe more then Martin Luther or Iohn Cal∣uin, this I say supposed, it onelie now remay∣neth that for the conclusion of this Period we doe not onelie censure the Contents of this se∣ction for vnsounde doctrine, but also the au∣thour of it for an indirect and false dealer in the confirmation of the seame. THE IV. PERIOD. THE fift section of the booke is about the impediments of reformation of such thinges as the knight iudgeth inexcusable in themselues: and for impediments of reforma∣tion, he assigneth wordlie pollicie and profitte, the thinges which he calleth inexcusable are the doctrine of Purgatorie, Indulgences, prayer for the dead, the communion vnder one kinde, worship of pictures, and such other poynts of Catholike doctrine all which hee temerari∣ouslie affirmeth to be inexcusable and that one∣lie by waye of an odious relation of then in particular, but adduceth nothing whereby to proue anie one of them to be such indeede, and
so neither will I proue anie thing against him heere more then that he vttereth diuerse vn∣truthes in this one section. First in that he af∣firmeth the faith of Purgatorie is confirmed by Councells meerelie for the benefit of the Pope and his Clergie, which is nothing els but a manifest calumniation without all apparance of trueth, it being a thing wholie improbable and con∣trarie to common sense, either that so manie learned, graue and pious men as vse to be as∣sembled in Councells should determine anie thing as matter of faith meerelie for anie Tem∣porall respect whatsoeuer: or that the laitie of the Christian world, especiallie Princes, Kinges and Emperours being so much more powerfull as they are knowen to bee, then the Pope and Clergie, should condescend to a matter of such indignitie as the knight would haue it and so much to their cost, if they did not otherwise assure themselues both of the integrity of those who meete in those assemblies, and also of the trueth of the doctrine in it selfe. Besides that the same is manifestlie conuinced of falsitie, for that prayer for the deade, and consequentlie Purgatorie, was knowen in the world before eyther Pope, or Councells were extant as ap∣peareth by the historie of the second booke of the Macchabies the 12. chapter which our ad∣uersaries themselues cannot denie to be a true historie, though they impudentlie denie it to
be Canonicall Scripture against the plaine te∣stimonie of S. Augustine who affirmeth the Church to hould it for such though the Iewes hold the contrarie. Libros Macha∣beorum non Iu∣daei sed Ecclesia pro Ca∣nonicis habet. Aug. l. 18. de Cuit. Dei cap. 39. So that this is but an o∣dious fiction of Sir Humfrey and his compa∣nion sectaries inuented by them in disgrace of the chiefe pastour of the Church and the rest of the Priests without eyther authoritie reason or sence, accusing them as hinderers of refor∣mation who labour most for it, onelie because they refuse to admitte a reformation of their fashioning which indeede is no reformatiō but a deformatiō or defacing of the aunciēt Church & an introductiō of a certaine new fantasticall Church most disfigured and vglie, vniformiter difformiter deformis, voyde of all luster & beauty both internall and externall, nor euer knowne or heard of before the dayes of Luther. His second vntruth it in the end of the 39. page, where he affirmeth, that the Romanists in the psalters leaue out the second cōmaunde∣mēt. This secōd vntruth of the knight inuolueth a double vntruth, the first is in that he saith the Romanists leaue out the foresaid commaū∣dement in their psalters, whereas it is well knowne that in the whole Psalter the second cōmaundemēt is not to be foūd, at the least for∣mally as it is one of the ten. But this vntruth be∣cause I perceiue it proceedes rather of ignorāce thē malice, I am cōtent to pardon. Yet because
when he said the Romanists lefte it out of their psalters, he either meant they lefte it out of the text of Scripture, or that they left it out of their catechismes onely, I āswer that whethersoeuer he meant, he cānot be excused for telling an vn∣truth, first because he falsely supposeth for cer∣taine, that to be the second commaundement which indeede is but an explication of the first, in the opinion both of S. Augustine and either all or almost all other diuines of later yeares. Secondly because those same authours: who hould those same wordes. Thou shalt not make to this selfe any grauen image, to be the second commandemēt, doe not hould that the Images of Christ and his saints, and due honour of thē, are prohibited by that precept among Chri∣stians, but onely a gentilicall or idolatrous vse of pictures or grauen images of false Gods and other such abuses as be repugnant to the due honour of the true and onely God. Lastly it is also false that all Catechismes leaue out that precept, if precept it be, as appeareth by the Catechisme of the Councell of Trent and of Canisius and some others. So that you see now that the knight is euery way conuinced of an vntruth. And although it is true that in diuerse of their Catechismes the Romanists leaue out all the rest of the first commaundement as they lie in the text of the 20. of Exodus excepting those: Thou shall haue no other Gods but me. Yet
they doe not so with any sinister intention, as the reformers vniunstly accuse them to doe, in regard, it is well knowne that those who vse to instruct children in their Catechisme notwith∣standing they vse not to fill childrens heads with such proclamations against grauē Images as the reformers doe, yet they neuer omitte to declare and explicate exactly the whole tenour of the words of the commaundement, inculca∣ting most diligently the true sense of the same and teaching them how farre it is true that images and the worshippe of them in prohibi∣ted by that precept, & the difference betweene the vse of Christian images and those which according to the practice of those times were vnlawfull. But the true reason why Romanists most commonly omitte those wordes: Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauen thing, and the rest, is because Catechismes being onely a short summe of Religion, it is fitting they be most briefe and compendious as being so more easy to learne and more conformable to the ca∣pacity of children, then if they were large and prolixe in wordes, especially considering that that which wanteth in wordes may farre more easily be added by the master by may of cxpli∣cation then many lines can be cōmitted to me∣mory by weake, and vnapt schollers. Neither doe the Romanists make catechismes for Iewes and Gentiles but for Christians and Catholiks
and so it were both superfluous and imperti∣tinent to put in all the wordes of the text or more as the reformers doe, some of which doe belong rather to the law of moyses then to the Ghospell of Iesus Christ, and therefore for the verie same reason the Romanists leaue out of their Catechismes diuerse words of the precept of the Sabaoth, as iudging them vnnecessarie for the instruction of Christian children. As also because according to the doctrine of S. Au∣gustin in his question vpon this commaunde∣ment, those onely words: Vide illum infra in fine op. Thou shalt haue no o∣ther Gods but me: are the whole substance of the first commaundement, and the same in sense with the other which immediatly follow in the text, to wit, thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauen thing, by which grauen thing S. Augu∣stin in the same place vnderstandeth an idol & not any grauen image as the reformers doe cor∣ruptedly vse to translate and commonly put it so in their Catechismes for the false instruction of their children. And hence it plainely appea∣reth that the Romanists leaue not out of any of their bookes of Christian doctrine anie of the ten commandements, but rather that the re∣formed brothers put in one more then either according to Scripture or the doctrine of S. Au∣gustin they ought to doe, as by the true diuision and number of them at the end of this worke shall the be more manifestly declared.
Thirdly it is vntrue which he affirmeth, though by way of insinuatiō onely, that the Romanists doe adore a piece of bread. For it is well knowne they adore not the bread but that which christ, himselfe affirmed to be his body, for which adoration besides the scripture, we say with S. Augustin: nemo illam carnem manducat nisi prius adorauerit. Aug. in ps. 98. and so this, though Sir Humfrey as it seemes was ashamed to vtter it plainely, yet it is no lesse then a plaine leasing. Besides these vntrueths which I haue now re∣hearsed he hath diuerse very idle positions ei∣ther false or friuolous, as for example that the power of binding and loosing depends vpon Purga∣tory, that by defect of the Priests intention the wor∣shipper of the bodie of Christ in the Sacrament may commit flat Idolatry and the like, these because they are left by him vnproued, I will also leaue them vnrefuted till such time as I shall see his proofes produced, and in the meane time I condemne this whole section, as containing matter both idle, false, calumnious, and full of inuectiue bitternesse and puritannicall spleene against the Romanists accusing them that they turne the necks of Scriptures cleane about; & that it is a common practice of their Church of Rome to make greater price of victory then verity, & other such matter as is vnworthy to be published ei∣ther by printe or pen.
THE V. PERIOD. THE knight in his sixt section promiseth to refute that which he tearmeth the Common practice of his aduersaries in their re∣fusall of reformation, because saith he, we can∣not assigne the precise time when errours came in. This I confesse is a matter of importance, and if Sir Humfrey can performe his promise he will in parte recouer the credit which he hath formerly lost; if not, his honour must still lye in the dust. Now to performe his promise he must know that it is not sufficient for him & his partners to assigne the time and persons when and by whom those points of doctrine, which they hould to be erroneously maintai∣ned in the Roman Church, were first broached, but they must also by some meanes or other conuince them to be errours indeede. And as long as Sr Humfrey failes in the demonstratiō of either of these, it is manifest he doth not per∣forme his worde. He saith indeede very confi∣dētly in the beginning of this section, that they (meaning as I suppose himselfe and his compa∣nions in sect) are all eye-witnesses that the er∣rours, of the Romā Church are this daye so no∣torious that a very child may perceaue thē; but what is this to the purpose? this is but a friuolous repetition of their owne bare wordes, this is no
lawfull proofe among aduersaries, this is no de∣monstration, it is not this Romane Catholiks are bound to stand too, this is no reasonable sa∣tisfaction for vs or any other be he neuer so in∣different. We must be conuinced of errours by Scriptures, by consent of auncient Fathers, by plaine definitions of approoued Councels. And till you Sir Humfrey, or some of your consorts make this point cleare, we acknowledge no errours in our Church, and by consequence no necessity of reformation in that nature, as your discourse in this section doth falsely suppose. Moreouer touching the assignation of time & persons, when and by whom the pretended er∣rours of the Roman Church had their begin∣ning, it is apparant the knight is in a great er∣rour, in that he persuadeth himselfe that the Romanists exact of the reformers to assigne the time and persons when and by whom such errours as they attribut to their Church were first broached: For the Romanists do not stand precisely vpon assignation of the very first time and persons, or the very first Authours of those supposed errours, no they put no such rigorous taske vpon the reformers, but onely oblige them to shewe when they were first so noto∣rious and apparent in the world, as both they & their authours were condemned in any authen∣ticall Councell or assembly, and this is that onely which the Catholikes demaund of their
aduersaries, and not that which Sir Humfrey imagineth; and therefore whatsoeuer he pro∣duceth in this section for the confirmation of his intent in that particular, proceedeth vpon false supposition, and consequently proueth nothing but his owne ignorance. That which is a thing not onely proper to Sir Humfrey in diuerse places of his booke, but also so general∣ly incident to the rest of his conreformers as in reading their workes I haue often lamented their case to see them so labour in vaine like hounds spending vpon a false sent. And surely nothing els but the foresaid false supposition was the cause why Sir Humfrey proceeded in this point in so farre a different manner as he doth from the rest of his fellowes. He not ta∣king vpon him as they ordinarily doe (tho' without effect) to assigne the time when those imagined errours first began, and who were the first authours of the same; but as it were suppo∣sing that to be impossible, or els aduerticeing the ill successe which his fellow sectaries haue had in prosectuing their waye, fell vpon a quite contrary course, indeauouring to shewe a di∣stinction and difference betwixt the heresies of the Arians, Pelagians, and Donatists, and the er∣rours which he supposeth to be in the Roman Church: graunting that those heresies being such as did (saith he) indaunger the foundation and openly disturbed the Church, might easely
be discouered, adding that their first authours de facto were obserued and the times knowne & place pointed at. But the chāge of the Roma∣nists doctrine, saith he, was a secret Apostasie scarcely to be knowne or discouered, condem∣ning also that for an impertinent demaunde which the Catholikes vsually require of the reformers, to wit, that they shewe the first time and produce the first authours of the supposed Romish errours; by this shewing himselfe very desirous to rid his handes of so hard a taske as he hath vndertaken, as doth plainely appeare by those examples and similitudes which he v∣seth for that purpose tho' not very well ap∣plied. And now this being the sense of the first parte of this section, let vs briefely examine how soundly he proueth his intent. Matth. 13.24. In the pa∣rable of the sower (saith he) Christ himselfe giues a full answer to those impertinent de∣demaunds, he telleth vs that after the good seede was sowen, the enemy sowed tares when men were a sleepe. Thus he answereth to the impertinent question of the Romaniste as he tearmeth it. But good Sir Humfrey if the que∣stion be impertinent why doe you answer to it? why doe not you rather passe it with silence then spend your breath about it? but it seemes you will needes answer, yea and father your answer vpon our Sauiour as if Christ himselfe had answered in the words cited to the same
question which you say the Romanists de∣maund of you. Fy what application of Scrip∣ture is this! are you a master in Israell and yet ignorant that our Sauiour vsed that Parable to another purpose? did not our Sauiour meane by the enemy, the Deuill, by the tares vices, and by the field the soule of man? is not this a com∣mon exposition of interpreters? or if you will needes haue it vnderstood of errours in do∣ctrine, and of the sower of them in the field of the Church, of which we know there are good store in your congregation, yet can the parable of our Sauiour auayle your purpose nothing at all. For that the question of the parable is generall and so a generall answer was sufficient. But the demaund of the Roman Ca∣tholikes is particular & so in reason it requiers an answer in particular; for example, the que∣stion is if Purgatorie be an errour of the Romā Church, who was the first authour of it? In what age did he liue? if not to communicate in both kindes be an errour of the Romā Church, who was the first authour of it? &c. So that in the question of the Romanists there is no im∣pertinencie in the sense in which they demaūd it, but the knight's answer is both impertinent in it selfe and also falsely fathered vpon our Sauiour. True it is that the Roman Catholiks, as I haue said before, doe not oblige the knight
nor anie of his consorts to answer so metaphisi∣cally to their demaund as he erroneously per∣suadeth himselfe. But they onely vrge the re∣formers to name the authours and time of such supposed errours in a morall manner; that is who they were that haue beene in anie lawfull Councell condemned for either the broachers or publike defēdours of those he calles errours. Which is a demaunde so farre from imperti∣nencie, that there hath neuer beene any noto∣rious errour in the Church of God which hath not beene noted so by the writers of the seue∣rall ages wherein they liued, or at the least, by some others presentlie after their time. And so hence it appeareth manifestlie, that the Roman Catholikes being no wise guiltie of imperti∣nencie in their demaund, yet Sir Humfrey is most impertinent in his answer, and not onelie an impertinent alledger of Scriptures, but also a peruerse detorter of the same, as in∣terpreting them by the direction of his owne priuate spirit, and fathering vpon Christ that which he neuer thought nor intended. And this being the substance of his answer to the Catholikes, which in trueth hath no substance in it: yet he still prosecuteth the same making a greate flourish out of the cir∣cumstances of the same parable adding that the tares were sowen by the enemie when men where a fleepe, and that by consequence they
could not see him and much lesse produce him. I confesse that there both haue bene and be yet in the world who by reason of the exces∣siue moisture of their braiue haue sleeped both verie soundlie and verie long. I know the hi∣storie of the seauen sleepers who slept some hundreths of yeares. But I neuer heard of anie kinde of Congregation of people that all and euerie one of them sleeped about a thousand yeares together and that so profundelie as that not one of them did euer so much as once dreame of the enimie who sowed tares in their field. Is it possible that all the good men of the houses in all that space of tyme and in euerie place should haue bene so drowsie and so ouer∣come with sleepe as none of them could not one tyme or other awake & catch the theefe before the daies of Luther. Surelie there was neuer a Puritane in the world in all that long space of tyme, for if there had bene anie, some of them would infalliblie haue awaked, their hott brauies and fierie spirits would neuer haue suffered them to lie so long in a lethargie, but vp they would haue beene and layd about them most vallantlie with the whole bulke of the Bible, and haue gone to cuffes with Pen∣nance, Purgatorie and prayer to Saints, with pictures, Pope and praier for the dead, with merits, masse, and monasteries, with confession, tradition, and transubstantiation, with Indults,
fasts, and satisfactions. These I say and all other such like tares as the knight esteemes them, had bene by those Zealous Paterfamil∣lians rooted out as soone as euer they peeped out of the earth, if God had not permitted them to take a greate quantitie of Diapodium or pouder dormant by force of which, as I sup∣pose, they were all so lulled a sleepe as not one of them could once awake till the tyme of Do∣ctour Luther, who if he had chaunced to haue taken one onelie dramme of the same receipt, it is more then probable that greate worke of his had laine vndone till this present day, and perhaps for euer. From this parable Sir Hum∣frey passeth to confirme his answer by reasons, saying that the doctrine which they complaine of his a mysterie of iniquitie, and mysteries are secret and worke not openlie and publikly but by degrees, leasurelie, cunninglie and warilie to auoyde discoueries. Thus he, in which wordes you see he cals errours a myste∣rie, but describes them rather like a monster then a mysterie, attributing such subtiltie vnto them as if they had the vse of reason; whereas all errours which are such trulie, are by nature voyd of reason, and so, no mysteries but rather monsters. Hee saith they are secret and worke by decrees: And it is true, errours may be se∣cret for a short tyme, but long they cannot, es∣peciallie such as we heere speake of, that is pu∣bliklie
defended by a whole Church and all or most of them manie ages together. Mentall and priuate errours may be so smothered as not onelie not by degrees, but so as they neuer come to light and knowledge of the world at all, but vocall errours proposed and published to the people cannot possible be long vn∣knowne or vndiscouered. Witnes the errours of Luther and Caluin and of all other condem∣ned heretikes, all which doubtlesse for a tyme they were, meerelie mentall, yet euen before the death of their authours notice was taken of them, & perhaps also they were publikelie condemned. And so we see by this reason Sir Humfrey proueth nothing to this purpose, but tels vs of nothing but meere impossibillities contrarie both to reason and common sense. Neither doth it auaile him for defence of his answer to saye that errours being at first often∣times in one or few persons onelie, they can∣not easilie be espied, for this is not that the Ca∣tholikes vrge him too, we haue tould him al∣readie that wee will not deale so rigorouslie with him, we are content to graunt vnto him that errours onelie so farre published, were not easilie, especiallie by his drowsie conso∣ciates, to be discouered: neuerthelesse we see no reason at all why our supposed errours being so publiquelie taught, penned, and prea∣ched as they were long before either Luther or
Wicklifs tyme should not haue bene knowen for errours if such they were, long before ei∣ther of their daies, This is the point of the question, this is the demaunde the Roman Catholikes vrge, you Reformers are to answer, as longe as you goe about the bush as you doe, and answer not directlie, neither your Euange∣licall parable nor your cockatrice egge, though you write it with a greate letter to make it seeme bigger, will serue your turne, they are but onelie similitudes or examples ill applied, they prooue nothing but onelie serue you for a vaine flourish. Exempla illustrant non probant, especiallie if they be equiuocall as yours be. And as for your distinction of publike heresie and secret Apostacie, it is much more friuolous then all the rest you haue brought for the proofe of your purpose in this section. And although perhaps you shewed no small subtil∣tie in it, as you thought, yet is it in it selfe a most ignorant piece of doctrine, for that not onelie the common and vsuall sense of the worde Apostasie, but the verie etimologie of the same worde, which signifieth a defection or discession, doth demonstrate that the thing sig∣nified by it must be a much more externall and publike action in it selfe then heresie vsed to be, and so that which is ordinarilie and vul∣garilie called Apostasie, must be publike and not secret; and therefore when anie errour
comes to that degree of malice as it may truely be called Apostasie in this sense, it must of ne∣cessitie be knowne, and consequentlie it is such as cannot be kept secret but may be most ea∣silie discerned, yea much more easilie then anie heresie how publike soeuer it bee, as being an aggrauating circunstance of the same. And thus we see that for the knight to yeeld a rea∣son why the errours of the Roman Church could not easilie be discouered, because they were secret Apostasie, is both most absurd in itselfe, and also inuolueth a contradiction in regard it includeth that a thing may be Apo∣stasie that is a thing of it owne selfe publike, and yet remaine so secret that it cannot be dis∣couered. Neither is that which Sir Humfrey farther addeth in the same place lesse absurde to witt that secret Apostasie worketh warelie and closelie in the tyme of Darkenes when the seruants of the husbandman are asleepe, for if all Apostasie as it is commonlie taken, must be publike, as I haue showed, how can it then truelie be said to worke in darkenes or by night? or how can the seede of it be scattered at vnawares to the seruants of the husbandman, certainlie except the seruants be so sluggish that they sleepe both nights and dayes, moneths and yeeres, yea and manie hundreth of yeeres together, naye and all the daies of their life, they cannot but discouer the tares of Apostasie, which is
not euer in seede as the knight falselie suppo∣seth, but is the increase or rather full growth it selfe, or yet rather the ouergrouth of the crop of heresie which is truelie the seede of it. From hence the knight proceedeth to the second parte of his section, in which he endea∣uoureth to shewe vs an vndeniable trueth (as he termeth it) that some opinions were condemned in the Primatiue Church for eroneous and supersti∣tious vhich now are established for articles os faith in the Roman Church. And for this his position he produceth an instance out of S. Augustin lib. de moribus Eccles. Cath. cap. 34. in which place he complaines that in his tyme the ruder sort of people were intangled with superstition euen in the true Church; I my selfe (saith he) know manie that are worshipers of Images and se∣pulchers whom the Church condemneth and seeketh euerie daie by correction to amend them as vngra∣tious children: Thus farre Sir Humfrey out of S. Augustin. To which I answer that this place of S. Augustin hath bene so often obiected by the moderne sectaries that it is worne quite thred bare with handling, and I persuade my selfe that all the Catholike authours that euer writt of controuersies haue sufficientlie ans∣wered it if it came in their way. Neuerthelesse least Sir Humfrey should thinke himselfe ne∣glected by me, Nolite consectari turbas imperito∣rum qui vel in ipsa vera reli∣gione su∣perstitio∣si sunt, vel ita libidi∣nibus de∣diti vt obliti sint quicquid promise∣rint Deo. Aug. supra. I answer first that S. Augustin complaineth in this place of certaine gentilli∣call
errours and abuses in the adoration of ima∣ges and sepulchers then practised in the true Church by some priuate ignorant and vitious persons, who without distinction either of the one or the other did worship the tombes and pictures of all sortes of people. Secondlie I ans∣wer that S. Augustin in the place cited, spea∣keth not of anie generall doctrine taught in his tyme touching the adoration of pictures, but onelie of some superstitious abuses in the pra∣ctise of the same, and so also in this respect the obiection is impertinent. I answer thirdlie that suppose there were some particular persons in the tyme of S. Augustine guiltye either in the manner of their worship of pictures or in their doctrine cōcerning the lawfullnes of the same, doth it thence therefore follow that Catholi∣kes are guiltie also of the same crime? or is it consequent, that that honour which Catholi∣kes graunte to the pictures of Christ and his Saincts, is iust the same with that which Saint Augustine mentioneth? No suerlie. For as there may be abuse committed in the due ho∣nouring of pictures, so there may be also law∣full vse in the due adoreing of them, and so it is cleere that it is no true manner of argument or true consequence to collect so. Those people whom S. Augustin reprehended for a∣doring of pictures in his tyme did worship ima∣ges reprehensiblie: But the Romanists doe also
worship images, therefore the Romanists doe worship images reprehensiblie. This I say were it in anie figure, yet is it a captious forme of argument containing a manifest fallacie or equiuocation in the minor by reason of which the Sylogisme concludeth nothing. Now vpon the foresaid wordes of Saint Augustin, Sir Humfrey addeth a descant of his owne, in which he comits diuerse faults. First in that he saith that although S. Aug. did note some people of his time for superstitious wor∣shippers of images, yet did hee neither name the authours of that errour, nor sheweth the tyme when it began tacitlie, intending hence to infer∣re that neither are the reformers bounde to as∣signe the names of the authours of those er∣rours which they attribute to the Roman Church, nor yet the tyme of their defence of them. But this inference of the knight is no conclusion at all, for that the case of S. Augu∣stines tyme which is the antecedent of the foresaid illation of the knights, is farre different from the case of the reformers as well for that S. Augustine speaketh of an errour which hap∣pened in his owne daies (as Sir Humfrey con∣fesseth) and perhappes by such persons as he could not name without preiudice of their fame, as being such as practised those supersti∣tions so priuatelie that they were not knowen to more, or at the least, not to manie more then
himselfe; after which manner preachers do vse to reprehend vices of persons knowen vnto them, and yet name them not: as also and chie∣felie because S. Augustine was neuer demaun∣ded of them in particular, or anie other waye vrged to declare their names. None of all which circumstances occurre in the case be∣twixt the Reformers and the Romanists, and so out of the wordes of S. Augustine, which be the Antecedent of the knights argument, no true consequence can be deduced against the Romanists. In has au∣tem san∣ct as ac sa∣lubres ob∣seruatio∣nes si qui abusus ir∣repserint, eos pror∣sus aboleri sancta Sy∣nodus cu∣pit ita vt nullae falsi dogmatis imagines & rudibus periculosae errorem praebentes statuantur &c. Con. Trid. sess. 5. init. Another fault sir Humfrey committeth also in that he affirmeth that this corruption which S. Augustin and the Church of his time condemned for superstition was confirmed 400. yeeres after by the second Councell of Nice for Catholike doctrine, and is now decreed by the Councell of Trent for an article of faith. Thus the knight. But this is all false, and grounded onelie vpon an erroneous persuasion of his owne, videlicet, that the worship which those people of which S. Augustin speaketh, gaue to pictures, is the same which the Roman Church practizeth at this daye according to the definition of those two Councells; that which he neither proueth heere, nor can euer proue in anie other place, as being manifest by the doctrine of those same Councells in this point, that they both condemned this super∣stitious practice of those people reprehended
by S. Augustin & the Church of his age, euē as much as he did in those former tymes. And so neither this instance framed by Sir Humfrey out of S. Augustins wordes, nor the whole ar∣gument it selfe concludes any part of his intent in this section: but rather conuinceth by the fact of the same S. Augustin that no errour can possible so secretlie steale into the Church, but it is either presently or within a small tyme espied and noted for such by one authenticall authour or other; which is quite contrary to the position which the knight indeauoureth heere to establish and whoely conformable to the tenet of the Roman Church in this mat∣ter. After this Sir Hum. maketh a large repeti∣tion of diuerse points of doctrine defended by the Church of Rome, as if they were farre dif∣ferent from the intention of those who first taught or ordeined them, but for this his con∣ceipt he bringeth no proofe at all, and so I leaue it as a voluntary tenet founded vpon his owne small authority. True it is he produceth diuerse authours for the confirmation of the same al∣ledging them all for Romanists, and yet some of them are not so esteemed to be, as is manifest in Cassander, and Agrippa, which the Roman Church houlds not for her true children but rather for illegitimate. Be citeth also Ioannes Ferus who altho' he was at the lest once a
Romanist, whatsoeuer he was afterwardes, yet there haue beene noted in his workes diuerse ill sounding propositions, whether it be for that his bookes haue beene corrupted by the secta∣ries of these times as by some editions of his workes may be iustly suspected, or whether it be that the man was something more rash in his assertions then he ought to haue beene. But howsoeuer it falleth out with him in that na∣ture, yet the place cited out of him by Sir Hum∣frey if it be rightly vnderstood, it proueth no more but that by the priuate abuses and super∣stitiōs of some particular men, many things or∣deined by holy men with a good intention, haue receiued some accidentall chaunge. And although Ferus exemplifieth in the feasts of the Church, Ceremonies, images, Masses, mona∣steries, yet certaine it is his meaning was not that all these are either vnlawfull or superstitious, or that they are new articles of faith or not to be vsed in the Church of God, as the knight and his cōpanions would haue thē to be, but onely out of a pious zeale he wished that such abuses might be corrected as he perceiued in his daies to haue crept into the practice and vse of the same; which is a thing so farre from Sir Hum∣freys purpose of prouing an alteration in the Doctrine of auncient tymes, as it is both very conformable to reason, and allso to the decree of reformation made in the Councell of
Trent aboue cited. He citeth allso Marius de schis. & Concil. Et Polidore de inuent. rerum, as speaking of the vncertainty of the entrance into the Church of Priests mariage. But this is nothing to the purpose the knight heere trea∣teth. For how I pray you doth this proue that there are errours of faith in the Romā Church, whereas the restraint of mariage of Priests it selfe, is no article of faith as Sir Humfrey igno∣rantly supposeth, but onely a precept of the Church and a matter of manners; and yet in case it were so in it selfe, neuerthelesse certaine it is that the question or difficultie a∣bout the first begining of the restraint (of such onelie the cited authours speake) is no matter of faith and consequentlie can be no er∣rour euen in Sir Humfreyes owne false suppo∣sition of errours in the Roman Church. To o∣mitte that suppose the first begining of the restrainte of marriage in Priests were truelie an article of faith in the Roman Church, yet this being but one particular instance or example drawne out of two Romanists onelie, it cannot sufficientlie proue that generall position of Sir Humfrey, to witte, that there was a knowne tyme when those tenets (meaning the points of doctrine which the Councell of Trent de∣fined) were not certainelie knowne or gene∣rallie receiued by the Roman Church; since that, according to the rules of Logike no gene∣rall
proposition can be inferred out of a particu∣lar, and that touching the rest of the articles of the Roman doctrine, the reformers are so farre from the assignation of the time of their be∣ginning, that Sir Humfrey him selfe euen in this verie place is forced to hould this precise tyme of the beginning of the same to be vnne∣cessarie to be assigned. And altho' by reason that both those authours are cēsured in the ex∣purgatorie Index, we are not boūde to giue cre∣dit vnto them: yet this I saye that supposing they are both here produced to testifie that the beginning of the and prohibition of Preists mariage can not be assigned, it is rather a great argument that it was appointed by the prima∣tiue Church itselfe then introduced of later yeares. Besides this Sir Humfrey doth falsifie Polydor in the place he citeth, for he doth not affirme that mariage of Preists was not alto∣gether prohibited til the tyme of Gregorie the 7. but that it could not be taken away till that tyme. Alijs snper alijs promulgatis legibus non ante Pontificatum Gregorij 7. coniugium adimi occidentalibus sacerdotibus potuit. Pol. lib. 5. cap. 4. edit. Antuerp. 1554. Cassander altho' Romanists esteeme not of his autho∣ritie either pro or contra, yet here he is cor∣rupted by Sir Humfrey for companie lest he should laff at his followes, where for those wordes non temerè reperies thou shalt not easilie
finde, he translates was not expresselie defined, speaking of the number of the 7. Sacramēts, of which Cassander saith that a man shall not ea∣silie finde anie who haue constituted anie cer∣taine & determinate number of Sacraments be∣fore Peter Lombard. non temerè quenquā reperies ante Petrum Lombardū qui certū aliquem & defini∣tum numerum sacramentoū statuerunt. Cass. p. 951. To the like purpose or rather to no pur∣pose he citeth also Gregory de Valentia say∣ing that it doth not appeere when the communion in one kinde beganne, which saying of Valentia is most true, & his meaning is that the custome of communicating so, is so auncient that it hath no knowne beginning, and consequentlie it hath bene euer in the Church of God since the time of Christ and his Apostles, and by them practized. And therefore Valentia addeth pre∣fentlie after to that purpose, that euer from the beginning of the Church ther hath beene some vse of the Eucharist vnder one kinde, as he hath showed before. Which wordes as ma∣keing plainelie against him he was content to omit. So that this testimonie either proueth nothing to the knights purpose, or els more then he desires, as also want of honest dealing in the citation of it. To omitte that when that manner of communion first began in the Church is no article of the Roman faith. The same authour is also once againe cited by Sir
Humfrey for that in the same place he affir∣meth the foresaid manner of communion not to haue bene generallie receiued but a little before the councell of Constance, which is no more to the purpose then the other allegation or scarse so much. For this and some other testimonies which he citeth page 60. at the most doe but onelie proue that some of the points of do∣ctrine, or rather of practice onelie of the Ro∣man Church, were not declaredlie knowen and definede successiuelie in all differences of times since the establishment of the Gospell; which the Romanists do not denie: though they knowe it is a point impertinent to the matter heere in question, which is not whether the Reformers can showe a time when the tenets (at he termes them) of the Roman Church were not certainelie knowne or generallie re∣ceiued, but also & cheefely whether they were erroneous; and then if such they were, when they were first publikelie knowen and by what authenticall Councell they were con∣demned. Which points because Sir Humfrey hath proued neither of them, neither by the testimonies of the authours he cites nor by any other forceable proofe, he hath failed of his pur∣pose and promise, and no way recouered the reputation in this section which he lost in the former, but rather hath much increased his discredit, and consequentlie the censure falleth
more heauilie vpon him then it hath done be∣fore. To the testimonie of Scotus aboute tran∣sub. I will answer in an other place. THE VI. PERIOD. HEere Sir Hūfrey from a diuine is turned Herold and promiseth the Romanists he will shew them their Pedegree in faith drawne downe from the auncient heretikes, and con∣trarilie the pedegree of his owne faith drawne from Christ and his Apostles. So that heere you see the knight hath vndertaken a large peece of worke, and how he will be able to per∣forme it I know not. It is a double taske and therefore I doubt he will not go through with it without double dealing. And I suspect this the more for that he saith he will proceede or∣dine retro grado, that is as I conceaue, he will imitate the Crabbe in going backward, and therefore I can expect no better of him then a crabbed piece of busines. He saith he will per∣forme his worke by ascending vpward, but in∣deed his proceeding is so preposterous that a man can find neither ascent nor descent it it. For he begins which lattine seruice, as he calleth it and prayer in a straunge tongue, the beginning of which he attributeth to Pope Vitalian about
the yeere 666. And ends with the restraint of mariage of Priests which he affirmed in the 60. page, in his former section not to haue bene altogether established till the time of Gregory the seuenth; and so according to this he doth not ascend but descend, and yet more then this, in the middle of his section he treateth of tran∣substantiation as first decreed in the Councell of La∣teran about foure hundreth yeeres agoe, and thus you see one cannot conceiue that he eyther as∣cendeth or descendeth directlie, but rather that he skippeth vp and downe like a mad man without anie order at all; but now I will cease to seeke order were none is to be sound, and come to the examine of the particular passages of his pedegree. He endeauoureth to proue the Roman faith to descend from auncient heretikes, first because they teach prayer in an vn∣knowne language not to be vnlawfull, (as saith hee) Epiphanius affirmeth of the heretikes Osseni in the first age. But to this I answer that S. Epiphanius is heere abused by the Knight, for he censureth not those people of heresie because they held prayer not to be vnlawfull in an vnknowen language, as Sir Humfrey falselie and ignorantlie affirmeth, but for other errours of theirs which the same Epipha: rela∣tes and confutes in his 19. heresie. Neither doth
he onelie affirme the Osseni to teach there was no need to make prayer in a knowne tongue as Sir Humfrey imposeth vpon him to the end their errour might some to agrree with the do∣ctrine of the Roman Church in this particular, Quibus porro vorbis & inani∣bus voci∣bus postea in ipso libro decipit, cum cum dicit: nemo quae∣rat inter∣pretatio∣nem sed so∣lum in ora∣tione hoc dicati, & hac ipsa ni∣mirum ex Habraica lingua transtulis velut ex parte de∣prehendi∣mus cum nihil sint ea quae imagina∣tur, iubet enim dicere: Abar, Anid, Moib, No∣chile &c. but he further chargeth Elxai the cheefe pro∣phet of that sect that he deceiued men with idle friuolous and strange wordes containing no∣thing of that which he imagined, and com∣maunding his followers to praye in this man∣ner: Abar, Anid, Moib, Nochile &c. adding that they should not seek for anie interpretation of them, which forme of prayer neuerthelesse holie Epi∣phanius doth not so much condemne for the strangenesse of the wordes, as for the obscuritie and deformitie of the sense, as appeareth by his wordes here quoted in Latin. All which is farre different from the doctrine and practice of the Roman Church in this point, which neither in sense nor wordes vseth anie other prayers then such as are conformable to that originall prayer which Christ him selfe appointed his disciples to vse. Neither can Epiphanius with anie showe of probabillitie be thought to haue condemned them for heretikes for that which he knew neither to be contrarie to Gods worde, nor anie definition of the auncient Church, either before or in his time. And as for that which the Reformers commonlie al∣lege
out of the fourth to the Corinthians and first epistle. I say that if the same Epiphanius had vnderstood it as written against such like prayers, infalliblie he would haue alledged the place against those heretikes. But he well knew that the Apostles meaning was not to condemne prayer in what language soeuer it were, but onelie to preferre prophesie before straunge tonges, or at the most to preferre prayer in a knowne tonge onelie as more edi∣ficatiue, not as absolutelie necessarie, and the contrarie to be condemned as vnlawfull or su∣perstitious, as the nouelists will needes haue it. And as for precept of the Church the same Epiphanius in like manner knew there was none extant. True it is, in his time the practise of the Greck Church was to haue their prayer in Greeke and the Latin Church in Latin, but as then neither all those of the Latin Church did vnderstand that kinde of Latin which then was vsed in the Church, so neither all those of the Greeke which was vsed in the publike ser∣uice of the Grecians doe (excepting Schollers) as I haue beene truelie informed, by one of that nation; which practise as you see, is nothing contrary to the practise of the present Roman Church but rather agreable vnto it. In regard that tho' the Latin Masse be not vnderstood of all the heares, yet is Latine euen by the con∣fession of one of the most learned Protestants
of this age. The common language in the world and vnderstood by many. And so this citation is no lesse in effect then a falsification of the foresaid Father; as is likewise another which followeth out of S. Ambrose whom the knight produceth to the same purpose, yet citing his wordes some∣what corruptedly, which he rehearseth in this manner. There were certaine Iewes among the Gre∣cians as namely the Corinthians who did celebrate the diuine seruice and the Sacrament sometimes in the Syriake, and most commonly in the Hebrew ton∣gue which the people vnderstood not. Thus the knight citeth S. Ambrose in his Comentary v∣pon the fourth chapter of the first to the Corin∣thiās: but his wordes which I haue reade, in La∣tin are these. Hi ex Hebraeis erant qui aliquando Syra lingua, plerumque Hebraea in tractatibus aut oblationibus vtebantur ad commendationem, gloria∣bantur enim se dici Hebraeos propter meritum Abra∣hae. Thus S. Ambrose, where as you see that vn∣derstands Latin, there be neither the words di∣uine seruice, nor the word sacrament to be foūde, but in tractatibus & oblationibus, that is as I con∣ceiue in their exhortations and sacrifices. That which as it seemes S. Humfrey did deceitfully translate otherwise then the wordes doe sound and signifie, least it might appeare to his reader that the Iewes conuerted, euen in those primi∣tiue times did celebrate sacrifice as the Roman
Church doth now, and not such a drye Rapsodie as the reformers doe in these our daies. But that which is most remarkable of all, it is manifest out of the same S. Ambrose in the same Co∣ment, that S. Paul did not condemne that pra∣ctise of the Iewes as contrary to the lawe of God, as the sectaries doe, but onely that he sought to bring them from it as a thing lesse pro∣fitable in regard of the Grecians amonge whom they liued, and that in respect of their exhorta∣tions or instructions which the Corinthians could not vnderstand in Hebrew or Syriacke. That which manifestly appeareth in the verie same wordes of S. Ambrose immediatly prece∣dent where speaking of the sense and meaning of the Apostle in the place vpon which he com∣menceth saith onelie: vtilius est paucis verbis in apertione sermonis loqui quod omnes intelligāt quam prolixam orationem habere in obscuro, that is to say: it is more profitable to speake few wordes in plaine speach which all may vnderstand, then to haue a long oration or praier in obscurity. Besides this: those last words: which the common people vnder∣stood not, are none of S. Ambroses, but added by Sir Humfrey and foisted in as if they had beene the reason yeelded by S. Ambrose, why the Iewes did amisse in vsing their seruice in an vn∣knowne language, whereas yet he expressely saith they did it for ostentation and commendation, so that S. Humfrey dealeth heere deceiptfully in
diuers respectes for the aduantage of his false cause. For iustification of the which he vttereth a most impudent vntruth in his owne wordes following: affirming, that Sainct Paule wrote that whole chapter of the fourteenth of the first to the Corinthians expressely against prayer or diuine ser∣uice in an vnknowne tongue, whereas in truth the Apostle expressely and directly laboureth onely to persuade the Corinthians that it is better to prophesie, that is, to interpret Scriptures, then to exercise donum linguarum, the done or guift of tongues. And altho' the Apostle in one place makes mention of prayer or praysing of God in generall saying, si benedixeris lingua &c. yet he neither maketh expresse mention of publike seruice in a knowne language, nor giueth anie precept about it, but onely preferreth that praier which he who prayeth vnderstandeth before that which he vnderstandeth not; and that not absolutelie, but onelie with relation to that time; leauing it for future times to the discretion of the Church to be determined according to the condition & nature of the persons that liue in it, and other circumstances. Alwaies suppo∣sing that although, caeteris paribus, some one thing be better then another euen ex natura rei, yet by some notable change of the time, place, or persons, that same thing which once was more profitable, may afterwardes become lesse profitable, yea and sometimes quite vnprofita∣ble,
or at the least of very small estimation, and importance. And yet for all this our Puritanicall crue runne so a madding with their Bible craste, that they will needes haue a precept where none is, rather then want their wils, especially if it be to Crosse the Papists. That which cānot appeare more plainely then in the matter of which we now treate, where the knight for the conclusion of his discourse citeth Sainct Paul his wordes in forme of a precept, as if he had said pray with the spirit, praye with the vnder∣standing also, whereas the Apostles wordes are onely these, orabo spiritu, orabo & mente, that is I will pray with my spirit, I will pray with my vnder∣standing, in which forme of speach you see there is no forme of precept or commaund at all, ex∣cept one will corrupt the text as he hath done. The knight also cites one Wolfius as affirming that Pope Vitalian first introduced Latin seruice & praier in an vnknowne tonge. But he might haue saued the labor of citing that authour whom he knowes we doe not admit as a com∣petent witnesse in regarde we finde him to be a wolfe indeed that is an enemie to our religiō, and for such he is noted in the Index Epurga∣torie. How be it we doe not denie but that Vi∣talian for the conseruation of vniformity in the publike seruice of the Church might make a generall ordinance in that particular and extend the practise of some particular and most aun∣cient Churches of the West in which Latin ser∣uice
was euer vsed, to all the rest of the Occi∣dentall Churches. Neuerthelesse we denie that by this action he either did contrarie to Gods lawe or renewe the heresie of the Osseni which I haue shewed all readie out of S. Epiphanius to haue beene of a farre different nature notwith∣standing out aduersarie doth indeuoure falselie to persuade the same to his simple reader nei∣ther was this as the knight vntruelie affirmes to introduce seruice in a strange language, but rather in the most knowne in the world & that in which most nations agree: and so this may serue to demonstrate that the Romanists deriue not this parte of their Pedagane frō auncient heretikes (as our aduersarie doth calumniate) but frō the practise of the most aūcient Church at the least in the west partes of the world to wit the Apostolicall Church. And heare we see also that Sir Humfrey in steede of deriuing the Pedegree of the Roman faith from Iewes and heretikes he deriues his owne from the Father of lyes that is from the abuse of both scriptures and auncient Fathers of the Catholike Church. In the next braunch of the Pedegree he pla∣placeth transsubstantiation, going about to proue that it was the doctrine or at least the pra∣ctise of certaine heretikes named Helcesaitae, who faigned a two fould Christ as (saith Sir Humfrey) the Masse Preists doe, who admit one bodie with all his dimentions and proper∣ties
in heauen, and other in the Sacrament which hath noe properties of a true bodie. Thus Sir Humfrey talkes most absurdely, ignorantly and falsely. Ignorantly for that according to this discourse he houldes the want of locall dimen∣sions or properties of a bodie sufficient to cause an absolute, indiuiduall, & sustantiall diuersitie in it, and to distinguish it really from it selfe and so to make it an other distinct bodie which is so voyde of reason that if he had not bene grossely ignorant in Philosophie haue he would neuer vttered such doctrine vnworthie of other con∣futation them a schoole stampe or hisse. He speake also falsely first in that he either affirmes or supposes Preists to admit that Christs bodie in the Sacrament is without anie properties of a true bodie. For they all contrarily teach and be∣leeue that as Christs bodie in the Sacrament is the same which is in heauen, so hath it all the same properties excepting locall extension. Se∣condly he speakes falselie in that he Fathereth that on Preists which none of them either thought or tought, and so makes them guiltie if the Helcesaits heresie onelie for that which he hath forged in his owne phantasticall braine. Also abusing the authority of learned Theodo∣ret in misaplying his words in which he vtters not anie iot or title by which it can be gathered that these heretikes meant of Christ in the Sa∣crament when they faigned a double Christ;
but of two visible Christs, the one aboue I knowe not where, and the other belowe in the world or I knowne not where els: adding that the supernall Christ did in former times liue in manie, but at being descended from aboue. And more, they sayde, he passed into other bodies, & other such like fabulous stuffe they haue of Christ which neuer enterd into the cogitations of any people of learning and iudgement; and therefore it is as great dotage in Sir Humfrey to impose this vpon Catholike Roman Preists as it was in the authour to inuentit, as will yet more plainely appeare by the formall words of Theodoret which here I put in the margin.Christum autem non vnū dicunt (Helcesai∣tae) sed hūc quidem infernè, il∣lum verò supernè, & eum olim in multis habitasse, postremò autem des∣cēdisse. Ie∣sum autē aliquando ex Deo esse dixit (Elxai) ali∣quādo vo∣cat spiritū. quando{que} autem Vir∣ginem ma∣trem ha∣buisse, in alijs autem scriptis ne hoc quidē; Rursus au∣tem eum etiam di∣cit transire in alia cor∣pora & in vnoquo{que} tempore diuerse o∣stendi. Theodor. heret. fab. to. 2. lib. 2. pag. 380. And the like absurditie Sir Humfrey com∣mits in that which immediatly followees, attri∣buting the doctrine of transsubstantiation to one Marke, an heretike, because forsooth he by some kinde of inchaunting inuocation ouer the Sacramentall cuppe caused the wine to appeare like bloud, which sacrilegious example and pra∣ctise of Marcus what force it can haue to proue the Romanists to be of that fellowes Pedegree let any indifferent man be iudge. And moreouer to take away all doubt and assure himselfe the more, let the reader but consider what S. Ire∣naeus in the same place cited by Sir Humfrey videlicet. libr. 1. cap. 9. saith of that Marcus, I doubt not but he will, see most clearely how e∣gregiously our aduersarie abuseth the Roma∣nists
in this matter. Marcus (saith S. Irenaeus) pro calice vino mixto fingens se gratias agere, & in multum extendens sermonem inuocationis, purpu∣reum & rubicundum apparere facit vt putetur ea gratia ab ijs qui sunt super omnia, suum sanguinem stillare per inuocationem eius, & valde concupiscere presentes ex illo gustare poculo vt in illos stillet quae per magum hunc vocatur gratia. By which words let the reader if he vnder∣stand Latin iudge how voyde of grace is he who so shamelesselie applies this to the Conse∣cration of the Eucharist by Preists of the Ro∣man Church. And yet the preposterous knight not being content to haue spoken so irreasonably, yet fur∣ther addes that the authours of transsubstantia∣tion were those disciples that beleaued the the grosse & carnall eating of Christs Flesh. From whence he would deduce that the Ro∣manists descend from the Iudaicall Capharnaits in this point. But this is a most grosse and ridiculous con∣ceipt of him to imagin that they can be succes∣sours to such as refused expressely and absolu∣tely to beleeue that same which they hould for a matter of faith tho' not in the same grosse manner which those incredulous disciples of Christ did apprehend, and as you also not like reformers but deformers out of the madnesse of your noddles grossely conceiue them to doe:
but in a much more spirituall manner, and yet, truely, really and substantially, and not onely in spirit as your priuate spirits would haue it. Which, if it were so onely, it were not the true Sacrament, which necessarily requires to con∣taine really and not by faith onely that which it represēts: but it were onely a meere shadowe or figure of a Sacrament as the sacrifice of Mel∣chisedech, the manna and bread of Proposition were signes and figures of the Sacrament of the holie Eucharist as not containing but onely re∣presenting the body and blōde there contained. And supposing that Sir Humfrey himselfe absolutely denies the reall presence of Christs body and bloud in the Sacrament, and suppo∣sing also that as S. Iohn doth testifie the Ca∣pharnaits did also refuse to beleeue the same, this fable of Sir Humfrey, mutat o nomine, may much more aptely and truely be verified of him and his companions (I will not say then of the Romanists) but euen then of the Capharnaits themselues; in regarde the Capharnaites, as farre as can be gathered by the text of the sixt of S. Iohn, did according to the interpretation of S. Augustin but onely make question of the reall presēce, or possibility of Christs giuing his bodie to be eatē not otherwise thē in that grosse manner which they then conceiued in their mindes, whereas yet the knight and the rest of his congregation directly & absolutely affirme
that Christs body and blood are as farre from being really contained in the Sacrament as heuen is from the altar or Communion table. And thus it appeares that by indeauouring to make vs Capharnaites, Sir Humfrey showes greater grossenesse of cōceipte them the grosse Capharnaites did by denying the reall presence vpon the same or like carnall imagination for for which he and his mates renounce it. From this Sir Humfrey passes to another parte of his Pedegree wher he putteth in the Popes supremacie as if it were deriued funda∣mentally from the Gentils, and to this purpose he applies the wordes of our Sauiour Lucae. 22.25. so ridiculously that it makes me thinke he is will read in the booke of Quodlibets or quae∣ris, he makes vse of Scripture so ingeniously. The wordes of our Sauiour are these. The King of the Gentils exercise Lordship ouer them, and they that exercise authority vpon them are called benefactours. Out of which place Sir Humfrey will needes inferre and prooue that the Gentiles haue giuen the Pope his suprema∣cie and consequently that they are the benefa∣ctours and founders of the Roman faith in that particular. Which passage of the Scripture how falsely and impertinently it is applied and how contrary to the true sense those words of our Sauiour are vsed and abused by the knight, I will not spend time in examination of it, but
leaue to the iudicious reader to censure of it as he pleaseth: onely I cannot omitte to take no∣tice how he concludeth this his idle discourse with another place of Scripture, out of the 20. of S. Math. where our Sauiour saith to his dis∣ciples, whosoeuer will be greate amonght you, let him be your minister, & whosoeuer will be chiefe among you, let him be your seruant: by which words it is most apparēt & agreed vpon by all interpreters, except the nouellists, that our Sauiour intended nothing els but to giue his disciples a lession of humility, not so that they ought not in any case to haue superiority and dominion in that nature one ouer an other, which were to destroy the Hierarchy & gouern∣ment of the Church which he himselfe or∣dained, but that those who were to haue it should not abuse it by dominiering tirānically ouer their subiects or subordinates. And yet Sir Hūfrey I know not by what rule of Alchi∣mie, will needs extract out of this place that his and his fellowes doctrine touching the supre∣macy is receaued from Christ himselfe. But in trueth with all my Logike I cannot vnderstand how he inferreth any thing hence for his pur∣pose except he will deduce ex quolibet quodlibet, and make a nose of way of the holy Scripture as indeed he doth very frequently, framing such a sense to the wordes as maketh for his po∣sition, and thence deduceing arguments for
proofe of the same. And if one were disposed to make vse of Scripture in that māner, he might-aswell inferre out of this place a kinde of supre∣macie for the ministrie, especially if we write the word minister with a greate M. as Sir Hū∣frey doth. And indeede I must confesse that your ministers are greate among you in diuerse respects. For some of thē haue greate Bishop∣rikes, others greate benefices, and allmost all greare wiues and greate store of children. And if the King would be pleased to suffer them, thē why might they not come to obtaine the supre∣macie euery one is his turne by succession, & in that case they might doubtlesse make farre better vse of the cited places of Scripture in fa∣uour of themselues then they doe in applying them against the Romanists. And according to his false dealing in applying the Scripture, so doth he falsely affirme that the Popes supre∣macy was first graunted by Phocas falsely ap∣plying the testimony of Vrspergensis to that same fol. 149. for Valentinian the Emperour who liued aboue 100. yeares before Phocas in his epist. to Theodosius which is extant in the preambles of the Councell of Calced. sayth of the Bishop of Rome, to whō all antiquity gaue the principalitie of preisthood aboue all &c. And as for Vispergensis altho' the authoritie of his booke may iustely be suspected as hauing ben published by the reformers or rather deformers
of Basill, yet doth he not say as Sir Humfrey affirmes that Phocas first granted the suprema∣cie to the Bishop of Constantinople, but rather the quite contrarie, for thus he sayth. Post Gre∣grorium Bonifacius sedit cuius rogatu Phocas con∣stituit sedem Romanae & Apostolicae Ecclesiae caput esse omnium Ecclesiarum, cum antea Constantino∣politana Ecclesia se scribebat primam omnium. After Gregorie (saith Vrspergensis) Bonifacius did sit at vhose request Phocas constituted the seat of the Roman and Apostolicall Church head of all Churches: for before the Church of Constantinople writ her selfe first of all Churches. So that as the reader may plainely knowe, Sir H. hath falsified Vrspergensis relating that to be said by him of the Church of Constantinople which he directly speakes of the Church of Rome: which neuerthelesse is so little to his purpose that howsoeuer he takes it, being not a gift of the Emperour (as not being in his power since that nemo dat quod non habet) but onely a decla∣ratiue constitution, I cannot conceiue why our aduersarie should haue corrupted this authour except it were to exercise his hād. Especially sup∣posing it is a thing vnpossible to apprehēd how either Phocas or anie other mā or Angell could giue the Pope of Rome his supremacie (which is that in this passage he intendeth to proue) by cōferring the same (according to our aduer∣saries relation) vpon the Bishop of Cōstantino∣ple.
And so I leaue this for one of S. Hūfreyes vnintelligible mysteries of his reformed faith. For worship of Images S. Hūfrey deduceth the Pedegree of the Romanists frō the Basilidians and Carpocrationes. But his deduction is false & for it he falsely citeth S. Ireneus, who saith in∣deede those fellowes were heretikes for wors∣hipping of images but in another kinde farre differēt from the honour which the Romanists vse towards pictures. Vtuntur autē ima∣ginibus & incanta∣rionibus, & reliqua vniuersa pererga. Irenaeus. l. 1. cap. 23. And he expressely condē∣neth Carpocrates as plainely appeareth by his wordes, Imagines depictas quasdam de reliqua materia habent fa∣bricaas dicentes formam Christi fa∣ctam à Pi∣lato illo in tēporequo fuit Iesus cum ho∣minibus & has coro∣nant & po∣nunt eas cum ima∣ginibus mūdi Phi∣losophorū videlicet cum ima∣gine Py∣thagorae & Platonis & Aristo∣telis & re∣liquem, & reliquorū obserua∣tionem circa eas similiter vt gentes faciunt. Iren. eod. l. cap. 24. because he put the Image of Christ among the images of gentilicall Philosophers, and because also he put a croune vpon it, and worshipped it in an Ethnicall manner, and not according to the custome of Christians, but as S. Epihanius heres. 27. explicateth, those heretikes, Gentilium ministeria perficiebant, they sacrified vnto all those images to wit of Pitha∣goras & Aristotle together with Christs image after the manner of the Gentiles: and so this parte of the Pedegree containes an errour in in heraldry, and proueth no true descent. In the next passage which is aboute the Com∣muniō in both kinds Pope Leo tells vs, saith the Knight, that the Manicheis a sorte of heretikes in his time vsed the Sacrament in one kinde vi∣delicet in bread onely. Cum ad tegendam infidelita∣tem suam (Videlicet Manichei) nostris au∣deāt inesse mysterijs ita in Sa∣cramento∣rum com∣munione se tempe∣rant vt tu∣tius lateāt, Ore indi∣gno Chri∣sti corpus accipiunt sanguinem autem re∣demptio∣nis nostrae omnino haurire declinant. Leo ser. 4. in quad. It is true S. Leo saith so, but he doth not condemne them for heretikes for that reason, but be cause they abstained frō
wine as from an vncleane creature, and because they did not beleeue that Christ had bloud in in his body, and so that which Pope Leo did when he gaue commaunde that those should be diligētly obserued who vsually receiued but in one kind, was done purposely for discouerie of the Manicheis who crastily to conceile their heresie touching the truth of Christ humanity communicated with the Catholikes dis∣semblingly: the Custome of that time being to communicate sometimes in one kinde and in both, as now the Grecians practise, and therefore that holy Pope did discretely com∣maunde those should be diligently obserued who in all occasions did vse to receiue vnder the forme of bread onely, houlding that for an euidēt argumēt of their aborring of the bloud of Christ. By which it is euident that euen that same time the communiō was lawfully vsed by some in one kinde otherwise S. Leo needed not to haue vsed any great diligence for the di∣couerie of the Manicheis in regard that if all generally had bene obledged to cōmunicate in both, the Manicheis who frequented the Com∣munion would haue beene discouered at the first by their abstaining from the chalice. And in like manner the knight abuseth Bell: tou∣touching a proofe of his taken from the exam∣ple of the Nazarites as if he had deriued wholy or chiefly the communion of one species or
kinde from the practise of their communion, whereas he doth not so, but hauing by other arguments of Scriptures, Fathers, Councells and reasons sufficiētly established the doctrine of the Church in that particular; he bringeth that of the Nazarites onely as a confirmation of the same. Lastlie the knight concludeth this point with those wordes of S. Luke, drinke you all of this, whereby he would proue that the com∣munion in both kindes came from Christ, and so it did indeede, but not by precept giuen to all in generall, but onelie to those then present and to those whome they represented as to be their successours that is the Apostles, and all Priests after them but not to anie Puritan or Puritannicall minister as not hauing from them anie true succession. After these passages Sir Humfrey proceeds to inuocation of Saints and Aungels, the founders of which he affir∣meth to haue bene the heretikes called Ange∣lici, and for this citeth Saint Augustine ad quod vult Deum. But this is idle for the Angelicalls were heretikes not for the inuocation of An∣gells, but either for that they held them to haue bene creatours of the world, or in regard they vsed to boast of their owne Angelicall manner of life, or because as Saint Augustin testifieth they were so addicted to adore Angels, Erant in Angelo∣rum cul∣tum in∣clinati quos Epi∣phanius iam om∣nino defe∣cisse testa∣tur. Aug. haeres. 29. that they did vse to worship them with latria or diuine
honour, all which kinde of adoration the Ro∣manists with the same Saint Augustin giue to one onelie God. And so the knight doth per∣uert the trueth and abuseth S. Augustine who in his 61. q. vpon the Genes. explicating that passage of Apocalips 19. in which the Angell pro∣hibited S. Iohn to adore him saith: neither let it moue the that in a certaine place of scripture the Angell doth prohibite a man to adore him and doth admonish him that he rather adore God: for the Angell did so appeere that he might haue adored him for God, and therefore saith S. Aug. the adorer was ro be corrected by which it is manifest that when S. Augustin tea∣cheth that the Angelici were heretikes because they were inclined to adore Angels, he meanes because they adored them with diuine honour and not because they gaue that due inferiour worship vnto them which the Romanists vse. For workes of merit and supererogation hee produceth for authours the heretikes named Cathari and Puritans, but the heresies of these sectaries were farre different from the doctrine of the Romanists touching these two points. Nay they were neuer defenders of either merit or workes of supereroga∣tion that euer I read, but that for which they were condemned by the Catholike Church was chiefelie for their defence of the errours of Nouatus and particularelie for denying remis∣sion
of sinnes and the authoririe of the keyes in the Church, and for that they affirmed their owne pretended puritie to be aboue the do∣ctrine of the Apostles as not conteyned in it but farre exceeding it, and therefore they were called Cathari that is pure ones. Cathari qui se∣ipsos isto nomine propter munditiam superbissime atque odiosissime nominant: Secundas nuptias non admittunt, paenitentiam denegant▪ Nouatū sectan∣tes haereticum, vnde etiam nouatiani appellantur. S. Aug. haeres. 38. And S. Isidor in the verie place cited by Sir Humfrey saith of them. That they named them selfes Cathari for their puri∣tie for glorying saith hee in their merits they denie pennance &c. And so it appeares by this that the knight belyes Saint Isidor in two respects. Because he quotes him lib. 8. cap. de Haeres. Christian: as if he did testifie that these here∣tikes were the first authours of doctrine of me∣rit, and workes of supererogation. Whereas S. Isidor hath neither the one nor the other. Nor yet makes anie mention in that place of workes of superogation. And so according to this lette our Puritans of England, and Sir Humfrey him selfe as none of the least of them, examen their consciences well, and doubtles they will finde themselues to haue farre more affinitie with the foresaid fellowes then the Romanists, who both gra∣nt remission of sinnes by vertue of the Eccle∣siasticall
keyes and allso denie and renounce all such puritie of Spirit as the Puritans pre∣tended. He addeth for conclusion the worship of the blessed Virgin Marie to haue bene the he∣resie of the Collyridians, Quaedam mulieres currum quendam siue sellam quadra∣tam or∣nantes expanso super ip∣sum linteo in die qua∣dam illu∣stri anni per ali∣quot dies panem ponunt & offerunt Mariae. Epipha: impres. Basilicae Iano Corn. in∣terp. om∣nes autem panem partici∣pant in ¦tum enim hoc m¦lier opi∣nio est. ibidem. Conti∣nentiam praedicat nuptias autem scortatio∣nem putat asserens nihil dif∣ferre ma∣trimo∣nium a scortatio∣ne sed idem esse. Epipha. ibid. nec recipiunt in suorum numerum coniugio vtentem. Aug. haer. 25. and restraint of the mariage of Priests he attributeth to the Tatians and Manicheis, and for proofe of this he citeth Epiphanius heresie 79. and 46. But he abuseth this authour in both those places. And first touching the Collyridians both the same Epi∣phanius and others doe expresselie teach that they worshipped our blessed Ladie idolatrously by attributing diuinity & sacrificying vnto her, or her image a cake of bread or tart as the verie worde it selfe in greeke doth signifie; and so this superstitious heresie can be no part of the Popish pedegree. Moreouer Sir Humfrey doth falselie affirme that Epiphanius calles thes women Idolaters, for he doth not in anie place giue them that generall name, altho' they iu∣stelie deserued it, but he calles them simulachri∣ficae that is sacrifiers to images, which is an he∣resie as much repugnant to the Roman Catho∣likes doctrine as it is to Protestancie: which worde alone is sufficient to cleare the Roma∣nists from the heresie of those profane people: but this, as it seemes, the craftie Cauallier dis∣sembled for the aduantage of his false accusa∣tion. Secondlie concerning the heresie of the
Tatians it is certaine out of that Epiphanius, Ireneus, and others that they reiected Matri∣monie absolutelie and compared it to fornica∣tion which as the world knowes the Roman Church doth not, but onelie for the greater decencie and reuerence to the seruice of God, prohibits it in those onelie who dedicate themselues to the same by receauing holie or∣ders and priesthood. And thus you see Sir Humfrey insteede of deducing the succession of the Romanists from auncient heresies, he makes but a Pedegree of his owne lyes. And the like I say of the Manicheans whome the knight falselie, and iniuriouslie affirmes to haue beene our predecessours in that they pro∣hibited mariage in Preists quoting in the margent S. Epiphanius heresie 46. whome neuerthelesse I haue diligentlie read but can∣not finde it. Yet I finde in Saint Augustin who both followed S. Epiphanius much in his des∣criptions of heresies, and also was better ac∣quainted then anie writer of his tyme with the errours of the Maniches, that they did not one∣lie prohibit matrimonie in Preists, but that they absolutelie detested the same, for so he saith of those sectaries. Verum si ad virginitatem sic ad∣hortamini quemodum hortatur Apostolica doctri∣na: lib. 3. con∣tra faust. Manich. cap. 6. qui dat nuptum bene facit, & qui non dat nuptum melius facit vt bonum esse nuptias dicere∣tis, sed meliorem virginitatem sicut facit Ecclesia
quae vere Ecclesia Christi est, non vos spiritus san∣ctus ita praenuntiaret dicens prohibentes nubere. Ille enim prohibet qui hoc malum tsse dicit, non qui huic bono aliud melius anteponit. Denique eum vos precipue concubitum detestamini qui solus ho∣nestus & coniugalis est, & quem matrimoniales quoque tabulae praese gerunt liberorum procreando∣rum causa, vnde vere non tam concumbere quam nubere prohibetis. And presentlie after. Nec ideo vos dicatis non prohibere qui multos vestros audi∣tores obedire nolentes in hoc, vel non volentes, sal∣ua amicitia toleratis, illud enim habetis in doctrina vestri erroris, hoc in necessitate societatis. Thus plainelie S. Augustin whose wordes to make them also plaine to those who vnderstand not Latin I will put them in English. But if (saith he) you so exhorte to virginitie as the Apostolicall doctrine dōth exhorte: he who giueth in mariage doth well, he who doth not giue in mariage doth better so that you should say that mariage is good, but virginitie better, as that Church doth which is truelie the Church of Crist, the holie spirit would not thus prenuntiate you saying: prohibiting to marie, for he doth prohibit who saith this is euill, not he who doth preferre before this good thing an other thing better then it. Finallie you doe cheeflie deteste that carnall coniunction which onelie is honest and matrimoniall, and which the matrimo∣niall writings also declare to be for procreation of children, whence it is that you doe not so much pro∣hibit
carnall copulation as you prohibit mariage. And presentlie after the same S. Augustin ad∣deth. Neither therefore can you say that you doe not prohibit to marie. Because manie of your audi∣tours being not willing or refusing to obey in this, you tolerate them for frendship sake, for you haue that in your doctrine of your errour, this in necessi∣tie of societie. By which wordes of this most famous doctour we may plainelie gather that suppose S. Epiphanius had those wordes: in sa∣cerdotibus: yet he did not meane of Preists one∣lie when he spoake of the Manichean heresie, but of a direct and absolute prohibition of ma∣riage as vnlawfull and detestable in all sortes of persons: and consequentlie this passage of Sir Humfrey drawne out of the wordes of S. Epi∣phanius containeth no kinde of disproofe of Roman Catholike doctrine in this particular, but a faule imposture of his owne, if he can not produce out of this authour the wordes which he citeth. And whereas he affirmes that the Maniches were our predecessours & prohibited mariage in Preists quoting S. Epiphanius in the mar∣gent, Dices mihi om∣nino in quibus∣dam locis adhuc li∣beros gig∣nere pres∣byteros, Diaconos; & Hypo∣diaconos at hoc non est iuxta ca∣nonem, sed iuxta hominum mentem Epiph. Haeres. 59. I finde no such heresie in his Cathalogue of the heresies of Manicheus: but contrarilie I am sure I finde in an other place of his workes that Preists were by the Ecclesiasticall Canons prohibited to marie. For thus he speaketh. Doubtlesse you will tell me that euen yet in certaine
places Preists, Deacons and Subdeacons gette children. But this is not according to the Ca∣non but according to the myndes of men &c. And with these and other errours which he affirmeth to be taught in the Roman Church but doth not specifie, he endeth his Pedegree of the Romanists, which though he houlds it to haue descended either from auncient here∣tikes, or at the least to haue, as he saith, neere affinitie with their adultered issue, neuerthe∣lesse presentlie after hauing better examined his conscience and considered more deliberate∣lie of the matter, he seemes to loose some of his former confidence, and so addeth that if he hath fayled in calculating the right natiuitie of their auncient doctrine, yet sure I am, saith hee, they are vtterlie destitute of a right succession in persons and doctrine from the Apostles and the auncient orthodox fathers of the primatiue Church, so the knight, by which discourse you may easilie perceiue euen by his owne wordes, and the if which he maketh that all which he hath hitherto said hath no greater warrant then his owne suretie, which although his au∣thoritie and credit were farre greater then ei∣ther we haue found it to be, or it can be in it selfe, yet were it not safe for anie man to relie vpon it, but rather to hould it for verie vncer∣taine and fayleable. Especiallie considering that all which he hath produced in proofe of
the same are either meere trifles, or at the most verie poore arguments grounded vpon false suppositions yea and vpon plaine vntrueths, falsifications, and corruptions both of scripture and fathers, and so partlie through ignorance and partlie through malice he hath shewed himselfe a most partiall and false Herold. And now altho' this might suffice for the censure of the section insuing because it per∣taineth to the same subiect, yet least the knigth should grūble I will a forde it a Period a parte. THE VII. PERIOD. IN his eight section therefore, Sir Humfrey promiseth to produce testimonies of his ad∣uersaries touching the antiquitie and vniuersa∣litie of the Protestant faith in generall. So he proceedeth in the title. To which he addeth by way of asseueration that if the Roman Church doth not confesse that the reformers are both in the more certaine and Safer waye in the Protestant Church, I will, saith he, neither refuse the name nor the punishment due to heresie. Heere we see the knight is as free in his promises as euer he was, let vs therefore examen how he performeth them, for if he doth not, he cannot escape either the name of an heretike, or at the least, the desert of punishment itselfe euen in this mortall life.
Hee beginneth thus. He that shall question vs where our Church was before Luther, let him looke back to the Primatiue Church: nay let him but looke into the bosome of the present Roman Church and he shall finde that if euer antiquitie and vniuersallitie were mar∣kes of the true Church, of right and necessitie they must belong to ours. So Sir Humfrey. In which wordes as it were by way of generall assertion he briefelie declareth the antiquitie and vniuersalitie of his Church to be found both in the Primatiue Church and also in the present Roman Church, in which assertion there being two partes and that no small ones, the first he endeauoureth to proue by shewing a conformitie betwene the doctrine of the Church of England with that of the Primatiue Church, and descending to particulars he tells vs that his Church teacheth and beleeueth the same three Creedes which were instituted by the Apostles and the Fathers of the Primatiue Church, and not created by Luther: as also two of the seauen Sacraments which were, saith he, by the confession of our aduersaries instituted by Christ. The same he affirmeth of 22. bookes of Canonicall Scripture which he saith were vniuersallie receiued in all ages. Likewise of the seuen generall Councells he affirmeth that foure of them were ratified by the Cannons of the Church of England, and confirmed by act
of parliament, and thus he runneth through the points of doctrine and faith in which they and we agree, adding to them the confession of his aduersaries. And yet in all his large rehear∣sall of points of faith, he maketh no mention of eyther those in which the Romanists and reformers disagree, nor of those new articles of the English Creede which dissent from the doctrine of the Primatiue Church, and which indeede are those that make the reformers guiltie of heresie, as its the doctrine of Iustifica∣tion by faith onelie, the deniall of the reall pre∣sence and such like: But craftilie leauing them out as if they were not to the purpose he trea∣teth, whereas in trueth by reason of these new errours obstinatelie defended by them, there can be no vniuersalitie nor antiquitie in their Church notwithstanding they had neuer so great conformitie both to the auncient prima∣tiue, and moderne Roman Church in all the rest of their beleefe. Especiallie supposing that anie one errour in matter of faith obstinatelie defended is sufficient to take away all true an∣tiquitie and vniuersallitie of anie Church or congregation whatsoeuer, as euen the refor∣mers themselues, as I suppose, cannot denie, for that, as the scripture affirmeth, that he who offends in one thing is made guiltie of all the rest, so he that in one onelie poynt of faith houldeth contrarie to the most vniuersall and
auncient Church, maketh himselfe presentlie guiltie of want or defect both of vniuersalitie and antiquitie in his beleefe. For as Saint Na∣zianzene saith to this purpose in his 37. oration towards the end: the articles of faith are like to a gould chaine from which if you take away anie one link (as Saint Ambrose saith) Ad cap. 9. Lucae lib. 6. in fine. you take away your saluation, vnum horum, saith he, si detraxeris tetraxisti salutem tuam. And so we see that the knight by reason he omitteth in his discourse that part vpon which the verie me∣dium of his argument chiefelie, or at the least greatelie depended, his proofe of antiquitie and vniuersality in his Church falleth to the groūd. But besides this defect he fayleth also in that he saith he beleeueth the three Creedes insti∣tuted by the Apostles and Primatiue Fathers of the Church. For either he meanes that those three Creedes do sufficientlie conteyne all that he is bound to beleeue or no. If the first he meaneth, then what will become of his solifi∣dian iustification, and of the 39. articles of the English faith, the greater parte of which is not to be found in those Creedes. If he meanes the second, then doth he ill in leauing those par∣ticulars out in the rehearsall of his faith. Nay more then this, for if matters were well exa∣mined, I doubt not but the knight notwith∣standing the protestatiō of his faith of the three Creeds, yet he would be founde holting in the
true & generally receiued, or Catholike sēse of diuers of the same, as that of the perpetuall vir∣ginity of the mother of God, in that of the descēt of Christ in to hell, of the Catholike Church, the cōmunion of Saincts, remission of sinnes, and the like I say of the doctrine of the 4. first Generall Councels, and of the Sacraments: in which particulars our aduersaries vnderpre∣sēce of reformatiō maintaine diuers deformed errours, specified and confuted by diuines of the Roman Church. Moreouer the knight is also defectiue in the proofe of the antiquitie and vniuersalitie of his faith, and doth egre∣giously equiuocate in that he saith that two of the Sacraments which the Church of Rome houldeth, are professed by the reformers and confessed by their aduersaries to haue beene instituted by Christ, not broached by Luther. This I say is equiuocall and doth not prooue his intent: for although it neither is nor can be denied, but ingenuously confessed by the Roman Church that there are two Sacra∣ments, yet doth she not confesse that there are onely two Sacraments instituted by Christ as the reformers professe, but houldeth and be∣leeueth fiue more as well as those two to haue beene instituted by Christ, which fiue being denyed, or at the least three or foure of them, both by Luther and the rest of the pretended reformers, and on the contrary hauing beene
receiued for Sacramēts in aūcient times, as after∣wards shall be declared, the deniers of thē who∣soeuer they be, cannot rightly claime either an∣tiquity of vniuersality of doctrine in that parti∣cular. And the same may be said for the same reason of the 22. bookes of Scripture, and the seuen first generall Councells, in the which he faith of the reformers is neither aunciēt nor v∣niuersall first for that they hould those twenty two bookes for canonicall Scripture & exclude all the rest out of the canō, which neuerthelesse as appeareth by the testimony of S. Augustin herecited in the margē,Totus au∣tem canon Scriptura∣rum in quo istam considera∣tionē ver∣sandam di∣cimus his libris con∣tinetur. Quinque Moyses &c. To∣bias, He∣ster, Iu∣dith, & Macha∣beorū li∣bri duo & Esdrae duo. Et postea. Nam & illi duo libri vnus qui sapientiae, & alius qui Ecclesia∣sticus in∣scribitur de quadam similitudi∣ne Salo∣monis esse dicuntur nam Iesus filius Sciach eos scripsisse constātisse perhibe∣tur: qui tamē quo∣niam in authorita∣tem recipi meruerūt, inter pro∣pheticos numerādi sunt. Aug. l. 2. de do∣cti Chri∣stiana. c. 8. were also canonicall in the auncient Church. And secondly because they receiue but onely foure of those seuen generall Councels, which neuerthelesse Sir Hūfrey himselfe here confesseth to haue beene genenerall by giuing them all that title as well as the four first. To omit other generall Coun∣cels which he & his brothers violently reiect. And now touching Apostolicall tradi∣tions Sir Humfrey doth no lesse plainely So∣phisticate then in the former points, for that it is well knowne that the reformers either hould no traditions at all to be beleeued but rely wholy vpon pure or sole Scripture as the totall rule of their faith: or if they hould any traditiōs to be necessary yet do not they hould all those which the auncient & now the mo∣derne Roman Church doth hould, and con∣sequently
their manner of houlding Apostoli∣call traditions is in words onely, and hath no true discent from the Apostles nor any vniuer∣sality or antiquity at all, as neither hath their booke of common prayer & manner of ordi∣nation and vocation of Ministers or Pastours: and so altho' they haue some parte both of the auncient liturgie and also of the Apostoli∣call māner of ordination, yet because they doe not wholy agree with them, no not in the sub∣stance and essentiall parts of the action, that is to say not in the consecration of the Eucha∣rist, nor in the essentiall forme and matter of order which are the wordes and imposition of hands, they are defectiue in the antiquity and vniuersality of the same in regard that the manner and forme of prayer and administra∣tions of Sacraments which the reformed Churches vse at this present is different from that of the auncient Church, & neuer knowne nor heard of in former ages but broach by Lu∣ther and his sectatours, quite contrary to that which the knight affirmeth and indeauoureth to prooue, as by comparing their Church seruice, their booke of common prayer, and of ordination of Ministers with the auncient liturgies, as that of Sainct Iames, Sainct Basil, Sainct Chrisostome and others, doth clearely appeare: as also by confronting the same with the writings of the auncient Fathers and their
formes of administration of Sacraments, by which we shall finde a maine difference bet∣wixt the one and the other in regard that in those auncient monuments of antiquitie, be founde sacrifice, oblation, altar, incense, hoste, chalis, holy oyle, Chrysme and the like: But in the forme of seruice and administration of Sacraments vsed now in the pretensiue refor∣med Churches, ther is none of this to be found or hearde. By which it may farther appeare that it is no silly or senseles question, as our aduersarie would haue it, to demaunde of the reformers where their Church was be∣fore Luther. Because it hath nowe beene made manifest that allthough some parte of their do∣ctrine that I meane in which they and the Ro∣manists agree, hath both vniuersality and anti∣quity if it be considered in it selfe, yet diuerse other points of it hath neither the one nor the other. That which cannot be found in the do∣ctrine of the Romā Church for that allthough it is true that some parte thereof was not ex∣pressely definde as matter of faith before the tyme of the later Councells, and sectaries, who by their defection from the euer succeeding Roman Church, and their new errours, gaue occasion of new declarations of some particu∣lar points, yet were those neither new in them selues nor first broached & taught by the fore∣said councells, but onely they by their autho∣rity
determined & established for certaine do∣ctrine that which diuerse nouellists presump∣tuously brought in question, the same neuer∣thelesse in all the ages before Luther hauing bene both aunciently and vniuersally tought, or at the least by many doctours of the Church with out contradiction of the rest: or perhaps if anie were of a different opinion, it was because matters were not then so plainely declared by the Church, and vnder her correction. And so the question proposed by the Romanists to the reformers can neither be rightly detorted vpon them, as the knight vainely auerreth, nor yet can the reformers euer be able to answer it, as plainely appeareth both by that with hath beene allready said, as allso by the doctrine of their 39. articles diuerse of which are not onely new in themselues and neuer heard of in aun∣cient tymes, but allso expressely broached by Luther himselfe, and that not only in negatiue but allso in some positiue doctrine, as is euident particularly in the point of iustisicatiō by faith alone. And hence allso it is manifestly infer∣red how vntruely the knight affirmeth in his 77. page that noe Romanist can deny but that the doctrine of the reformers lay inuolued in the bosome of the Roman Church as corne couered with chaffe or gould with drosse: for neither is it true that either all the doctrine of the reformers hath beene in the
Church before Luther, as I haue showed, nor yet that any Romanist euer affirmed the same, & so S. Hūfrey deliuereth two falsities vnder one forme of speech continuing the same for the space of a whole leafe grounding his dis∣course vpō false suppositions, & equiuocatiōs, & promising to produce testimonies of his ad∣uersarie the Romanists for the antiquity and vniuersalitie of the protestāt faith (he meanes the Puritan faith) in generall, yet produceth not one for the same excepting Pope Adrian the 6. and Costerus and D. Harding in Iewell none of which three authours proue S. Hum∣frey intent. Costerus and Harding onely spea∣king of one or two particular points & that in no matter of faith, to wit aboute the manner of the introduction of communion vnder one kinde and priuate Masse into the Church, as their owne wordes declare. And as for Pope Adrian, his owne wordes truely and compleatly cyted showe him to speake onely of the conditionall adoration of Christ in the Eucharist in case the hoste should not be consecrated, and so he is here produced by the knight both most falsely and most ridi∣culously to proue, for sooth, that the Roma∣nists excuse their absolute adoration of Christ in the Sacrament by that conditionall, I adore theif thou be Christ: which manner of adora∣tion neuerthelesse they neuer vse but onely in
speciall cases of doubt whether the Preist per∣formed his office according to Christ institu∣tion. The Popes words are these in Latin. Con∣cilium Constantiense excusat simplices adorantes hostiam nō consecratam quia facite implicatur con∣dition, si consecration sit recte facta &c. And now let the reader iudge how conueniently they be applyed to S. Hūfreys purpose of pro∣uing absolutely that the Romanists excuse their adoration of Christ in that manner. Further more Sir Humfrey doth not adduce any reason at all for the proofe of his antiquitie and vni∣uersality, but onely vseth his owne conceiptes cōsisting mearely in iffes an andes, or conditio∣nall asseueratiōs, & thus quite throu' the rest of his section he rides poste like a man that caries newes of a false victorie now and then drop∣ping a lye by the way for the haste he maketh to come to the end of his iourney, which is no∣thing els but his owne discredit: which be∣cause it hath beene already sufficiently mani∣fested I neede not goe to particulars for more proofe of the same, especially for that I know I shall haue occasion hereafter to handle more largely all those seuerall points which our ad∣uersary cōgesteth in this place rather by way of recrimination then of treaty, as that Coste∣rus & Harding excuse the cōmunion and pri∣uate Masse, the one by saying that the cup was not taken away by the commaundement of
the Bishops, but that it crept in the Bishops conniuing ther at, which he attributeth to Costerus: the other, that it is throu the negli∣gence of the lay people that they cōmunicate not at euerie Masse, which he ascribes to D. Harding. All which is imposed by the knight vpon those two Catholike authours cōtrarie to their true sense and meaning, for that as it is apparent by their owne wordes which I will rehearse in an other place, they say not those things by way of excuse in regarde they know ther is no need of excuse wher no faulte is founde nor acknowledged: it being certaine to them and all other Romanists that how soeuer priuate Masse, and single communion were at first introduced, yet they are both lawfully practized. And so I conclude this se∣ction of his, inroling il with the former cen∣sures: or rather I may with greate reason frame a more rigorous censure for it, in regard that the knight hauing promised more then before, yet he hath performed lesse, and ha∣uing vnder the name and punishment due to heresie vndertaken to showe by the testimo∣nies & confession of his aduersaries the anti∣quitie and vniuersalitie of his faith, & that his way euen by the confession of the Romanists is more certaine then their owne, yet he hath performed nothing but spent his whole dis∣course in equiuocations and iuggeling tricks,
and so he cannot possible escape the same sen∣tence which his owne execration called vpon him. THE VIII. PERIOD. THIS Period shall conteine the ninth se∣ction of S. Hūfreys booke: with though by reason of the largenes of it, he diuideth it in to seuerall paragraffes, yet because they haue but small substance in them as he handleth them, though otherwise they be in themselues matters of importance: as alsoe for that his do∣ctrine in te same points hath beene already in parte examined & cōfuted, therefore I will not stand to make so many seuerall distinctions in the treaty of them as he doth, but reduce them all to one onely period, briefely examining how farre those testimonies of Romanists which he promiseth to produce as witnesses of the anti∣quity of his owne doctrine, and the nouelty of theirs, doe reach in the particular points of the same. He beginneth therefore with iustifi∣cation by faith onely, Page. 85. I saith he, will make it appeare that before and after the conquest, the priests and professours of those tymes protested open∣ly against the doctrine of Romish merits preaching saluation by Christ alone, and with all publikely professed and administred the same sacraments in the same faith and truth which we teach and admi∣nister
to this day. Thus he proceedeth by way of assertion with a promise to make it appeare, which assertion neuerthelesse contayning two partes, yet neither of them is true, but both either false or equiuocall, or rather partely false, and partely equiuocall. The first parte is clee∣rely false in of it affirmeth that the priests and professours both before and after the conquest protested openly against Romish merits. That this is false it is manifestly conuinced first be∣cause all the workes of learned men, and histo∣ries both of England and other contries that write of that matter, doe testifye that from the tyme of S. Gregories mission of S. Augustin into England to preach and establish the Ro∣man faith (to omit more auncient times) both the Kings, priests, and people as well before as since the conquest haue continually professed the same Roman doctrine which then they receiued, vntill the time of Henry the eight at the least, and among the rest the very same do∣ctrine of merits which now the Church of Rome defendeth. As is diligently proued by the authour of the protestants apollogie in the first section of his first treaty the 63. page euen by the testimonies of Protestants themselues. And what S. Gregories owne doctrine was in this particular, he himselfe testifieth in his booke of moralls the 42. chap. saying that because in this life there is diuersitie of workes
among vs therefore with out doubt there will be in that diuersitie of dignities, to the end that as heare one doth surpasse another in me∣rit, so there one may transcend another in the re∣tribution. Thus Sainct Gregorie to whose te∣stimonie as I could, if neede were, ioyne the expresse authorities of Fathers of precedent ages for witnesses of the doctrine of merits, as of S. Augustin, Hierome, Ambrose, Hilarie, Cyp. Tertull. and other Grecian Doctours euen till the time of the priuatiue Church: so may the consent of those who succeeded the the same S. Gregory be added for the confir∣mation of it S. Bernard: to omit other places alledged by me in an other occasion: in his 8. serm. vpon the Cantic. saith. Omne quod feceris bonum malumne, quod quidem non face∣re liberum sit, meritò ad meritum deputatur. Concilio Aran. can. 18. debetur merces bonis operibus si fiant, sed gratia quae non debetur praecedit vt fiant. To which might be ad∣ded the Councels of Lateran sub Inno. 3. cap. firmiter, the florent. decreto de Purgatorio, and the late Councell of Trent. Which all teach the same doctrine of merits as our aduersaries cannot denie, to which also might be ioyned all those are testimonies of aūcient Fathers who teach that faith onely doth not iustifie, nor is sufficient to saluation, by all which its manife∣stly conuinced that the doctrine of iustificatiō
could not be openly protested against both before and after the Conquest by the Preists and professours of England, except Sir Hum∣frey will persuade vs that the faith of England in those times was different from the faith of all the world beside, and euen of those who di∣rectly sent preachers for the conuersion of it from gentilisme and superstition, all which being wholely incredible, so by necessary con∣sequence is the whole discourse grounded thereupon. Secondly I answer that its mani∣fest out of the words cited by the knight out of the booke of the forme of administration of Sacraments vsed in those times (supposing the booke is authenticall, which neuerthelesse may be suspected as being being onely pro∣duced by Cassander a suspected authour) there is not any word, sentence, or sillable which excludes from saluation those me∣rits which the Roman Church defendeth: but onely such merits as either exclude, pressely exclude the merits of the passion of Christ and therefore the question which ac∣cording to the order of that directory the Priest maketh to the sick person runneth in this tennour. Doest thou belieue to come to glorie not by thine owne merits, but by the virtue and merits of the Passion of our Lord Iesus Christ? which interrogation as you see manifestly containeth an opposition betwene
the merits of the infirme man and those of Christ, and for that cause he calleth them his owne as being wholy wrought by his owne naturall power without the concourse of the merits of our Sauiour & consequently in that sense of no force or vertue for the obtaining of saluation. That which is yet more manifest by the like question insuing made also by the Preist to the same person in this manner. Doest thou belieue that our Sauiour Iesus Christ did die for our saluation? And that none can be saued by his owne merits or by any other meanes but by the merits of his passion? where you see the opposition still runneth, and espe∣cially heare more clearely, betwixt mans owne merits or other meanes which proceed not frō Christs Passion, but from some other cause, not including or depending vpon them as the prin∣cipall agent of all meritorious operations. And verily I am persuaded that the reason why in those daies & in those occasions the formes and speach where somewhat different in the matter of merit, from the formes vsed in our times, is no thing els but the differences of errours reigning in the worlde in those times, and those that are now at this present defen∣ded by the nouellists. For the Pelagian heresie which did attribute ouer much virtue to the merits of man hauing once beene and perhaps some requikes of it yet remaining verie rife in
Englād whē the foresaid directory was vsed (if any such there were) or at the least not lōge be∣fore, it was necessary that in all occasions hu∣mane merits should be as much extenuated as could possible be without preiudice of faith in that point. But contrarilie in these our daies since the publication of the errours of Luther and other sectaries in this matters, it was con∣uenient, if not necessary, to extoll the same me∣rits as much as could be without preiudice to the merits of Christ. Now touching that which is added in the second parte of the knigts assertion videlicet, that the Preists of former times preached sal∣uation through Christ alone, it is most plai∣nely equiuocall, and in one sense it is true and conformable to the doctrine of the Roman Church in all ages, but in another sense it is false and disagreable to the same, it is true that Christ alone is the authour of saluation and that no other then he can saue vs according to that of the Apostle Sainct Peter Act. 4. non est in alio aliquo salus. Nec enim aliud nomen est sub Caelo datum hominibus in quo oporteat nos sal∣uos fieri. Neither is there any other name vn∣der heauen giuen to men wherein we must be saued: and in this sense and no otherwise the Preists of England in more auncient times preached saluation by Christ alone: yet not∣withstanding all this, it is false that those
Preists preached saluation with an exclusion or deniall of the merits of man wrought by the grace of Christ and by virtue of his death and Passion, neither was such doctrine euer taught either in England or any other place before the time of Luther, except it were by some more aūcient heretikes. Moreouer that which the knight putteth in the second parte of his foresaid assertion, to wit that the Preists of those times published and administred the same Sacraments in the same faith and trueth, which they (meaning the reformers) teach & administer this day, this I say is partelie equi∣uocall in that he saith they publike professed & administred the same Sacramēts. For tho' it were true that two of the Sacraments which those Preists administred videlicet. Baptisme & the Eucharist, be the same which there formers administer at this day, yet it is false that the foresaid Priests did the vse in their time either to professe or administer two onelie, as may appeare by the same rituall out of which S. Hū∣frey draweth this testimonie, in which all the seauen Sacraments are contained and appoin∣ted to be administred, if the booke be perfectly published without corruption. Partelie also that same parte of the assertion is false, for that it is manifest the foresaid Preists did not receiue those two which the reformers hould for Sa∣craments in the same faith which they doe, for
as much as the Priests mentioned receiued those two in the faith of fiue other Sacramēts which also they beleiue to be such as well as the rest, supposing that the number of all the seuen Sacraments were then in beleefe and practice as much as now they bee, as both the rituall cited, if it be not corrupted, and also the histories of those times can testifie, of which fiue Sacraments neuerthelesse the reformers haue no such faith as they thēselues cōfesse. To say nothing of the faith of those same Preists in other points of religion, which as it is cer∣taine by the relation of historiographes, was farre different from the faith of the reformers and practice of their Churches, and conse∣quentlie it cannot with truth be said to be the same. And as for the rest of the words which the knight citeth out of the same rituall, they proue nothing against merit it selfe but onelie against confidēce in proper merits as appeares by those wordes in particular, place thy whole confidence in his death onelie, haue confidence in no other thing, that which is so farre from the deniall of merits as that it is counselled & aduised euen by those who are most professed defendours of the Roman doctrine in that point as out of Bellarmine and other diuines we haue showed before.Period. 4. Nay and besides this it is most plaine in my iudgment that the fore∣said rituall in certaine other words following
in the same place did neuer intend to exclude all kinde of merit from the workes of man performed by Gods grace and assistance, for that it expressely saith in the person of that sick man: I offer his merits (that is the merits of Christ) in steede of the merits I ought to haue, for if he ought to haue merits as he affirmeth euen vpon his death bed, though he haue thē not, euident it is that he denied not the same but plainelie supposed the truth of them. And thus we see that the words of the order of ba∣ptizing benigniouslie interpreted make no∣thing for S. Hūfreyes position nor against the Romā doctrine of merits, How be it the same was iustelie corrected by the Inquisitors both because the manner of phrase which it vseth might easily giue occasiō of errour especially in these our dayes: as also because it is iustelie sus∣pected to be Apochryphall, in regarde it con∣taines certaine ill sounding sentēces not onely in the doctrine of the Roman Church: but also according to the tenets of the Reformers. As where it saith thus. These protestations of such as lye a dying were reuailed to a cer∣taine religious man. And those wordes: he that shall protest such things as followe, from his harte cannot be damned &c. All which propo∣sitions and some othgers are commaunded by the authours of the Index to be blotted as well as the wordes which Sir Humfrey here cites.
And yet more ouer it is to be aduertised that there is not a worde in all that which our ad∣uersarie produceth against merits which doth proue iustification by faith onelie, which is that which he intendes to proue in this place as the title of his paragraph doth declare. And so by this meanes he hath quite fled from his text. And so this may suffice to demonstrate the falsitie of the knights assertion and the nul∣litie of the proofe thereof by the testimonies of his aduersaries, seeing plainelie that he doth no thing therein, but partlie by vntrueths and partlie by equiuocations deludes his reader not citing anie one authour either Romanist or re∣former in all this paragraffe more then the wordes rehearsed out of the foresaid Rituall, which neuerthelesse hauing bene, as suspected of corruption, chasticed by the Inquisitours, the vncensured coppies (which doubtlesse he and his fellowes onelie vse) haue no authoritie nor credit in the Roman Church, or at the most, verie little, and consequentlie he procee∣deth most weakelie in produceing for a testi∣monie of his aduersarie that which they doe not acknowledge for theirs, especiallie consi∣dering he alledgeth nothing els for the proofe of his tenet. The second paragraffe is of the Eucharist and Transubstantiation. As con∣cerning the Sacraments of the Lords supper saith the knight. In the dayes of Alfrick a∣bout
the yeare 996. There was a Homilie pu∣blikelie to be read to the people one Easter day, whe∣rein the same doctrine which, saith hee, our Church now professeth was publikelie taught and receaued, and the doctrine of the reall presence (which in that time had gotte some footing in the Church) was plainelie cōfuted and reiected. The wordes which he citeth are these. There is a greate difference betwixt the bodie wherein Christ suffered and the bodie which is receaued of the faithfull, the bodie that Christ suffered in it was borne of the flesh of marie with bloud and with bone, with skinne and with sinewes, in human lims, with a reasonable soule liuing: and his spirituall bodie which nou∣risheth the faithfull spirituallie, is gathered of ma∣nie cornes without bloud and bone, without lim, without soule, and therefore there is nothing to be vnderstood bodilie but spirituallie &c. Thus farre out of the homilie. And this doctrine faith the knight was deliuered in those times not by one onely Bishop but by diuerse in their Synods and by them commended to the Clergie, who were commaunded to reade it publikelie to the people one Easter day for their better preparation and instruction in the Sa∣crament, and for the same cause translated into the saxon language by Alfrick: and to the same purpose the Knight also citeth two other wri∣tinges or Epistles as published and translated also into the vulgar tongue by the same Alfric. But to this I answer first that whatsoeuer do∣ctrine
is conteynd in the Hom. & Epistles cited, the Romanists are not boūd to beleeue it, because the knight onely citeth them out of his owne authours and as printed by the members of his owne Church, to wit out of B. Vsher, and Do∣ctour Iames, and so it is both absurd and imper∣tinent to produce thē as testimonies of his ad∣uersaries, as he professeth to doe in the title of his section, especially supposing that he hath not aledged any one author of the Romanists religion where by to proue them authenticall, nor yet any other indifferent witnesse, but onely those two reformers whom we haue na∣med, whoe by the Romanists may iustly be suspected of partiallity in fauour of their owne cause, especially if we consider that Sir Hum∣frey himselfe graunteth that the Latin epistle written by Alfric is to be seene mangled and ra∣zed in a manuscript in Benet colledg in Cambridge. And certainely the English coppies being found not to aggree with the Latin manuscript which is either the Originall it selfe, or at the least cometh much neerer the time in which the authour of it liued, then any other coppie the knight could possible haue, there is farre greater euidence that the latter translations and impressions are corrupted by the refor∣mers, then that either the Index expurgatorius or any other Romanist hath made any altera∣tion or chaunge in the originall coppies or first
authenticall manuscripts, or in any other ex∣cept it were onely to restore them to their prime innocenty and originall trueth: chee∣fely supposing that the inquisitors in their expurgation of bookes intend no other thing more then to reduce such as be corrupted to the former purity of their originalls. Thirdly I answer that admitte the editions which are published in England be true and sincerely translated and printed, which neuerthelesse may iustly be suspected by reason of the mani∣fould corruptions found to haue bene vsed in that nature by diuerse of the reformed pro∣fession as by the expurgatory Index doth plainely appeare, the authours of which Index haue discouered diuers workes Fathered par∣tely by auncient and partely by moderne se∣ctaries vpō those who neuer writ them: which was the cause as I suppose, why Antonius pos∣seuinus in the preamble to his select Biblio∣theke saith that Sixtus, Bellarmine, and others haue manifested very maine pestilent bookes attributed by heretikes to ancient and good authours among which we may number one cited by Sir Humfrey in some parte of his worke, intitled de fiducia & misericordia Dei, which Bell. in his booke de Scrip. Eccles. de∣clares to be counterfait and suppositious and none of Bishop Fishers on whom it is imposed. Neuerthelesse how so euer the matter standes
touching the truth of the foresaid homilie, and admit it be neuer soe true and authenticall: yet I am confidently assured that the wordes by Sir Humfrey cited out of it against the reall presence, are not so obscure but that they admitte such a comodious exposition as doth not in any sort fouour the denyall there∣of but rather impugne and it confute it. First for that there is not one worde which inclu∣deth a denyall of the reall presence of Christs bodie in the Eucharist, but the wordes onelie showe a differēce betwene the body in which Christ suffered and the bodie which the faith∣full receiue, which difference is not reallie in the substance of the bodie it selfe, it being one and the same in nature in euery place where it existeth; but onely in the properties and manner of existence, or being in place: it ha∣uing beene in the passion visible, mortall, and with it entire locall extension: but in the Sacrament inuisible, impassible, and vnexten∣ded: in which sense allso it may rightly be called spirituall: yea and not altogether im∣properly, especially taking it with a relation or respect vnto the same body perfectly exten∣ded in the manner aboue declared, it may be said to be without bloud, bone, sinn woe, limbe, or soule, that is without extensiō or mo∣tion of these partes, as the cited wordes doe signifie, which by reason of the foresaid ma∣ner
of being of Christs body in the Sacrament doe call it his spirituall bodie, from thence as it were inferring & concluding that noething is to be vnderstood there bodily but spiritually: all which is noething contrarie to the doctrine of the Romanists in this point, but rather most agreeable to the same, which teacheth that Christs body though it be truelie in the Sacra∣ment, yet without extension and not in a Cor∣porall, but in a spirituall manner; yea and very cōformable to the doctrine of S. Paul who spea∣king of the resurrectiō of the flesh douteth not to call one & the same humane bodie both cor∣ruptible & spirituall: 1. Cor. 15. Seminatur corpus animale, surget corpus spirituale, and that not for the difference of the bodie in it nature and sub∣stance which it hath not but onelie by reason of the accidentall difference which it hath in it properties and māner of existence, & which the same bodie receiueth in the resurrection not hauing had them in this mortall life. True it is ther is one passage in the homilie which in my opinion hath more difficulty & showe of repugnance to the reall presence & transsubstantiation then the former wordes, to wit where the authour makes a comparison betwixt the manna and water which flowed from the rocke in the desert, both which he affirmes to haue beene figures of Christ bodie and bloud as the Eucharist also is. Neuerthe∣lesse
he hath consequenter an other passage or two which plainely declare that similitude to be nothing contrarie either to the reall pre∣sence or transsubstantiation. For so he addes. The Apostle Paul saith that the Israelists did eate the same gostely meake, and drinke the same gostely drinke, because that heauen∣ly meate that fed them 40. yeares and shat water which frome the stome did follow had signification of Christs bodie & his bloud that now be offered daylie in Gods Church: it was the same (saith he) which we offer, not bo∣dily but gostely. But which wordes it is euident that Alfric puts a maine difference betwixt that spirituall meate and drinke of the Iewes, & the spirituall foode which Catholike Chri∣stians receiue in the Sacrament, that being but a signification, as the authour of the Homilie expressely affirmeth, of Christs body & bloud, it being the same not bodilie but onely spiri∣tually or figuratiuelie with that bodie and bloud of Christ which he auerreth Preists to offer daylie and of which he also teacheth the foresaid water to be a representation, not the bodie and bloud themselues, which as being euerie day sacrificed in the altar, euen according to common sense they must of ne∣cessitie be reallie and truelie in the Eucharist. And altho' the authour of the Homilie calleth if a figure of Christs bodie & bloud, yet doth he
not say it is a figure of thē absent, as the water flowing out of the rock was, but truelie and reallie present, as those his wordes in which he saith and diuers time repeateth, that Christs bodie and bloud are offered in the same Eucha∣rist by Preists in sacrifice, doe euidently con∣uince, supposing it is impossible to conceiue the authour of the homilie should affirme that Christs bodie and bloud be offered, in the altar, and yet not beleeue the same to be reallie truelie and substantially present in the Eucha∣rist. Moreouer the same Homilie saith in plaine termes, the wine which in the supper by the Preist is hallowed, shewe one thing without to humane vnderstanding and another thing with in to beleeuing minds, without they seeme bread and wine both in figure and tast, and they be truely after their hallowing Christs bodie and his blood throu' gostelie misterie. And afterwardes these wordes doe followe, we said vnto you that Christ hallowed bread and wine to housell before his suffe∣ring and said this his my bodie and my bloud, yet he had not then suffered: but so notwithstanding he turned trou' in visible might the bred to his owne hodie, the wine to his bloud, which wordes how plaine they be for the reall presence and transsubstantiation, anie one that is not vio∣lently partiall in his owne cause may easilie perceiue, considering that for Christ to turne by inuisible might the bread and wine into
his bodie and bloud, is nothing els but that which both the definitions of the Roman Church and Catholike diuines call by the names of reall presence and transsubantia∣tion. Thirdlie it is manifest that the foresaid testi∣monie cannot in reason be alledged in fauour of the reformers doctrine in this particular, for that they denie the bodie of Christ either to exist or to be receaued really in the Eucha∣rist otherwise then by faith & figure, neither of which neuertelesse is denied by the words aboue cited, but contrarilie they expressely and absolutelie auerre that the bodie of Christ is receaued by the faithfull, and altho' they call it his spirituall bodie, yet doubtlesse they doe it onelie for the reason alledged as also for that it nourisheth the receiuers spirituallie, yet they neuer denie it to be a true bodie, or to be trulie present in the Sacrament, or affirme it to be re∣ceiued by faith onelie as the reformers com∣monlie doe, and Sir Humfrey in particular most expresselie in diuerse places of his booke. Fourtlie the wordes alledged call the bodie which the faithfull receiue in the Eucharist a bodie gathered of many cornes, without bloud and bone, without lim, without soule. But the reformers professe to receiue no such bo∣die in the Sacrament, but the verie same bodie
which sitteth on the right hād of God in heauē indued with all the properties and dimensions of a true bodie, though by faith onelie; and so there being such small affinitie betweene both the words and sense of the foresaid place and the reformers doctrine in this point, neither S. Humfrey, nor those from whom he receiued it, had any reason to produce it as a testimonie wherebie to proue their Church to haue bene visiblie extant, and their faith publikelie pro∣fessed before the daies of Luther. And from hence we may further deduce how vaine a flourish the knight maketh in the end of his 97. page were by way of conclusion he affirmes that the most substantiall points of his religion were visiblie knowne and gene∣rallie published not in pryuate corners but in pu∣blike libraries, not in obscure assemblyes. But in open Churches, and generall congregations of our owne countrye in the darkest ages long before Lu∣thers dayes; All which deduction is most fri∣uolous and idle: first for that suppose it were most true and certaine that the denyall of the reall presence were contained in the foresaid writings, the contrarie to which I haue made most manifest, yet is it a most vaine and false brag of the knight to saye that therefore the most substantiall points of his religion were visiblie knowne and generallie professed in his countrie longe before the dayes of Luther, it
being manifest that with all the Arethmatik he can vse, The de∣niall of the reall presence and tran∣substan∣tiation confessed by Sir H. to be the most sub∣stantiall points of his reli∣gion. the whole some of substantiall points of his religion falselie pretended to be sounde by him in the foresaide epistles and ho∣milie, doe not passe the number of two: whe∣reas yet on the contrarie ther are truelie and vnfainedlie aboue twise as manie against him and for the Romanists, as masse, prayers in La∣tin, water mixed to the wine in the chalis, offe∣ring of the same, sacrifice, the pronouncing of Agnus Dei in the masse, the signe of the Crosse. As also because there are no certaine premisses out of which anie such illation of the knights can be collected, but the quite contrarie as hath beene alreadie showed: and so for Sir Humfrey to say the most substantiall points of his faith haue beene generallie published not in priuate corners but in publike libraries be∣fore the dayes of Luther grounding his saying onelie vpon the foresaid writings, is most ab∣surde and voyde of truth. To omit that if as the knight affirmes, there is a copie of the foresaid Epistle mangled in the foresaid librarie a man may doubt how the pretēsiue reformers could come by anie more true manuscript then that razed copie, out of which they could by com∣paring the one with the other, discouer that that which was so blotted & defaced, did con∣taine anie doctrine contrarie to the reall pre∣sense or transubstantiation or agreeing with
their owne copies now of late translated in to English and printed by them. And also we may further suspect that the copie which Sir Humfrey mentioneth as mangled and razed, is the onelie true originall, and that the trans∣sumpts of Alfrickes sermon now published in English, are altered and changed from the pu∣ritie of their first copies, all which I leaue to the iudgement of the indifferent reader and my owne further examen of the matter as op∣portunitie shall serue. And yet besides this, I cannot conceiue how this businesse hangs together, to wit that Sir Humfrey produces the foresaid homilie against transubstantiation, and yet the same Sir Humfrey page 98. affirmes that they (I knowe not who) haue in that same homilie suggested transubstantiation by two faigned miracles. Now if in that homilie there be two miracles to proue transubstantia∣tion, as indeed there bee, howe can it then be truly produced by the knight against the same? So that here must of necessitie be some iug∣gling in the matter. And more, for my parte I cannot possible imagin howe that ould mu∣stie copie of the homilie being in the saxon language could make two such monsterous iumpes as first to leape out of ould saxon in to English, and then out of exiter into Oxon euen iuste at that present time when M. Fox had need of them for the fornishing of his moulie
monumēts. Certainelie I hould this for one of the greatest miracles that anie of the reformed brothers euer committed. Besides this in my opinion it sauoures rancke of forgerie to say that the wordes razed in the Latin copie of Alfricks Epistle to Wolstan Archbishop of yorke were supplied by the saxon copie of Exi∣ter, as some of our aduersaries doe affirme, not-obstanding others say they had the supplie from worcester. And I demaunde further, whether it is not much more probable that the sentence which he mentioneth if anie such there were in that Epistle, was neuer taken away in the Latin, but rather added by Swin∣glius, Oecolampadius, or Bucer, or some other greater Doctour of that potatorie Confrater∣nitie. More D. Iames saith that the Latin E∣pistle so razed is intituled: De consuetudine mo∣nachorum, and yet the same Doctour out of Fox relates it to be against the bodilie presence. Quibus speramus nos qui∣busdam prodesse ad corre∣ctionem, quamuis sciamus aliis mini∣me pla∣cuisse: sed non est nobis con∣sultum semper si lere, & non ape∣rire subie∣ctis elo∣quia diui∣na, quia si praeco tacet quis Iudicem venturum enuntiet. D. Iames detect. part. 2. pag. 55. Now what connexion the bodilie or vnbodilie presence of Christ in the sacrament hath with the custome of monks, I am persuaded that, excepting these two great Doctours, all the world beside can not imagin: Especiallie con∣sidering that in the wordes related by Iames, there is no mētion at all of the bodie of Christ, but of correction of some certaine persons. And surelie Alfrick being an Abbat himselfe it is to be iudged farre more proper to him to
haue writ of things appertaining to the profes∣sion of religious persons, thē of the Eucharist or transubstātiation, or as they will haue it, against the same. Finallie Fox referres the translation and publishing of the Homilie and Epistles to the yeare 996. Yet Iames affirmes that the Archbishop wolstan to whome Alfrick writte his Epistle concerning that businesse, was a boute the yeare 1054. which yeare differeth much from the other. Wherefore let Sir Hum∣frey be assured that till he cleares these difficul∣ties this his new-founde writing caries no au∣thoritie against the Romanists. And so for conclusion of this matter I say that till Sir Humfrey or some of his companions can pro∣duce some authenticall authour before Luther who without their owne glosses or illations doth teach plainelie these negatiues: Christs bodie and bloud are not reallie present in the Eucharist: the bread and wine consecrated by the Preist are not turned into the bodie and bloud of Christ by vertue of Gods worde and power, let him not trouble himselfe and vs with such obscure new founde fragments as this, with which as being subiect to diuers ex∣positions he fills his owne head and ours with proclamationes neither disprouing ouer do∣ctrine nor prouing his owne, and onelie giues occasion of altercation and expense of time in vaine aboute the tryall of these his questiona∣blie
and faultie wares. From hence Sir Hum∣frey passes to the second parte of his Paragraffe, that is to the doctrine of transsubstantiation in these wordes. Looke saith he vpon their do∣ctrine of transsubstantiation, and you shall see how miserablie their Church is diuided tou∣ching the antiquitie and vniuersalitie of that point of faith. Thus the knight. To which I answer that hauing exactely examined all the particulars which he produ∣ces for proofe of this his boysterous affirma∣tion, I finde that as he chargeth most falselie the Romanists of diuision in the doctrine of transubstantiation, so his proofe of the same by authoritie of the authours which he cytes, is also most deceitfull, in regard he produces them as if they disagreed in their faith of the soresayd point, and consequentlie as if euen according to their owne tenets, they had ney∣ther antiquitie nor vniuersalitie in their do∣ctrine, whereas in truth none of the cited au∣thours haue anie disagreement among them∣selues, but all with one vnanimous consent professedly acknowledge the faith and do∣ctrine of the change of the substance of bread and wine into the bodie and bloud of Christ in the Eucharist, some of them onelie differing a∣boute the manner of it. Some houlding it to be sufficientlie expressed in scripture, as (vnles∣se it be Caietan whose meaning I will ex∣plicate
in an other place) all scholasticall di∣uines affirme. Some others (among which scotus is one, or rather scotus alone) being of opinion there is no place of scripture so ex∣presse that without the dermination of the Church it can euidentlie conuince, and con∣straine one to admitte transubstantiation in the Sacrament. Others that the doctrine of transubstantiation was held euen in the Pri∣matiue Church, tho' perhaps the worde it selfe was not vsed in those most auncient times but since inuented. But not obstanding what they held in these particulars, yet doe none of them which the knigth cites, impugne tran̄ssubstātia∣tion, or denie that the bread and wine are truelie conuerted into the bodie and bloud of Christ in the Eucharist, but they all expresselie auouche, and maintaine it, so that a man may maruell where Sir Humfreyes eyes were when he read and rehearsed them. And as for Cardinall Aliaco, he doth not expresse his owne opinion in the wordes alled∣ged by Sir Humfrey, nor yet affirmeth it to haue beene defended by anie authour in his time, but saith onelie, tertia opinio fuit, the third opinion was. Putting his owne which he cal∣leth more common, and more agreeable to the scripture and determination of the Church, as also to the common opinion of the holie Fa∣thers and doctours: onelie graunting that it
doth not euidentlie follow of the scripture that the substance of the bread doth not remaine after consecration together with the bodie of Christ, or absolutelie ceaseth: or, that which I rather conceiue of his true meaning, it can onelie be gathered out of this authour (whome I haue exactelie read in this passage) that in times past there were some fewe who, before the matter was plainelie defined by the Church defended that it is possible, yea and more con∣formable to naturall reason, and more easie to be conceiued, nor were euidentlie repugnant to scripture, that the bodie of Christ might remaine with the substance of bread in the Sa∣crament: none of which is contrarie to the do∣ctrine of transsubstanciation as it is beleeued actuallie in the Church, nor to the vniuersali∣tie of her faith therein, supposing that an act may consist with possibilitie to the contrarie, of which nature it selfe yealdes infinitie exam∣ples especiallie in such effects as depend vpon indifferent or free causes. But not obstanding this diuision of the Ro∣manists which, as the reader may easilie per∣ceiue, being onelie in accidentall points of this controuersie betwixt them and the reformers, maketh nothing for Sir Humfreys purpose: yet besides this the testimonies which the knight alledgeth out of the same authours are so farre from prouing his intent, that there is not one
of them which doth not either expresselie con∣taine or at the least suppose the trueth of the Roman doctrine in the chiefe point of the con∣trouersie of transubstantiation, two especiallie that is dutand in his Rationall, and Camera∣censis, speake so plainelie in that particular of the conuersion of the substance of the bred and wine into the bodie and bloud of our Sauiour, that it is to be admired that one of the contrary opinion could possible be either so ignoraunt as not to perceiue them to be against him, or so impudent that perceiuing the same, he should vēture to produce that which he might easily haue perceiued it could serue for nothing els but a testimonie of his owne confusion: es∣peciallie considering with how small sinceritie he hath delt in vsing or rather abusing for the aduantage of his cause, both the wordes and sence of some of the foresaid authours, as ap∣peereth particularlie in the citation of Bellar∣min. page 111. where he affirmeth him to saye that it may iustlie be doubted whether the scriptures doe proue the bodilie presence of Christ in the Eucharist. In which he shame∣fullie belyeth the Cardinall, for he sayth not those words merito dubitari potest cited and En∣glished by the knight, of the proofe of the reall presence out of scripture, of which neither he nor Scotus (of whose opinion he there trea∣teth) makes anie doubt at all: but he onelie
saith that altho' to him the scripture seemes so cleare that it may force one that is not obstinate to beleeue transubstantiation, yet merito dubi∣tari potest, it may with iust cause be doubted whether transubstantiation can be proued so expressely by scriptures as they may constreine anie man not refractorie to beleeue it: which are farre different matters as anie one that is not either verie ignorant or verie desirous to deceiue, may easilie vnderstand. Secundo dicit Sco∣tus non extare vllum lo∣cum scrip∣turae tam Expressū vt sine Ec∣cles. deter∣minatione euidenter cogat trā∣substantia tiationem admittere: atque id nō est om∣nino im∣probabile: nam etiā si scriptura quam ad∣duximus videatur nobis tam clara vt possit co∣gere ho∣minem nō prosteruū: ta: an ita sit merito dubitari potest, cā homines doctissimi & acutissi∣mi qualis in primi Scotus fuit, con∣trarium sentiant. 3. addit Sco∣tus: quia Ecclesia Cath. in Concilio Generali Scripturā declara∣uit, ex seriptura sic decla∣rata mani∣festē pro∣bari trans∣substātia∣tionē. Bell. lib 3. de Euch. c. 23. And in the same fashion, if not worse, doth he abuse Maldonate the Iesuit affirming that he confesseth Saint Augustin in the doctrine of transubstantiation to be wholie theirs, citing the foresaid Maldonat's words vpon the 6. chapter of Saint Iohn. the 5. verse. For the same; which although they be truelie rehear∣sed by the knight, yet haue they no such sense or meaning as he doth either ignorantlie or malitiouslie suppose, nor doth he treate in them either of the reall presence or transubstantia∣tion, but onelie of the exposition of the wordes of the foresaid verse, Patres vestri manducaue∣runt Manna & mortui sunt, qui manducat hunc panem viuet in aeternum. Making a question whether in them there be made by Christ a comparison betweene the seuerall persons that did eate, or betwene the seuerall kindes of breades which they did eate. And whereas Mal∣donate citeth Saint Augustine and others to
follow that opinion which houlds the compa∣rison to be betwixt the eaters, he with other authours who liued since the tyme of S. Au∣gustin reiecting that as lesse probable & more neere to the exposition of the Caluinists, lea∣ueth it so, and imbraceth the contrarie: and in this point onelie, and in this manner doth Mal∣donate persuade himselfe that Saint Augustin as a most greate enimie to heretiks would haue bene of another mynde if he had liued in these our daies, and seene his owne exposition of the foresaid wordes come so neere the glosse of the Caluinists. And this being all; yet our learned knight is so curious an Alchimist that he will needes drawe out of Maldonate by arte, that he confesseth S. Augustin to haue bene wholie for the reformers in the doctrine of transub∣stantiation, and (also that which is further fet∣ched) that the Romanists haue neither anti∣quitie nor vniuersalitie in their doctrine. But alas his worke hath succeeded so vnfortunate∣lie that insteede of gould he hath extracted drosse, I meane that in lieu of one single trueth he hath vttered a double lye, falsifying most shamefullie Saint Augustine and maldonate both at once, and with in the space of a verie few lines. And the like Circulatorie and circumuen∣ting tricks the knight also vseth in the cita∣tions of Alfonso de Castro Gregorius de Va∣lentia
and Cardinall Cusanus. As if they did testifie that there is no antiquitie nor vniuer∣sallitie in the Fathers touching the doctrine of transubstantiation, where as in deede they haue no such matter, as appeereth euen out of the verie same wordes which he citeth in this place: Castro onelie affirming that there is seldome mention of the transubstantiation of the bread into the bodie of Christ in antiquis scriptoribus in the auncient writers, not in the auncient Fa∣thers as the knight doth falselie translate. And that which is yet much falser, he translates con∣uersion for transsubstantiation; where it is also to be noted that Castro speakes there onelie of the worde transubstantiation not of the thing signified by the worde, as is euident by his o∣ther wordes which presentlie fellowe, saying thus. Who but an heretike will dare to denie these things because they are not mentioned in auncient Fathers vnder such names? So that both Castros wordes, and sense are grosselie corrupted by Sir Humfrey. Valentia onelie affirmeth that it is not to be marueled, if one or two, or some of the auncients (not Fathers as our aduersarie yet somat more corruptedlie then before tradu∣ceth) before the question of transubstantiotion was throulie debated in the Church, haue tought lesse consideratelie, and lesse weigtilie of this matter. In which wordes the knight also translates palam, throulie for openlie, and
leauing vnmentioned the other ansers which Valentia giues to the testimonies of Gelasius and Theodoret vpon whose occasion he spea∣kes in that manner, Haec ergo tam multa & tanto∣rum viro∣rum testi∣monia sa∣tis esse de∣bent vt o∣stē damus Luthero transsub∣tiationem non esse nouā nec trecente∣nariam vt ipse asse∣rit, sed multo ve∣tustiorum nempe ab ipsis Ec∣clesiae pri∣mordijs proditam. Castro li. 6. haer. 5. f. 178. and yet further omitting the conclusion of the sentence, to wit: maximè cum non tractarent ex instituto questionem; as al∣so other wordes which follow to the same pur∣pose. Cusanus lastlie saith no more but that certaine of the auncient diuines (if we may giue credit to the knight not heere citing his wordes) are found to be of this minde that the bread in the Sacrament is not transubstantia∣ted in nature but still remayneth, and is clothed with another substāce more noble then it selfe. In which wordes as you see, whatsoeuer those innominated men, and as it seemes vnknowne to Cusanus himselfe, whatsoeuer I say they did hould touching the trueth of transubstantia∣tion, yet certaine it is that they were not Cal∣uinists in the point of the reall presence as plai∣nelie appeereth by that noble substance which they held to clothe the bread after consecra∣tion, which doubtlesse could be nothing els but the most pretious and noble bodie of Christ which the reformers denie to be present in the Sacrament. This therefore is all that the cited authours affirme. And to omitte that none of them vseth the name of Fathers as the knight would haue them, translating and transfor∣ming
the wordes scriptotes, veteres, and anti∣qui Theologi, or the like, into Fathers, or at the least citing the foresaid authours as if they spake planiely of the auncient fathers, which neuerthelesse their wordes doe not showe, I say, to say nothing of this which though it is a trick to deceaue the reader, yet it is so poore a one as it cannot much aduantage his cause. And to admitte that by those formes of speech the foresaid moderne authours meane the auncient Fathers: yet doth not this argue want of antiquity or vniuersallity of the Fathers in that pointe, in regard it is not required to the argument of antiquitie that all auncient Fa∣thers in all ages none excepted agree in the pointe for which that kinde of argument is vsed, especiallie before the matter be suffi∣cientlie declared & determined by the Church in case of doubt or opposition of heretikes or otherwise: but onely it is required and suffi∣cient that the most parte of them doe consent therein the rest not obstinatelie contradicting the same, or carrying themselues at least indif∣ferent according to the aduise of Vincent lyr. Contra prophanas haeres. nouit. saying that, si in ipsa vetusttate discrepantes sentētias reperiamus, sequamur sententiam plurium & illustriorum Doctorum. That is, if in antiquitie it selfe we fin∣de. different opinions, let vs followe the opinion of the more famous Doctours. And this is there∣fore
true because that if such methaphisicall antiquitie & vniuersality were necessarie for all points of faith, noe Church in the world could truely be said to haue antiquitie and vniuersalitie in all points of doctrine or to haue beene alwaies Catholikes, it being a thing manifest that not any Church either is, nor was, nor euer will be so auncient and vniuersall as that ail and euery one of the auncient Fathers agree euer actually with her in euery point, as it is most cleare in the auncient Father Sainct Cyprian and yet more cleere in Tertullian and origen, who by reason of some points of doctrine which either were not in their time sufficiently and expresselie determined by the Church, or of which they had, not occasion to treate may seeme in some sorte to dissent from the pre∣sent Church euen in such doctrine as now is knowne, and beleeued for matter of faith euen by the nouelists themselues, as appeares in the point of rebaptization defended by S. Cyprian & his adherēts in those times. Which if it were not so, its euident, that the reformers were yet in farre worse case then either the Romanists should be vpon that supposition, or then now they are, if in worse they can be imagined to be, whoe neither haue, nor euer can haue any kinde of vniuersalitie or ātiquity of Fathers either metaphisicall or morall on
their side. And now this being all in substance, are rather more then those three cited authours affirme, it hence appeereth how smale reason Sir Hum. had to cite them in his fauour, espe∣ciallie considering that one of them that is Alfonsus a Castro, doth onely say that there is seldome mention made of transubstantiation in the Fathers, not denying as it is manifest, their agreement in that point, but rather insi∣nuating their consent therein tho' not so fre∣quentlie expressed. Furthermore the knigth addeth for the conclusion of this pointe that many writers, and schoole men in their owne Church are so farre from graūt of antiquity & vniuersalitie to this doctrine, that they professe the tenet of transubstantiation was latelie receaued in the Church for a point of faith. And for this he citeth Scotus as affirming that before the councell of Lateran transubstan∣tiation was not beleeued as a point of faith and that the doctrine of it is not verie auncient in the Church. Thus Sir Humfrey. Tho which I answer that all tho' Bellar∣min affirmes that Scotus sayde transubstantia∣tion was not an article of faith before the coun∣cell of Lateran yet I finde he speakes not so ab∣solutely, but at the most he saith it was not so∣lēnly declared as an article of faith before that Coūcell, not denying but that it minght be also declared in other particular coūcels as in deed it
was declared by the Roman coūcell vnder Ni∣colas the secōd, aboue a hundreth & fifty yeeres before, and more expressely in another Ro∣man councell vnder Gregorie the seuenth: yea and maintained in the Church time out of minde. Neuerthelesse by way of argument I am content to graūt to the aduersaries that which Bellarmin affirmes of Scotus: Et tunc ad tertium, vbi stat vis: dicen∣dum quod Ecclesia declarauit istum in∣tellectum esse de ve∣ritate fidei in illo simbolo edito sub In. 3. in Consilio Later. vbi ponitur veritas a∣liquorum credendo∣rum magis explicite quam ha∣beantur in simboloo rum vel Atha. vel Nyceni: & breuiter quicquid ibi dicitur esse credē∣dum, te∣nendum est esse de Substantia fidei, & hoc post istam de∣clarationē solemnem factam ab Ecclesia. & Paulo post. Non enim in potestate Ecclesiae fuit facere istud ve∣rum vel non ve∣rum, sed Dei insti∣tuentis. Et secundum intellectū à Deo tra∣ditum Ec∣clesia de∣clarauit directa in hoc vt cre∣ditur spi∣ritu veri∣tatis. Scot. 4. d. 11. q. 3 in resp. ad arg. yet not with∣standing this liberall graunt, I doe affirme with all that our Church wanteth neither antiquitie nor vniuersality either in this or any other point of her doctrine, and the reason is because allthough some points of her faith were not in all ages and times knowen expresselie for arti∣cles of faith, yet were they in themselues such indeede and for such beleeued with an implicite faith at the least, that is with such a faith as all conteined in the worde of God is belieued by all true Catholikes as an infalible trueth, altho' no one particular were knowne vnto them. For as it is most certaine that euery faithfull Christian which cannot reade belee∣ueth many things conteined in scrpture with be knoweth not, in regard that altho' he is igno∣rant of them in particular, yet in that he belie∣ueth all that they include, he allso belieueth truely euen those particular trueths which he knoweth not: so allso it is certaine that euery faithfull Christian beleeuing vniuersally all that which the word of God conteines, hath
an vniuersall faith of whatsoeuer points of do∣ctrine either was, is, or shall be declared for matters of faith by the most vniuersall Church in any difference of time, and consequently he hath as ancient, and vniuersall a faith of those particular points so declared as he hath of those which euen both in the Apostles time & in all succeding ages were expressely knowne for articles of faith to all the Christian world. And let this suffice to declare that noe point of do∣ctrine definde by the most vniuersall Church as matter of faith conteined in the worde of God, can truely be tearmed new, but hath as much antiquity and vniuersality as the greatest mysterie of the Christiā faith, & also that if any noueltie it hath, it is onely in the declaration of it, & quoad nos; that is in respect of that new or expresse knowledge which we receiue of it by the proposition of the holy Church. Which infalible manner of arriuing to a new know∣ledge of matters of faith, because the sectaries neither haue it nor admitte it, it necessarily followes that whatsoeuer doctrine they dis∣couer in these later times, must of necessity want both the foresaid properties of antiquitie and vniuersality as we haue declared, in regarde they can not show as much as an implicite per∣petuallie succeeding faith in the articles they haue newly broched. Sir Hūfrey further more citeth allso Hostiensis and Gaufridus out of
Durand. in 4. d. 10. q. 1. n. 23. whoe (as he affirmeth) saith there were others in those daies whoe taught that the substance of bread remaines; and that their opinion was not to be reiected, so the knight relateth. But how false and corrupted this relation is I know out of Durand himselfe for that I finde in his 10. d. of the 4. of sent. q. 1. n. 15. that this passage cited by him, is neither Durandes owne doctrine, nor yet theirs whome he cites aboute it, but onely related by them, and taken out of them by Durand to frame his obiection in the begining of his question, as he vseth to doe, which he afterwardes solues in plaine termes saying in his 25. number. Quod ante inducitur de Glossatoribus Gaufrido & Hostiense super decreta: dicendum quod licet recitent tres opiniones nullam tamen approbant vt veram nisi illam quod corpus Christi sit in altari per transsubstantiationem panis & vim: & si expresse non dicunt aliquam aliam erroneam, non propter hoc non est erronea, non enim sciuerunt omnes passus scripturae à quibus discedat opinio supra posita sicut ostensum est prius: And thus the busines being well examined, I say no more but that I ame sorie the worthy knight should be so vnfortunate as to stumble vpon the obiection in lue of the doctrine of the au∣thor himselfe. How be it I know it to be a thing so incident to the frailty of other of his religion, that I doe not much admire the case.
The same Durand is alsoe abused by the knight in regarde he produces him to proue that the Roman diuines are diuided in their o∣pinions touching transsubstantiation, which neuerthelesse I haue showed by his owne words how plainelie he maintaines it. And that which Bellarmin is here cited to affirme of him lib. 3. de Euch. cap. 13. is not that his opinion is hereticall touching the maine point of trans∣substantiation, but onely because by a singular opiniō he houldes that onely the forme of bread and wine, and not the matter is conuerted in to the bodie and bloud of Christ in the Sa∣crament, which altho' it be false, yet doth not the author therfore make anie doubt of trans∣substantiation it selfe and so this is an other of Sir Hūfreyes trickes by which he cousens his reader and iniureth both these diuines at once. But put the case Durand were truely cyted, yet I say as I said before, that a small number of writers against the whole torrent of the rest cannot hinder the antiquitie or vniuersalitie, either of the doctrine of transsubstantiation, or any other point of faith. And if the antiquitie and vniuersalitie of Fathers were to be taken in that rigour which Sir Humfrey will haue it, it is manifest that he and his consortes may cast their cappes at it for any such they should euer be able to finde in their reformed congrega∣tions, it being now euident out of the examen
and censure of the former sections, that to speake within compasse, they haue not (I doe not say the tenth parte in number of the aun∣cient Fathers for the proose of the antiquitie and vniuersalitie of their whole Creede, which the Romanists haue for theirs) but not so much as one onely authour before Luther, which truely cited and vnderstood doth defend their doctrine in all and euery particular pointe. And according to this, I answer also to the testimonie of B. Tunstall whom the kinght citeth as houlding the point of transubstantia∣tion to haue bene a matter of indifferencie and not an article of faith within lesse then fiue hundreth yeeres. To which I replye first that Sir Humfrey dealeth heere according to his accustomed manner that is insyncerelie, first because he produceth this authours testimonie as if he had bene of opinion that perhaps it had bene better to haue left the doctrine of Tran∣substantiation vndetermined and free for euery one to vse his owne coniecture, as in his Phansie it was before the Councell of Lateran; which is most false for that the Bishop doth onely relate that as an opinion of some others which yet he nameth not, his resolution being in that pointe farre differēt as his booke testifieth in that same place. Secondly he dea∣leth insincerely in that he taketh hould of that onely which maketh for his purpose in
some sort but, leaueth out not onely that which maketh expressely against him and for the reall presence (quaefuit saith Tunstall ab initio Eccle∣siae fides, which was the faith of the Church from the beginning) but also he leaueth out the very resolution it selfe of the authour in this same pointe of transubstantiation, where after the wordes by the knight cited, he saith expressely he houldeth it iust for that the Church is a pillar of trueth, that her iudg∣ment is to be obserued as throughly firme. Ad∣ding further that those who contend that, that manner of transubstantiation ought to be reie∣cted (meaning that same which the Roman Church both then taught and now teacheth) because the worde is not found in scripture, nimis praefracti iudicij sese esse ostendunt. Quasi vero saith hee Christus eo modo illud quod vult efficere non posset, cuius omnipotentiae & spiritus S. operationi in totum detrahere sua assertione vi∣dentur. By which plaine wordes of this learned Bishop the reader may plainely see how dece∣iptfullie he is dealt with and how much he is abused by the knight. Secondly I answer that how indifferent soeuer the doctrine of transubstantiation might seeme to our aduer∣sarie to haue beene before the Councell of Latran, neuertelesse both this authour and all others truely Catholikes both since and before that councell, haold it not for a matter indiffe∣rent,
but for a certaine trueth and verity as appeareth planely by that which hath beene said allready in the declaration and answer to those testimonies which haue in this paragraffe beene produced for the contrary. Lastly I answer that there was neuer such in∣differēcy in the Romā Church concerning the foresaid doctrine of transubstantiatiō, but that so manie authours in all ages folowed the affir∣matiue, that the reformed flock shall neuer be able to show anie for the negatiue, no not one classicall authour. He makes vse also of the testimonies of the other. Durand in the fourth of his Rationale chap. 41. of Odo in Can. d. 4. And Christopher de cap. fontium lib. de correct. Theol. Scholast. cap. 11. & alib. who seeme to say that Christ did not consecrate with those wordes, this is my bodie: but by his benediction. But to these authours I say first that whatsoeuer they held in this par∣ticular, they all agree in that point which is here in controuersie betwixt Sir Humfrey and the Romanists, that is they all accorde and teach the reall presence and transubstantiation, and so they are all impertinentlie alledged. Se∣condlie I say, that these authours dispute in the places cited, onelie by what wordes, or action Christ himselfe did consecrate, and not of the wordes of Consecration by which the Preists vse to consecrate: And altho' they propose a question of this also, yet they agree in that the
Preists doe consecrate by no other wordes but those. This is my bodie. That which in du∣rand, at the least, is most plainelie expressed when in his page 166. he saith. Cum ad prola∣tionem verborum istorum, hoc est corpus meum: hic est sanguis meus sacerdos conficiat de consecrat. d. 11. credibile iudicatur, quod & Christus eadem verba dicendo confecit. By which wordes it is most apparent that durand made no doubt of the determinate wordes by which Preists doe consecrate, nor yet was of opinion that Christ himselfe did vse anie other, how be it he rela∣tes an opiniō of some others which thinke that Christ did not consecrate with those same wor∣des, but he saith in the opinion rather of others then himselfe) that virtute diuina nobis occulta confecit, that he did it by diuine virtue or power himselfe, and afterwardes expressed the forme sub qua posteri benedicunt, by which the succee∣ding Preists doe blesse or consecrate. Now Sir Humfrey in his citation of this authour lefe out the latter parte of his text which doth plai∣nelie declaire his minde to wit the wordes, scilicet hoc est corpus meum, which durand inclu∣des in the benediction or cōsecration of Christ, chimericallie ioyning to some of the authours former wordes, others which belonge to ano∣ther opinion related by durand, which houldes that Christ repeated the wordes twise first to giue them power and vertue of confection or
consecration, and afterwardes to teach the A∣postles the forme of consecration, by which the reader may easily perceiue that the knight insteed of making durand his owne, he both lost him & his owne reputation by either most ignorant or malitious peruerting of that Ca∣tholike authours wordes, and sense. The like to which proceeding he vseth also in the testimonie of Odo whome he cites to proue that Christs bodie is made in the Sacra∣ment by his benediction, and not by the wor∣des: this is my bodie. For he neither sincerelie relates, nor trulie construes them. And first whereas that authour by may of exposition of that worde, benedixit, saith benedixit, corpus suum fecit, meaning that Christ blessed the bread, that is to say made it is bodie, Sir Hum∣frey doth English the wordes both with a false interpretation of them and a false separation so: Math. 26. and then made that his bodie, adding the worde then of his owne stampe. Secondlie he makes a false construction of Odos wordes in that whereas Odo vnderstands by benediction con∣secration, as diuers other diuines doe, and as it manifestlie appeares by his owne wordes vttered presentlie after, to wit those which Sir Humfrey cytes, saying, virtute sermonis Christi factum est corpus & sanguis Christi: that is, by virtue of Christs speech the bodie & bloud of Christ are made: the ignorant knight imagined that
because he affirmed before that Christ by be∣nediction made his bodie, therefore he made it without those wordes this is my bodie: which neuerthelesse are the verie wordes of benedi∣ction or consecration which Christ himselfe vsed. True it is Odo speakes some thing intri∣catelie and obscurelie by reason of his breuitie, yet those plaine wordes which followe in the same place and matter, videlicet virtute sermo∣nis Christi fiunt corpus & sanguis Christi, doe sufficientlie explaine the authours mynde, and serue for a cleare exposition of the rest, as the iudicious reader of his whole text, will easilie perceiue. Concerning the citation of Christopher De capite fontium I suspect there is some legerde∣maine vsed in it: because it seemes not to me a thing credible that anie man of learning, and iudgement as he is held to be, should be so farre out of temper as peremptorilic to conclude for an infallible truth to which scriptures, Coun∣cels and all antiquitite yeald an vndeniable te∣stimonie and consent that the wordes, this is my bodie, are not the wordes of consecration, how be it the might say with the opinion of some others that those are not the wordes by which Christ himselfe consecrated, which point as it is not yet declared by the Church as a matter of faith, so neither is it pertinent to the matter we here treat, if so it were: as being no
denyall of transubstantiation, which onelie is here in question and not the wordes of conse∣cration. and consequentlie if that authour (whome I could not haue whereby to examen the truth) if I say he speakes in that sense one∣lie, then his testimonie was cyted in vaine. As also I may not rashelie auouch that, especiallie if he meanes in the other sense, and as accor∣ding to their rehearsall of our aduersarie, the wordes doe sounde. That surelie he had tasted of a wrong fountaine when he spoake in such an exorbitant manner, if so he euer spoake. I haue exactelie examined Card. Aliaco, and finde he speakes in those wordes cyted by Sir Hūfrey, onely of the possibility of the coexistēce or presence of the substance of the bread & the bodie of Christ vnder the same accidēts, which possibilitie he affirmes neither to repugne to reason nor to the bible, no more then that two quantities or qualities may possiblie stande to∣gether vnder one matter videlicet de potentia absoluta, that is by the absolute power of God: which is true in regarde that no text of scrip∣ture can be found to such contrarie possibility, nor implicatiō of contradictiō in reason. But all this how true soeuer it is, yet is it out of the pur∣pose and state of our question, which is not about the possibilitie, but aboute the fact of transsubstantiation, in which point the resolu∣tion of this authour is plainelie for vs saying
that altho' it doth not euidentlie followe of the scripture that the substance of the bread doth absolutelie cease to be, nor yet, as it seemes to me, of the determination of the Church, ne∣uerthelesse because, saith he, it doth more fa∣uore the determination of the Church and the common opinion of the holie Fathers and Do∣ctours, therefore I hould it. And this same is that which the Councell of Trēt declares: to which doctrine if Sir Hūfrey would consent as farre as Aliaco, this disputation were at an end, for that here is nothingels required either of him or any other of his profession but that they obey the authoritie of the Church in her definition.Ses. 15 c. 4 Secun∣dum hanc viam dico quod pa∣nis trans∣substātia∣tur in cor∣pus Chri∣sti ad sen∣sum expo∣situm in descrip∣tione tran∣substantia∣tionis. A∣lic. in 4. q. 6. art. 2. In his 111. page the knight proceedes most sophisticallie in this same matter, where, vpon a false if, or conditionallie false supposition that neither according to the doctrine of S. Thomas, the Roman Cathe∣chisme, and the Masse-Preists, as he pleaseth to terme them, the consecrated bread is tran∣substantiated by Christs benediction before those wordes, this is my bodie, be vttered, nor by the same wordes vttered after benediction, as saith he, the Archbishop of Cefarea and o∣thers doe affirme; he presentlie thence inferres that absolutelie there are no wordes at all in the scripture to proue transubstantiation for an article of faith: which collection of his neuer∣thelesse is no other then to deduce for conclu∣sion
of his discourse an absolute proposition from a conditionall and this also grounded vpon a meere equiuocation: for admit it is true that the foresaid authours doe not agree whe∣ther determinately transubstantiation be made by the benediction, or by the wordes of con∣secration, yet they all accorde most constantlie and conformablie in this, that by one of the two, to wit either by benediction or consecra∣tion, or at the least by both the one and the other, the transubstantiation is vndoubtedlie effected, and consequentlie they agree vnani∣mouslie against the position of Sir Humfrey, affirming that there be no words of scripture to proue the same. And the trueth is that Sir Hum∣freys captious ratiocinatiō proues no more thē if two should argue, the one that the colour of the sea water is greene and the other blewe, & that some ignorant Cockes-come should step in and tell them that it followes on their va∣riance in opinion that the Sea water hath no colour at all. Which who so euer should pre∣sume to doe he deserued to be soundlie hist at for his audacious follie, & so doth Sir Humfrey. And as for Biell whome the knight cites saying, it is not expressed in scripture how the body of Christ is in the Sacrament, he hath in∣deed those wordes which are quoted by him, tho' not in his 49. as he puts it, but in his 40. lection vpon the Canon: but yet this his
saying is not contrarie to the Romanists who easilie admit that the manner of the existence or being of Christs bodie in the Eucharist, is neither expressedlie declared in the Scripture, nor yet in all ages, and by all authours expres∣sedlie tought in the Church as matter of faith: neuerthelesse this authour himselfe in the same place addes in plaine wordes, that now that o∣pinion which defendes transubstantiation is receiued by all Catholikes, yealding for a rea∣son of the same, because (saith he) we ought to hould of the Sacraments as the holie Roman Church doth hould. And afterwards he addes. Wherefore because by the determination of the Church confor∣mable to the authorities of the holie Fathers we ought to beleeue that the bodie of Christ is in the Sa∣crament by conuersion of the bread into it, we are to fee &c. And the like I say of Scotus, & Yribarne his Scholar, who altho' they seeme to diminish the antiquitie of transubstantiation, yet their meaning onelie is that it was not in auncient times declaredlie proposed by Publike autho∣ritie of the Church as an article of faith: yet both of them expresselie beleeuing and defen∣ding the same professedlie as a matter of faith. And by occasion of this, I desire the reader to take notice that whensoeuer he findes anie Ca∣tholike authours to say that this or that do∣ctrine was not a matter of faith before this or
that time, their meaning is not that the obiect in it selfe was no matter of faith in anie one time since it was first reueiled by God, either expresselie in it selfe or as included in some o∣ther veritie, but onelie that it was not expres∣selie and generallie knowne, and beleeued for such by all faithfull people, by reason it was as then not declared and proposed publikelie vn∣to them by the Church in anie Generall Coun∣cell. For that as much as concernes the do∣ctrine in itselfe, it is no more an article of faith after the definition and declaration of the Church then it was euen before it was so defi∣ned, as may appeare in the consubstantialitie of the eternall sonne with his eternall Father, in the vnitie of person in Christ and the distin∣ction of natures and the like: which in them selues were reueiled verites and matter of faith euer since the newe Testament and the lawe of Christ was published to the world, not ob∣standing they were not declaredlie and vniuer∣sallie knowne for such in a long time after to wit not till the time of the Nicene, Ephesin, & Chalcedon Councels in which they were defi∣ned and proposed for matter of faith against the Arian, Nestorian & Euthycian heretikes. And according to this rule it passeth in our case of transubstantiation for declaration of which this breefe obseruation may suffice to satisfie anie indifferent mynde.
Nowe as I said of Scotus and Yribarne, the like I say of Caietan cited by the knight out of suarez, in his comment. vpon S. Thomas page 108. who altho' in it vpon the first art. Of the 15. quest. he saith transubstantiation, which ther he calles conuersion, is not in the Euangell expresselie, conuersio non habetur ex∣plicitein Euangelio: and before he saith: we expresselie receiued from the Church that which the Gospell did not explicate. Yet afterwardes, the same authour expresselie teaches and incul∣cates that those wordes: this is my bodie: cause both the reall presence and transubstan∣tiation. For thus & addes. Et perhoc, verbae Christi: hoc est corpus meum: quia efficiunt vtram∣que nouitatem scrilicet conuersionis & continentiae &c. That is. And by this, because the wordes of Christ: this is my bodie: doe effect both no∣uelties videlicet of the conuersion, and the con∣taining. By which wordes it is manifest what this authours meaning was absolutelie touching the reall presence, & transubstantiation; how∣soeuer he spoake of the manner in which it is cōtained in scripture, which is not our questiō. And in this sense speakes Aliaco when he saith, in the place cited by our aduersarie, that manner of meaning which supposeth the sub¦stance of the bread to remaine still a possible nei∣ther it is contrarie to reason, nor to the authority of the scriptures &c. For he meaneth onely it is
not repugnant to anie such expresse scripture as doth conuince the transsubstantiatton plai∣nely to euerie one, without the authoritie and declaration of the Church and therfore he addeth: if it could stand with the determination of the Church: in which Aliaco showes such obedience to the Church as Sir Humfrey and his fellowes obstinately denie vnto her, most piously captiuating his vnderstanding euen in that which he held more easie, and confor∣mable to reason, and scripture, according to humaine intelligence and discourse. More euer touching the citation of Bishop Fisher contra cap. Babyl. cap. 10. His intent in that place, was onely to proue that meerly by the bare wordes of scripture without the tra∣ditionarie interpretation of the Fathers, no certaintie can be had in questions of controuer∣sie, or matters of faith. And to proue this (which is a direct conclusion against Sir Hum∣frey and the rest of our nouelists) he argueth exhiposthesi, or vpon supposition, saying that not obstanding it is true and certaine that our Sauiour by vertue of those wordes: this is my bodie: did make his owne bodie really pre∣sent in the Sacrament: yet if one were obsti∣nate, standing preciselie to the pure text without the interpretation of Fathers, and sen∣se of the Church, he might denie, that it doth thence followe that in our Masse, Prests
make really present the bodie of Christ. Not meaning to affirme that they doe not in deed (for that the rest of his booke doth demon∣state him to beleeue the reall presence in Masse especially the fourth chapter) but onely inten∣ding to declare by examples and reasons, that it can not be conuinced that Catholike Prests doe so, by pure scripture secluding the expo∣sition of the Doctours of the Church, and her infallible authoritie. And now this being the true sense of B. Fishers discourse: Sir Humfrey verie coningly, by leauing out the precedent, and subsequent wordes of the authour, so manageth the matter as if he had flatly denied that the reall presence of the bodie, and bloud of Christ, can be proued by anie scripture to be made in the Masse. And that, this is the true meaning of this authour both the title of his chapter out of which our aduersarie taketh the wordes he cites, which is this. Of the in∣terpretation of scripture by Fathers. And the whole tenor of his discourse, doe suffi∣ciently declare, so that if the matter comes to scanning, the fraude will easily appeare with shame enuffe to this our professed aduersarie of truth. who not content with this, hath also like a cheating gramster to mende his ill game, dropt a carde, I meane the worde nostra which he hath left out in his translation: but this but a pore trick, and so let it passe. And
perhaps it was onely the negligence of the printer. But for the readers better instruction I will punctually rehearse the authors wordes concerning his true meaning, as well those which Sir Humfrey hath omitted for his owne aduantage, as the rest. Thus he saith. Docea∣mus quod citra Patrum interpretationem & vsum ab eisdem nobis traditum, nemo probabit ex ipsis nudis Euangelij verhis sacerdotum quempiam his temporibus verum Christi Corpus, & Sanguinem consecrare, non quod res haec ambigua fit, sed quod eius certitudo non tam haheatur ex Euangelij ver∣bis quam ex Patrum interpretatione, & vsu tanti temporis quem illi posteris reliquerunt. That is let vs teach that without the interpretation of the Fathers, and the practise by thē deliuered vnto vs, noman can proue by the bare wordes of the Gospell them selues, that anie man in these our times doth consecrate the true bodie and bloud of Christ, not because this thing is doubtfull, but because the cer∣tainetie of it can not be had so much by the wordes of the Euangell, as by the interpretation of Fathers, and the practise of so long time, which they left to posteritie. By which wordes it is voyde of all doubt and tergiuersation, that the authour of them neuer made question but that true Ca∣tholike Prests, as he him selfe was, truly con∣secrate, and make present the uerie bodie, and bloud of Christ, the contrarie of which our aduersarie pretendes to proue: onely inten∣ding
by this pasage and others to declare against his aduersarie Martin Luther, that scri∣ptures alone without the expositiō of the Fathers and practise of the Church, are not sufficient to conuince the trueth expecially when the wordes are obscure and subiet to diuers senses. And therefore in his page 172. giuing the reason of this, he saith. Hoc idcirco dixerim ne quis ipsis Euangelij verbis pertinacius adhaereat spreta patrum interpretatione quemadmodum Lu∣therus fecit, vsum, & interpretationem a patribus traditam nihili pendens, & nuditati verborum infistens, quae non sufficiunt ad id quod velint con∣uincendum. Therefore (quoth B. Fistier) I said these thinhs least anie one should ouer obstinately adhere to the wordes of the Gospell themselues, as Luther did not esteeming the vse, and interpretation deli∣uered by the Fathers, and insisting in the nakednes of the wordes, which are not sufficient to conuince that which they desire. And in the insuing page he concludeth in this manner. Therefore that is manifest which afore we promised to sbow, to wit that long continuing custome, and con∣cording exposition of Fathers none dissenting, doth yeald more solid certainetie how anie ob∣scure place of the Ghospell must be vnderstood, then the bare wordes; which may be varioufly detorted by contentious people at their pleasure. By all which wordes it is more then certai∣ne and manifest that this authour neuer inten∣ded
to show that the reall presence of the bodie and bloud of Christ can not be proued by anie scripture to be made in the Masse, as our false aduersarie doth endeuore to persuade his reader: for he onely affirmes that this can not be conuinced by the bare text of scripture without the exposition of Fathers, if anie contensious person should obstinately denie it, as his wordes aboue cited, euidently de∣clare. And as for those wordes which Sir Hum∣frey quotest in his margent which in English are these. Neither is there anie worde put there by which the verie presence of the flesh, and bloud of Christ may be proued in our Masse: I say that he dealeth not honestlie in the recitall of them in regarde he omittes the next wordes fol∣lowing, not obstanding they belong to te inte∣gritie of the same discourse, and also are a plaine explication of the former as the reader of the whole discourse may more clearely vn∣derstand, the wordes being these. For altho' (saith he) Christ made his flesh of the bread, and his bloud of rhe wine, it doth not therfore follow by virtue of anie worde here set downe, that we as often as we attempt the same, doe effect it. In which as the reader may plainely perceiue, the authour absolutelie affirmeth not that Preists doe not effect that which Christ effected concerning the reall presence
of his bodie and bloud in the Eucharist, but onely saith there (that is among the wordes of the institution of the Sacrament as they are related, by S. Math. and in which those wordes: doe this in remembrance of me, are not contained) there is not anie worde by virtue of which the same can be concluded of Preists which is ther affirmed of Christ our Sauiour: yet not denying, but expresselie auerring that by other wordes of the scripture, and particu∣larlie by those wordes rehearsed by S. Luke, and S. Paule: doe this in remembrance of me: interpreted according to the exposition, and practise of the auncient Fathers, the making of the reall presence of Christ in the Sacrement is firmelie proued, and established. And hence it is that after he had vttered those wordes which Sir Hūfrey also citeth, tho' not intirely; to wit non potest igitur probari, per vllam scri∣pturam, it can not therfore be proued by anie scripture that either laie man or Priest, as often at he shall make triall of the busines, shall in like manner make the bodie and bloud of Christ of bread and wine, as he him selfe did, since that, neither this is contained in the scripture: immetiatelie after this I say, he sub∣ionines for conclusion of his discourse, this in∣suing clause. By these things I thinke no man will be ignorant, that the certaintie of this mat∣ter (the faith of consecration, as the note in
his margen doth declare) doth not so much depende vpon the Ghospell, as vpon the vse, and custome, which for the space of so manie ages is commended vnto vs by the first Fathers themselues. For it seemed to them, the holie Ghost teaching, so to interpret this parte of the Euangell, and iudged it was so to be vsed in their times: that whosoeuer now would in∣troduce, either an other sense, or an other vse, he should vtterlie resist the holie Ghost, by whose instinct, the former Fathers did deli∣uer this rite, and ceremonie, in the consecration of the Eucharist. Thus plainelie doth Bishop Fisher explicate his owne meaning in that which he had before deliuered somat more obscurelie; so that now I doubt not but this will be sufficient to make the reader capable of the authours true sense, in which I was forced to in∣large my selfe more then the substance of the matter required, the more plainelie to discouer vnto him the fraude of the aduerfarie both in detorting the sense, and mangling the tenor, or continuation of the text of this most Catho∣like, and renowned Prelate. Moreouer Sir Hūfrey allegeth S. Thomas in 3. par. q. 75. ar. 7. as also the Romā Cathecisme at randome. as affirming that the substance of the bread remaines till the last worde of the con∣secration be vttered. But this is nothing to the present purpose in respect that how long souer
the substance of the bread remaines, if at lenght it ceaseth as they both confesse, they both agree with vs Romanists and not with the nouellists, in the faith of transsubstantiation so professedly, that it was more then ordinarie impudencie, and madnes once to mentione them for the contrarie. Now for cōclusion of the secōd paragraffe of his 9. section, Sir Humfrey affirmes in his 115. p. out of Bell: and suauez, that manie writers in our Roman Church professe the tenet of trans∣substantiatien was lately receiued for a point of faith. Which affirmation neuerthelesse is not iustifiable, but false, and calumnious to the authours he cyteth for it, videlicet Scotus, Durand, Tunstal, Ostiensis, and Gaufridus. Which being all the Romanists he either did or could produce (supposing Erasmus whome he likewise alledgeth, is no Romanist in much of his doctrine, in what faith soeuer he ended his life, of which, I am not able to iudge) yet none of these Romanists I say euer affir∣med the doctrine of transsubstantiation to be no point of faith, as I haue aboue sufficiently declared in my answer to euerie one of their te∣stimonies in particular. And touching Bellarmin and suarez the one being alledged by our aduersarie as affirming Scotus to haue said, that the doctrine of tran∣substantiation, was not dogmafidei, a decree of
faith before the Councell of Lateran: the other as aduising to haue him, and those other schoo∣lemen corrected, who teach that the doctrine of transubstantiation is not verie auncient. I professe I haue diligentlie read Scotus in this matter, and I sinde he onelie saith, that what soeuer is auerred to be beleeued in the Councel of the Lateran capite firmiter, is to beheld de substantia fidei as of the substance of faith after that solemne declaration: yet he in no place hath this negatiue: transsubstan∣tiation was not a point of faith before that Councel, not obstanding our aduersaries alle∣gation to the contrarie out of the Cardinal, who, if he conceiued right of his whole dis∣course, could not iudge Scotus to haue absolu∣telie denyed transubstantiation to haue beene a point of faith in it selfe, as Sir Humfrey will haue it: but at the most quoad nos, or in respect of our expresse and publike faith of the same. For that some of Scotus his owne wordes plainelie importe that trāssubstantiatiō is included in the institution of the Eucharist, howe be it, it was not explicitly or expresselie declared for such in all ages, before the solemne declaration, as he termeth it, made in the Generall Councel of Lateran. The wordes of Scotus to this sense and pur∣pose are these. Scot. d. 11. q. 3. ad ar. Non enim in potestate Ecclesiae fuit facere istud verum vel non verum, sed Dei
instituentis. Et secundum intellectum à Deo tra∣ditum Ecclesia explicauit, directa in hoc vt credi∣tur spiritu veritatis. That is. For it was not in the power of the Church to make this (the point of transsubstantiation) true, or not true, but of God the institutour: And according to the vnderstan∣ding deliuered by God, the Church did explicate it, directed, as it is beleeued, by the spirit of trueth. By which ratiocination or discourse, of Scotus, it is most cleare and apparent that the point of transsubstantiation was in it selfe a matter of faith euer since the Sacrament was instituted by Christ, in regarde that it being now a point of faith, it must of necessitie in substance haue beene ordained for such by God himselfe, for that it is not in the power of the Church to make, but onelie to declare, and propose to beleeuers, the articles of Religion, And accor∣ding to this, I say, that suarez (sauing the due respect I owe vnto them both) had yet lesse reason then Bellarmin had concerning Scotus: to taxe the same Scotus and some other di∣uines, as if they had tought that the doctrine of transsubstantiation is not verie auncient. For neyther Scotus as his wordes which I haue re∣lated doe testifie, nor anie other approued di∣uine of the Roman Church, doe vse anie such manner of speech, or at the least haue no such sense in their wordes, as euen by all those their seuerall passages which our aduersarie could
alledge, doth manifestlie appeare. How be it some of them haue not omitted to say, that the worde transsubstantiation hath not beene aun∣cientlie vsed in the Church, but eyther in∣uented by the Fathers of the Lateran Councel, or not long before: or at the most, that there haue beene some in the world of a contrarie opinion to the trueth of transsubstantiation in itselfe: which altho' we Romanists should graunt to be true; yet doth it not argue anie noueltie in the doctrine, but rather the nouel∣litie of some fewe extrauagant wits, as heretiks or corrigible Catholikes, in opposing the same, which otherwise was generallie main∣tained by the rest of the Orthodox diuines in all succeeding ages: the antiquitie of which doctrine, euen those same authorities which the same Scotus himselfe professeth to be pro∣duced by him out of S. Ambrose, Scot. d. 11. quest. 3. §. quāt. ergo. to the num∣ber of 11. doe euidentlie conuince, yet further adding that manie others are alledged cap. de consecrat. and by the master in his 10. and 11. distinction. Wherefore in my opinion both Bellarmin and suarez might much better haue spared to passe their censures in that manner vpon anie Catholike diuines supposing such reprehensions serue for little or no other vse, then to aforde our aduersaries the nouelists newe occasion and matter of contention with∣out eyther necessitie or conueniencie, of which
the present fact of Sir Humfrey lind euen in this place, doth alreadie yealde vs some expe∣rience. In the last place the knight citeth for his tenet Erasmus but he might haue saued the labour for that the Romanists hould him absolutely for none of theirs (as in like manner neither doe they acknowledge wicklif and the waldensians which neuertelesse he was not ashamed to produce for his tenet though onely by waye of omission) howbeit in this particular Erasmus onely affirmeth that it was late before the Church definde it, which is not contrarie to the certainetie of the doctrine in it selfe, but onely a superficiall relation of the time when it was declared expressely for a matter of faith or infalible trueth in that nature. And now of this and the rest of the testimo∣nies which haue beene discussed in this para∣graffe which if it had not beene for the satis∣faction of the common people which may easily be deluded by them I would neuer haue prosecuted so largely, as containinge noething worthie of a scholers labour: it may I say be easily collected and perceiued how fondly he concludeth his whole dis∣course as if he had made it appeare that the reformed faith touching the spirituall and sa∣cramentall participation of Christs bodie, had beene generally beleeued and taugh both in
the former and later ages, and as if the doctrine of transsubstantiation had noe vnity among the Romish authours, nor vniuersalitie among the auncient Fathers, nor certainety in the scriptures. This I say is a most impudent vaunt of the bragadocho knight, for that it hath beene already made manifest by the same testimonies which he produceth against the Roman doctrine, that not onely the antiqui∣tie and vniuersalitie of the same in those two points stands firme and sound, but that there is no antiquitie or vniuersalitie at all to be found in the doctrine of the reformed Churhes in those particulars: to say nothing of other points of theit deformed faith, and so this shall suffice for the censure of this paragraffe which as it is larger in wordes then the former so deserueth it a larger sentence of condem∣nation as conteining noething more but a greater multitude of diuerse sorts of ill procee∣ding. The third paragraffe is of priuate Masse in which for the honour as I suppose which he beareth towards the mother Church he pla∣ceth her definition in the first ranke, and then afterwardes the article of his owne Church. The decree of the councell of Trent. ses. 22. can. 8. is this. If ame shall say that Masses in which the Priest alone doth communicate are
vnlawfull and therefore ought to be abroga∣red, let him be accursed, but the article of the reformed Church will not haue it so, but pro∣testeth that priuate Masses that is the recea∣uing of the Eucharist by the Priest alone with out a competent number of communicants is contrarie to te institution of Christ and the practise of the primatiue Church. Thus the knight setteth downe the matter of disputatiō, thus he placeth the two armies in battle aray with their contrarie collours one confronting the other. And this speciall difference I note in them, that the one armie consists of milites veterani that is of ould Roman souldiers gathered out of the whole Roman Empire and Christian world, the other of fresh men fetched from a corner of the world that is from Ireland. Loe heere the armies set in order, now let vs see who car∣ries away the victorie. You may perceiue by Sir Humfreys relation that the Councell spea∣keth with authoritie, it intimateth those aged Synods of the primatiue Church, it doth so ful∣minate that it maketh the reformed brothers tremble to heere it. Naye it seemes it so daun∣teth the valiant knight that he found no other refuge then to flie to Irelād for an article of his faith. A man would rather haue expected that to confront the Councell of Trent and it defi∣nition,
Sir Humfrey would haue had recourse to the Councell of Gapp. or of Dort, or to some consistorie assemblie of Geneua, or to an Acte of an English Parleament. But alas the poore Caualier found so small hope of assi∣stance in these, that he was constrained to saile to Ireland for an Irish article as he himselfe doth tearme it. True it is the Irish article di∣rectlie opposeth the definition of the Councell, but by what authority I know not, yet certaine it is that in the Coūcell of Trent there were as∣sembled by themselues or their legates, or at the least conuented, all the Princes both of the ould and newe Religion, and Prelates of the Christian world, as the Bull of indiction, and the oration had in the last session most plaine∣lie testifie. And so the authoritie of this Synod euen in common sense must needes be verie great: but the authoritie of the articles which our knight opposeth to the Councell, what authoritie they had, is yet vnknowne: nei∣ther could they possible haue anie authori∣tie of greate moment, for that they were ga∣thered onelie out of a verie small corner of the Christian world, and farre inferiour in vertue, learning, and other naturall parts to the most greate, graue and venerable number of the members of the foresaid Synod. Wherefore let the indifferēt reader iudge whether of these two armies is to be followed. The authours of the article protest that priuate Masse is contra∣rie
to the institution of Christ and the practice of the Church, and hence the knight inferreth that it is vnlawfull and therefore to be abroga∣ted: and farther that the Councell of Trent by cursing those who hould that masses in which the Priest alone doth comunicate are vnlawfull and ought to be abrogated, doth cursse Christ that ordeined it and God that commaunded vs to obserue it. Heere you see the knight tal∣keth with as greate authoritie as if he were the greatest graduate, either in Oxford or Cam∣bridge, neuerthelesse he must giue him leaue who is no graduate to let him knowe that he fayleth mightilie in his colection, yet not so much in the gradation it selfe as in the premi∣ses, which being either false or at the least aequi∣uocall, the conclusion must of necessitie be faul∣tie. That which deceiued him is his Irish ar∣ticle of faith in that it affirmeth the receiuing of the Eucharist without a competent number of comunicants, is contrarie to the institution of Christ. For though it is true that when Christ instituted the Sacrament, he did actual∣lie comunicate those that were present, yet it is not true that he included in the institution of it that iust so in all occasions it should be practi∣zed, neither gaue he anie negatiue precept the∣rein in that respect, but onelie an affirmatiue which according to it nature, not allwayes but onelie according to time, place, and persons,
obledgeth. So that the distribution is neither anie essentiall parte of the Sacrament, nor yet anie necessarie propertie of it to be in all occa∣sions exercised, but rather appertaineth onelie to the due administration of it according to the foresaid circumstances: and heerein consists the aequiuocation of the first article. Now touching the second part which affir∣meth that the receiuing of the Priests alone is cōtrarie to the practice of the primatiue church, is also equiuocall, for if it meanes that the pri∣matiue Church did in all circumstāces of time, place, and persons, practice the same either by virtue of Christs institution or commaund, so it is false as we haue alreadie showed: but if it meanes onely that indeede so it was practized in the primatiue Church either alwaies, or for the moste parte, yet not as a thing alsolutely necessarie either by virtue of Christs institu∣tion or precept, so we cannot deny but that it is true which the second parte of the article affirmeth, but then this being a matter in this sense either of indifferencie or at the most of greater merit and perfection, it might law∣fully be altered by an introduction of the con∣trarie custome or practise of the Church, especially the communicating or not commu∣nicating of the auditours of euerie Masse being a thing wholelie depending vpon the deuotion of the people themselues. Which deuotion
although the Church could haue desired it had continued in the same feruour in which it was in those primitiue times, neuerthelesse ther was no reason why either she should obledge the people to the same, or yet that the Preist for want of deuotion in the people, should omitte his owne, and cease to exercise so high and profitable a function to the members of the whole Church as is the publique liturgie and common praier of the same. And truelie this is a matter so conformable to reason and pietie that if it were not that our aduersaries are quite possessed with a spirit of cōtradiction they would neuer contend so much aboute it as they doe, Especially supposing that of all points of controuersie betweene them and vs that is of the least moment, and a thing for which they haue the smalest reason to striue as well because they themselues reiect all sorts of Masses as vaine and superstitious whether they be priuate or publique, with communion of the people or without: as also because euen they themselues after their newe manner cele∣brate their owne liturgie as they call it, often∣times yea most ordinarily not onely without the comunion of the people, but euen with out the comunion of either Priest or clarke, as is euident by the most common practise of all the reformed Churches, which onely with a drie fothering passe the greater part of the
sūdaies of the whole yeere. And yet these same Zealous brothers are so Crosse in their procee∣dinge that they are not ashamed to reprehend in vs the same which they thēselues ordinarily practise in a much worse manner. In regard of which preposterous dealing of theirs in my opi∣nion we may not vnaptlie applie vnto them the saying of a certaine ingenious Protestant in his description of a Puritan, to wit that they are become so crosse in their teaching, that he thinkes verily, that if the Roman Church should inioyne the puting on of cleane shirts euery sunday, rather then obey her precept, they would goe lowsie.Ouerb. Caract. But besides this Sir Humfrey for the proofe of his Irish faith alledgeth scripture out of S. Matth. 26. Marke 14. Luke 22. but the wordes he citeth doe not argue Christs institu∣tiō in both kindes in respect of all sortes of peo∣ple, Accepit Iesus pa∣nem bene∣dixit dedit discipu∣lis suis, & dixit accipite & manduca∣te. but onely his action, manner of administra∣tion, not his ordination. we know, as well as the reformers Christ did comunicate his bodie and bloud to all his disciples there pre∣sent at the institution of the Sacrament, euen to the traitour Iudas as many deuines doe hould, but we know with all he did not ordeine it so to be administred in all occasions. Neither doe we finde one worde of commaund in the whole bible by virtue of which the Priests are inioined to celebrate this misterie alwayes iust
in the same manner that Christ did: And otherwise if we should be so tied to euery cir∣cumstance which Christ himselfe vsed and particularie to giue the communion to all that are present, we should be bound to giue it to those also which we know are vnprepared for it, nay euen to excommunicated persons and to such traitors as Iudas. That which neuerthe∣lesse I persuad myselfe the most pure precisian of them all will scarsely doe, though otherwise I hould thē not for very scrupulous in that na∣ture so they know the receiuers to be mēbers of their cōgregation. And touching the foresaid citation out of the Euangelists, it is to be noted that because Sir Hum. will not haue his reader heare of the consecration of the Sacrament which the reformers neuer vse, in their Churches, therfore he left out the wordes, and he blessed it, puting onely the wordes of thākes giuing, whereas yet the Greeke  signifies both blessing and giuing thankes, & therefore when our Sauiour multiplied miraculously the fishes Luc. 9. the Euangelist saith  he blessed them. The knight also citeth a place of S. Paule 1. Cor. 11. But the Apostle indeed reprehen∣deth there the fault of the richer Corin∣thians in that they did exclude or at the least not expect the poorer sorte to eate the vsuall supper with them, when they met to gether to
receiue the blessed Sacrament, but giueth no precept to them that all that are present should euerie time they did meete in the Church actually receiue the communion, with the Preist: or that the Preist ougth not in anie case to celebrate without a competent number of communicants, which is our question in this place: but at the most S. Paule there ordaines that when the people comes together to eate either the vsuall and common supper, or the bodie and bloude of Christ in the Sacrament, they vncharitablie exclude not or preuent one an other, but expect, and doe it with order and sobrietie, and like brethren together, without scisme or separation: and as Christ himselfe did who imparted his supper most louinglie to his disciples there present without exception of persons: to which altho' I admit the same S. Paule in parte alludes in his first verse of this chapter; saying: be you followers of me as I also of Christ, yet not in that sense as if he had per∣suaded the Corinthians that our Sauiour com∣maunded that the Eucharist should neuer be celebrated by the Preist alone with our recei∣uers, as our aduersarie foundlie infers for profe of the article he opposeth to the Councell of Trent. Neyther is the doctrine of that article in anie sorte fauoured by S. Augustin in his 118. Epistle cited by Sir Humfrey: he onelie there affirming at the most that the Apostle
speaketh of the Eucharist, when he saith those wordes: Propter quod fratres cum conuenitis ad manducandum inuicem expectate. &c. That is in English: Therefore my brethren, when you come to eate, expect one an other &c. Which wordes eyther of S. Augustin, or those of the Apostle, are not contrarie to the celebration of priuate Masses except it be in the imagination of the Nouellists, as I haue sufficientlie aboue declared: To omit that the greater parte of di∣uines both auncient & moderne, expounde not those wordes of S. Paule rather of the Eucharist but of the common supper, the trueth of which exposition the text itselfe, in my iudgemēt, doth plainely conuince. Yet not to stand vpon this it is sufficient for the defence of the doctrine of the Councell of Trent, in this particular and confutation of the contrarie position, that ney∣ther in the cited place of S. Paule, nor in anie other place of scripture, priuate communion, or receiuing of the Preist alone without other cōpanie, is affirmed to be repugnant to Christs institution: nor condemned as vnlawfull eyther by Sainct Augustin or anie other Orthodox writer. But yet I must further aduertise the reader that I perceiue Sir Humfrey hath not dealte so faithfully as he ought to haue, in his recitall of S. Paules wordes, putting in by parenthesis and in the same letter those (to eate the lords sup∣per)
which wordes neuerthelesse S. Paule hath not, at the least in that place, and then omit∣ing the first wordes of the next verse he connecteth them with the latter parte of the same verse, to wit: that you come not together to iudgement. Procuring by this fraude to per∣suade his reader that those wordes containe the penaltie due to those whoe communicate not with the Preist and the rest of the people which directly they doe not, but rather the punishment amenaced by the Apostle to such as by excluding vncharitably ther fel∣lowes from participation of the oblations, or common supper then vsed in the Church, and by other abuses and sinnes mentioned in this Epistle, indignelie receiue the bodie, & bloud of Christ in the Eucharist. And yet not to stand vpon these particular circumstances, certaine, it is that none of them could yeald anie warrant at all for Sir Hum∣frey to alter the tenour of the Apostles wordes either by addition, or transposition of them. Sir Humfrey addeth also that Sainct Paule 1. Cor. 10. calleth the Eucharist the communion. But he might haue saued labour in citing scripture, the commonly receiued phrase both by vs and them being sufficient to prooue that. And yet he might much better haue spared the interpretation of the worde it
selfe for whether his etimology be true or false, which I will not stand to examen, certaine it is that no iudicious man can thence inferre that all the people present at Masse must of neces∣sity communicate, but it onely foloweth that when they actually receiue the Sacramēt, they receiue the Communion as a common vnion not onely of Preist & people but also and ceefly of the people among themselues, according to the wordes of the same Apostle in his next chapter and 33. verse cum conuenitis, when you come together to eate expect one-another &c. And much like as he did proceede in the former place of S. Paule, so doth he in this: The cup of blessing which we blesse, is it not the communion of the bloud of Christ? Where for, communication he puts communion. And yet the scope and sense of the Apostle in this place is not of the communion of Preist and people, nor prescribes he anie rule in that nature, but onelie reprehendes those who voluntarily and without ignorance eate idolothytes or meates sacrifyced to Idols, saying that as those who receiue the bodie and bloud of Christ comuni∣cate or are ioyned in societie with him: so they who of knowledge eate things offered to Idols are made companions of the deuill. And the∣refore the same Apostle in the latter parte of his 20. verse saith thus. And I will not haue you become fellowes to deuils. And presentlie in the
next verse he addes: You can not drinke the chalis of our Lord, and the chalis of deuils. So that the whole tenour of the chapter afor∣deth not a worde or letter for Sir Humfreyes purpose. Wherefore let him examen his con∣science diligentlie, and he will easilie finde that neyther the one place nor the other proue anie thing else in this matter then his owne dishonest dealing, and his abuse of the sacred text of scripture. Especiallie considering that in the first place, the Apostle repre∣hendes not the Corinthians so much because they did not communicate together, but cheefelie because the rich did vnchristianlie exclude the poore. Which case as the reader may easilie perceiue, hath no place in the Masses of the Roman Church, where none are excluded but rather expresselie exhorted vnto the communion, as the verie same decree of the Tridentine Councel which our aduer∣sarie him produces, doth sufficientlie declare in these wordes. Optaret quidem sacrosancta Synodus &c. The Sacrosaint Synod could wish that the faithfull people which assiste at euerie masse would communicate with the Preist, not onelie spi∣rituallie, but also by Sacramentall reception. Thus the Councel. Which wordes alone doubtlesse were sufficient not onelie to iustifie the practise of the present Roman Church in this particu∣lar, but also to satisfie the aduerse parte, if their
importunitie were not so exobbitant, that they will rather suffer pore Christians to passe out of the world without that diuine viaticum or∣dained by God for the confort of their soules, & defense against their enimies in that dāgerous trance, then suffer them to receiue it without a competent number as they tearme it: which impious order of theirs may be seene in their booke of common prayer title of the communion of the sicke: not obstanding our Sauiours most strict, and generall charge affirming that vn∣lesse we eate his flesh, and drinke his bloud, we cannot haue life in vs. But certaine it is that in this as is in other matters the pretensiue reformers may ritelie be compared to the Pha∣risees, exolantes culicem, camelum autem glucien∣tes I who straine a gnat, and swallowe a camel, in that they stande so peremptorilie vpon the communion of the people with the Preist in all occasions which is but a circumstance of the precept: and yet make no scruple of vio∣lating the precept itselfe euen in time of it grea∣test necessitie and obligation. But this I speake onelie vpon supposition their communion were sounde and according to Christs insti∣tion, for taking it as it is, the want of it is no losse to the not receiuers of it: and so I leaue them to the generall liberty they vsurpe as well in this as in other matters of Religion, and auncient practise of the Church.
Furthermore the knight citeth the coūcell of Nāts, to proue his tenet, but most ridiculously. For that there is not a worde touching the cō∣muniō in all that text which he citeth. Definiuit. Sanctum Conciliū vt nullus presbyter praesumat solus mis∣sam canta∣re. Cassan∣der. p. 83. And the trueth is the councell onely reprehendeth the saying of Masse with out a clarke, or Minister as it seemes some cloisters of monkes did accu∣stome to doe in those times, so you see this is quite out of the purpose, as is also another citation out of Innocent the third libr. 2. c. 24. Illos igi∣tur (An∣gelos) quos ha∣bemus in oratio∣ne partici∣pes habe∣mus in glorifica∣tione con∣sortes. In∣noc. lib. 2. 24. fine. he onely saying that it is piously to be beleeued that the Angells of God doe assist at Masse accompaning those that praie. Not speaking a worde good or bad of the communion of the people in that place. Lastlie Sir Humfrey alledgeth the te∣stimonies of diuerse Romanists which hee calleth the confession of his aduersaries, that priuate Masse was altogether vnknowne to the primatiue Church. But I answer that when the knight cited those authours he ought to haue remembred what hee was to proue ac∣cording to the Irish article which he vnderta∣keth to defend and according to his owne position viz. That priuate Masse is contrarie to Christs institution, and vnlawfull, and to be abrogated. This then he ought to haue proued if he ment to proue anie thing against the Ro∣man doctrine. But in steede of this which he will neuer be able to proue, he proueth at the
most by the foresaid testimonies, onelie that which the Romanists, doe not denie, to wit that the primatiue Church did practice the ad∣ministration of the Eucharist to those that were present, but he proueth not that either that Church did soe in all occasions, nor that she held it necessarie by virtue of anie lawe, or institution of Christ, and so he laboureth in vaine as well in this as he hath done in other proofes often times before. Neither is this pre∣sent point of Controuersie betwene vs and the reformers about the auncient custome of the primatiue Church concerning the communion of the people present at the Liturgie, but whe∣ther it is contrarie to Christs institution or commaunde to celebrate priuate masses? the affirmatiue of which question excepting Cas∣sander (whome I haue alreadie aduertised the reader to be no Romanist) nay nor yet Cassan∣der himselfe nor anie one of the cited testi∣monies doth proue. Nay there is not one worde in anie of the places cited touching anie such doctrine or precept of the Primatiue Church but onelie mention is made of the fact of auncient Christians in that particular, with an addition of their owne verdit as houlding it for more profitable to the receiuers to commu∣nicate at euerie Masse, if their deuotion were so much extended as in those more feruorous times of the primatiue spirit it appeeres to haue
bene. And although not onelie all or most of the authours rehearsed, but also the Councell of Trent itselfe doth hould the foresaid practi∣ce of the auncient Church to be more fruitefull for the Laytie then the custome of more mo∣derne ages: yet doth Sir Humfrey most absur∣delie hence inferre either the noueltie of the Roman doctrine, or the antiquitie of his owne. For that as we haue showed alreadie neither in anie of the cited authours nor in the Coun∣cell of Trent it selfe, as their wordes doe wit∣nesse, is there anie mention of doctrine or pre∣cept of the Primatiue Church but onelie of her fact and practice, from whence also may most easilie appeere the greate impertinencie of a further illation which the knight doth make concluding the greater fruitfulnes of his owne communion then of ours, whereas indeede his being no true communion at all, as not con∣taining that which according to the institution of Christ ought truelie and reallie to be in it, and so communicated truelie and reallie to the people, and not by figure and faith onelie, I meane the bodie and bloud of Christ, certaine it is that no such inference can be made out of anie comparison made betwene the Catholike communion and his owne, in regard there is no true paritie or similitude to be founde in them: and moreouer it is so farre from being confessed by the cited authours that the communion of
the reformers is more fruitfull then their owne, that they teach expresselie that according to the doctrine of the reformed Churches tou∣ching the reall presence, the receiuers of their Sacrament can receiue no fruite at all. And now let this suffice for anser to those authours In generall: Yet because it may be my aduersa∣rie will not be satisfied with this generall anser alone, as also because I finde he hath vsed not a little of his vsuall proceeding in want of fidelitie in the citation of the authours, I ame content to descend to particulars, and examen them in order. The first the knight cites, is Cochlaeus out of Cassander, but neither he nor Cassander haue anie thing in that place against priuate Masse, but onelie testifie what the cu∣stome of the auncient Church was, which, as I haue alreadie declared, is impertinent to this purpose. Besides Sir Humfrey translates Co∣chleus wordes corruptedlie, for he doth not say that the holie Goste hath thought vs a remedie against the slouthfulnes of the Preists in cele∣brating of priuate Masse, but he saith, the holie Ghost hath inuented and introduced a pious supplie of this negligence by the frequentation of such Masses as Preists celebrate alone. So by inuerting the wordes, the malitious knight imposeth v∣pon the Preists onely for a faulte that which Cochleus calles a remedie prouided by the holie Gost to supplie the faulte of the lesse de∣uoute
sorte of people as well as the defect of the Preists. Which defect neuerthelesse Cho∣cleus placeth not in their slouthfulnesse in ce∣lebrating priuate Masses: but in not exhorting the laytie to communicate at euerie Masse, as his wordes sufficiently declare. In the second place he cites Durand myma∣tensis who as speaking onelie of the custome of the auncient Church and consequentlie not against the Romanists, yet he corruptes him both in that for Domino dicente, he translates; according to Christs commaunde: as also by lea∣uing out his insuing wordes which declare the reason of the alteration of that auncient cu∣stome. Sed excrescente fidelium multitudine tra∣ditur institutum vt tantum Dominicis diebus com∣municarent. Durand. rat. lib. 4. c. 53. But the multitude of beleeuers increa∣sing, it is deliuered vnto vs to haue beene institu∣ded that they should communicate onelie on sun∣dayes. Odo vpon the Canon doth not disproue pri∣uate Masse, but onelie relates the different cu∣stomes of the Church in different times. Cum primitus missae sine collecta non fierent, postea mos inoleuit Ecclesiae solitarias, & maxime in Caenobijs, fieri missas. d. 2. in Can. circa init. The same I say of Belethus, yet Sir Humfrey omits the rest of his wordes. As he did in the testimonie of durand. Hugo in spec.In the testimonie of Card. Hugo who wit∣nesseth
onelie the same in substance, he addes the worde together, which is not in the text, to mend his ill market, also letting slip some of his wordes which denote the cause of the chan∣ge of the auncient vse, which are these. Initio nas∣centis Ec∣clesiae Christiani qui cele∣brationi Missae ad e∣rant, post acceptam pacem cō∣municare solebant. Durantus de rit. cap. 58. Sed propter peccatum circumstans nos, statutum est vt communicaremus terin anno solum. But by rea∣son of sinne compassing vs about (saith Hugo) it was determined that we should communi∣cate onelie thrise a yeare. And in the next allegation of Tolosanus who sayth no other then the rest, he translates mysterie for Masse. In the citation of Mycrologus the craftilie omits: iuxta antiquos Canones: And for ante obla∣tionem he translates before cōmunion, because he will not haue his reader to heare that either the communion of the people in euerie Masse might seeme to be an Ecclesiasticall custome or lawe onelie, or that there is anie such matter as oblation in the celebration of diuine seruice, for that they themselues haue it not in their newe Raphsodie. For Cassanders authoritie we do not care. And yet I can not finde in Mycrologus those wordes which Cassander and Sir Humfrey al∣ledge out of him, to wit, it can not properlie be called a communion except some besides the Preist doe communicate. How be it the same Cassan∣der in the same place doth not condemne pri∣uate Masses for a Sacrilegious action, or to be
prohibited, as Sir Humfrey and the rest of the Nouellists commonlie maintaine: But onelie playing the parte of a Pacifyer, which he pro∣fesseth, persuades that the auncient custome may be restored. Nay and he addes further and that truelie, that the Preists say when they celebrate priuatelie, they doe not participate of the Sacrament in their owne priuate name, but in the name of the Church and people: which doubtlesse in reason is sufficient to make it a true communion, if otherwise it were not. And as for Mycrologus, certaine it is that he is no condemner of priuate Masse, how soeuer he might esteeme that communion lesse proper, according to the Etymon of the worde, Vid. Cas∣sander. pag. 998. in which more then one doe not actuallie receiue, which is all he intendes, if anie such saying he hath, which notwithstanding is not contrarie to the doctrine or practise of the Romanists. Innocentius tertius onelie explicates the ancient custome of the Church touching the commu∣nion of the people at euetie Masse, and the change of it at seuarall times and by degrees. And surelie if we consider that the Nouelists hould this Pope for one of their greatest oppo∣sites in doctrine, it were madnesses to imagin that he should in anie sorte fauoure their te∣nets. And because I reflected that Innocentius as being a Pope had no reason to finde anie greater fauour at Sir Humfreys hands then o∣ther
Romanists haue founde, vpon vewe of the place I discouered that he had falselie transla∣ted some parte of Innocentius wordes, which make against him to wit, for these wordes: quia nec hoc digne potuit obseruari, he translates: by reason this custome was neglected, whe∣reas he should haue put in English: Because neither this could be dignely, or with due reuerence obserued: By which false translation he in∣uertes the true cause of the altetation of the fo∣resaid custome. Hoffmeisterus onelie declares the publicitie of the auncient custome with a desire that en∣deauours may be vsed for the restitution of it, with whome we Romanists all ioyne to our power; so this is out of the compasse of our question. The allegation of Doctour Harding who speakes much to the same purpose, I haue ansered in an other place and showed the de∣ceite of the relatour, altho' in this place I finde he rehearses his wordes truelie, by reason it had auailed him nothing to haue here abused him. Iustinian makes no mention of either pri∣uate or publike Masses but onelie of the parti∣cipation of one consecrated bread or loafe to signifie more expresselie the vnion of charitie, which is not to this purpose: as neither is the place of Bellarmin following lib. 2. de missa cap. 9. as afterwardes I will declare.
But to returne to Doctour Harding, it is true I find Sir Humfrey cytes him towardes the end of the same paragraffe out of Iewell, which altho' he makes nothing for the proofe of his intent in this place, but is onelie brought in vpon the by to enlarge and fournish his dis∣course, as I suppose, yet doth he abuse that learned diuine in that he leaueth out one spe∣ciall reason which he alledges why the prima∣tiue Catholikes vsed to communicate euerie day with the Preist, because, sayth he, they looking hourelie to be catched & put to death by the Panimes (I relate the sense not the for∣mall wordes) should not departe without the viaticum. Which wordes being the verie harte of the authours sentence, Sir Humfrey verie slylie omits it, as if it were not to the purpose, and by that meanes he most deformedlie cou∣ples the head and the heeles together, which corruption altho' it doth not much auaile him, yet it seemes he makes a recreation of that arte, and so he will rather playe smale game then sit out. Lastelie the wordes of Iustinian taken out of his Commentarie vpon 1. Cor 10. are im∣pertinent, for he does not affirme that the Communion directlie was giuen to all that were present, as his wordes cited by the knight doe testifie, which authour being the laste which he cites, and no more to his purpose
then the rest, let this suffice for the censure of the contents of this whole paragraffe, and par∣ticularlie for the confutation of that aspersion of Noueltie, and corruption with the knight doth indeuore calumniouslie to cast vpon the Roman Creede, it nowe being plainelie cleered and iustified by that which hath beene said, and he himselfe conuinced of false dealing and forgerie. The paragraffe insueing is of the seuen Sa∣cramēts. And to be plaine with Sir Humfrey, I say that in the verie entrance of his treatie he telleth a plaine lie to his reader, affirming the Romanists to relie wholie vpon the Councell of Trent in this pointe. For this Councell ex∣presselie hath in the margent of the decree of the septenarie number of Sacraments, the Councell of Florence, and in the decrees of euerie seuerall Sacrament there is reference to scriptures, Councels and Fathers, as the mar∣gines doe testifie. Wherefore thus the knight beginneth, and how he will proceed I know not, but yet for the most parte an ill beginning makes an ill ending. First he reprehendeth Bellarmin for saying that the authoritie of the Councell of Trent if there were no other ought to suffice for proofe of the septinarie number of the Sacra∣ments. But he might with farre greater reason haue reprehend both his owne temeritie and
the presumption of the reformed Churches. Which without anie such authoritie as the Councell of Trent hath, doe denie the foresaid number of Sacraments. Besides that Bellar∣mins meaning is not that the Coūcell of Trent hath sufficient authoritie to define the same without foundation of the worde of God, or without scripture as it seemes Sir Humfrey fal∣selie supposeth, but that supposing such a foun∣dation, it hath infallible power to declare the same as conformeable to trueth & to the aun∣cient doctrine and practise of the Church in former ages, and consequentlie as a matter of faith. And certainelie that Church which hath not this authoritie is no true Church nor such an one as is described in the scriptures, but a meere conuenticle or Scismaticall cōgregation vnsuteable to the worde of God. And whereas it seemes straunge to Sir Humfrey that accor∣ding to Bellarmine, one testimonie of a late Councell might suffice for the establishing of an article of faith for that by his owne tenet such an article requires both antiquitie, vni∣uersalitie and consent: let him but truelie and sincerelie consider what Bellarmines meaning is, and he will presentlie cease to maruell at his position. He must therefore know that whe∣reas Bellarmin affirmeth that the Councell of Trent alone might bee sufficient to declare vn∣to the whole Church as an infallible trueth
that the number of Sacraments properlie and truelie so called is no more nor lesse then sea∣uen, his meaning is that because the foresaid Councell is of as greate authoritie as other ge∣nerall Councells euer haue had in times past, it ought to haue the same credit in the present Church touching those points which it hath defined, that they had in the Church of their times in such matters as they then defined, and consequentlie that as those points of doctrine which notwithstāding they had beene doubt∣full before, were neuerthelesse by the same Councels determined as certaine and infallible doctrine of faith without anie defect of anti∣quitie vniuersalitie, or consent, & in such man∣ner as all the whole Christian world was boūd vnder paine of damnation to beleeue it, as is manifest in the consubstantiallitie of the second person definde in the Councell of Nice, the di∣uinitie of the third person in the first Councell of Constantinople, the vnitie of the person of Christ in the Ephesin, and the duplicitie or distinction of his natures in the Coun∣cell of Calcedon, as also the duplicitie or di∣stinction of his wills in the sixt Councell cele∣brated at Constantinople: so in like manner ought the present Church to doe with the Councell of Trent in all it definitions, and par∣ticularlie in the definition of the number of the seuen Sacraments, which definition ought to
be held for certaine as well as the former deter∣minations of the foresaid Councels, both in res∣pect it was decreed by the authoritie of the same succeeding Church by which those defi∣nitions were made, as also in regard it hath an∣tiquitie, vniuersalitie, and consent, both in as∣much as it is deduced from the scriptures by infallible authoritie, and also for that we doe not finde anie either of the auncient Fathers, or moderne diuines to haue denied the Sacra∣ments to be seuen in number, or affirmed them to be onelie two as the reformers commonlie teach. Now for the second reprehension which Sir Humfrey maketh of Bellarmin for saying, that if we take away the credit of the present Church and present Councell of Trent, the decrees of all other Councels, nay euen Chri∣stian faith it selfe might be called in question: this reprehension I say is as friuolous as the former, for that according to both Bellarmines supposition and the trueth itselfe, the present Roman Church and Councell of Trent, being of the same authoritie, as I haue aboue decla∣red, with the Church and Councels of more auncient times, and also it being euident that as in those daies diuerse points of doctrine haue bene called in question by the heretikes of those times, so they might at this present be brought againe in doubt by others, as expe∣rience
itselfe hath taught vs both euen in those same matters which in former times haue bene definde, as appeereth by the heresie of the new Trinitarians, and others: as also in other truethes which as yet were euer held in the Church for certaine, all this I say being most apparantlie true and out of all manner of doubt among the learned sorte of people; doubtlesse if, as Bellarmine saith, we take awaie the credit of the present Church and present Councell of Trent, or others which heereafter may be as∣sembled, there will be no power lefte whereby to suppresse such new oppinions, and errours, as by heretikes in diuers times and occasions may be broached contrarie to the Christian faith as well concerning matters alreadie de∣termined in former Councells, as also touching such new doctrine as may hereafter be inuen∣ted by other sectaries, of which we haue too much experience in the Nouellists of these our dayes who call in questiō diuers points defined in former Synods, of which we haue instances in the doctrine of the distinction of the diuine persons questioned by the new Trinitarians, of the doctrine aboute the lawfull vse and honour of images defined in the 7. Generall Councell the doctrine of transubstantiation in the Coun∣cell of Lateran. The number of the Sacraments and the like reiected euen by Sir Humfrey him selfe and his fellowes: and consequentlie that
which Bellarmine affirmeth in this sense is most plaine and certaine and so farre from Atheisme, as the contrarie is from trueth it selfe. And if Bellarmine be reprehensible for equalizing the present Church and Councells with those of auncient times, suerlie the refor∣mers themselues are farre more faultie and guiltie in this kinde, for that they doe not equa∣lize but also preferre the authoritie of their owne present Congregations and Parleaments before the Church and Councells of farre more auncient times then is the date of their doctrine and religion. And this they doe not onelie in these points of doctrine which the later Councells haue determined against the later errours of Sectaries, as the knight doth odiouslie sugiest, but also in some articles of most auncient faith and doctrine, as is mani∣festlie apparant in the pointe of the reall pre∣sente, iustification, and the like. And as for the reason which Sir Humfrey yeeldeth against the authoritie of the present Church, alledging that the worde of Christ is alone sufficient for the faith of all beleeuing Christians; this reason I say is of no force, it is but an ould song of the Puritans which hath beene a thousand times repeated by the refor∣mers, and as osten refuted by the Romanists. And who denyes but that the worde of God certainelie knowē for such, & truely interpre∣ted,
and declared, is sufficient for the faith of all Christiās? but to this who doth not also knowe that the authoritie of the Church is necessarie in all times and places? nay whoe doth not see that the one of necessaritie and as it were in∣trinsically inuolueth the other, and that in such sorte that the sectaries by excluding the infalible authouritie of the present Church from the sufficientie of the scrpitures doe no∣thing lesse then deny that parte of the scripture which commendeth vnto vs the constant and perpetually successiue authority of the Church till the confommation of the worlde. And if Sir Humfrey had considered the reason which Bellarmin yeeldes, surely he could not so much haue marauiled that he giues so great authority to the councell of Trēt, and present Church, for saith hee, if we take that away we haue no infallible testimonie that the former Councells were euer extant & that they were legitimate and that they defined this or that point of do∣ctrine &c. for the mention which historians make of those councells is but a humane te∣stimonie subiect to falsitie, thus Bell. all which discourse of his because he might haue more colour to complaine of him, and the the Romā Church, the insyncere knight resolued to keep it from the eyes of his reader. True it is that the reformers out of their greate purenesse or rather out of their pure madnesse, doe
vsually exclaime against the supposed supersti∣tions of the Roman Church, but the Roma∣nists may farre more iustly complaine of them in the same kinde, in regarde that, superstition is noething els addording to the etimologie of the worde, but superfluous religion, and to tie the worde of God to the precise written caracter alone, in my conceipt, is the highest degree of superstition that can be imagined, because these precisians by that meanes doe so excessiuelie, and superfluously extoll the wri∣ten worde, that by their exclusiue hiperbole of the sufficiencie of it alone, they renounce all other sortes of worde of God, either preached or otherwise deliuered to the Church, either in plaine tearmes or at the least by necessarie sequelle, which is noething els but out of a superfluous precisenes, to assigne limits to that which is illimitable, and boundes to that which is infinite, and consequently out of a supersti∣tious zeale of religion to destroyall true reli∣gion, and the true worde of God it selfe. Furthermore for the sufficiencie of the writ∣ten worde preciselie, the knight citeth the Apostle S. Paule act. 20. vers. 27. were he saith so: I haue not shunned to declare vnto you all the councell of God. but this is so impertinentlie alledged that it needes no answer: it being manifest that the Apostle neither speaketh of scripture alone, nor intendeth to exclude other
partes of the worde of God, nor yet so to limit that which he himselfe writ or spoake as if he had deliuered in writing all the doctrine with out exception which is any waie necessarie to the saluation of euerie mans soule both in ge∣nerall and in particular. Otherwise it would follow that all which the rest of the sacred writers haue published in the scriptures were superfluous and no way necessarie to haue beene penned. Besides that S. Paule in the place cited, saith not that he hath written, but onely that he hath declared vnto them all the councell of God, and so he neither in wordes nor sēse fauoureth the reformers tenet of the all suf∣ciencie of the writtē worde but rather Sir Hū∣frey is here to be noted for a corruptor of the text. And no lesse idlely doth the knight cite for the same purpose the testimonie of Bellarm. his meaning being so farre from this matter as that if hee were not his aeuersarie as he is most plai∣nelie euen in this point, yet had it beene meere madnesse to haue as much as named him in this darticular, and so perhaps for this reason onely he was ashamed to quote the place, yet as comonly he doth in other occasions. Finally for conclusion of his disproofe of the authoritie of the present Roman Church, Sir Humfrey demaundeth of vs how the faith of Christians can depend vpon a Church which is fallen from the faith, or generall beliefe of
Christianitie can rely safely vpon a coūcell that is disclaimed by the greatest parte of the world. By England by France by Germany? But to this I answere that in this double question, he telleth his reader at the least a double lye, both which we must take vpon his owne credit, for he alledgeth nothing but his owne worthie word, which of how little worth it is we haue sufficientlie tryed allreadie. Wherefore we must with his leaue tell him that neither it is true that the Roman Church is fallen from the faith, except he meanes from the faith of Luther and Caluin, or from his owne English faith, from which neuerthelesse the Roman Church cannot truelie be affirmed to haue fal∣len, but it from her, she hauing beene in the world manie hundrethes of yeares before the authours of the new Religion were created: nor is it true that the Tridentine Councell is disclaimed by the greater parte of France and Germanie at this present time in matters of faith. To saie nothing of Italie, Spaine, Poland, Hungarie; and those most vast and spatious In∣dian Regions of later yeeres reduced to the Roman faith, all with nations doe conteine a farre greater number of such as imbrace the foresaid Councell then there are reformers in the world who reiect the same. Especiallie considering that euen amongst the reformed Churches themselues notwithstanding the
most rigorous lawes & proceedings which they vse against the Roman Catholikes where they haue the superioritie of power, yet is there no smale number to be founde of those who wil∣linglie receiue all the doctrine of faith, contey∣ned in the Tridentine Sinod: and consequen∣tlie it appeeres by this that Sir Humfrey hath failed mightilie in his Cosmographie and cal∣culation, when he affirmeth that the foresaid Councell is disclaimed by the greatest parte of the world; except in his greatest parte he in∣cludes Iewes, Turkes and Gentiles, or at the least count for his owne, all those which are not Romanists of what sect or faction soeuer they be, as some of his reformed brothers vse to doe not excluding the most vnchristian he∣retikes the Arians out of the number of the members of their Congregation, to make it showe more ample and glorious. After this the knight out of the vehemencie of his zealous Spirit, falls into a fearefull exe∣cration taking vpon him the Anathema if anie man aliue shall proue that the seuen Trent Sacra∣ments were instituted by Christ, or that all the Fa∣thers, or anie one Father in the Primatiue Church, or anie knowne authour for aboute a thousand yeeres after Christ, did teach that there were neither more nor lesse then seuen Sacraments truelie and properlie so called, and to be beleeued of all for an article of faith. Thus hee▪ with so manie tur∣nings
and windinges as you see, and so manie limitations of his speech, that a man would thinke it vnpossible but that he might escape the snare of his owne conditional cursse, which yet he doth not, but rather falleth flatte into it, as I will presentlie shewe. And first I say that if Sir Humfrey would content himselfe with the authoritie or testi∣monie of dead men, I could remitte him not to one but to one hundreth authours who yet aliue in their workes doe testifie the foresaid institution in plaine tearmes, to witt all those diuines who liued and writ euer since the time of Petrus Lombardus, of whom as from their common master they receaued the doctrine of the seuen Sacraments as successiuelie deduced from the institution of God, and deliuered it to their successours with greate vniformitie and consent, as appeereth by their bookes. And altho' this might be sufficient to satisfie anie reasonable person in the world, neuerthe∣lesse because Sir Humfreys importunitie is so greate that he will needes haue the testimonies of liue authours, I remitte him to all those who either in the publike vniuersities or pulpits of all Catholike countries doe teach and preach the same at this daie to witt that not onelie a thousand yeeres after Christ, but euen from the time of Christ himselfe or at the least from the time of his Apostles preaching and writing,
there were neither more nor lesse, then seuen Sacraments truelie and properlie so called and to be beleeued of all for an article of faith as instituted by Christ. The number of which authours being not onelie verie greate in it∣selfe, but also farre greater and of farre more learned men then all those who in the refor∣med Churches hould the contrarie as I per∣suade my selfe Sir Humfrey cannot denie: it is most euidēt that (to saie nothing of those aun∣cient writers which by their proofes of euerie particular Sacrament by Scriptures and Fa∣thes doe plainelie wittnesse the same trueth) he had no reason at all for this parte of his greate demaunded. And now touching the rest of it, I answer first that as it is certaine the reformers themselues if we should demaunde the like of them con∣cerning the number of those Sacramēts which they defēd for truely & properly such, & to be belieued as an article of faith and as instituted by Christ, cannot prooue either by scripture or any one authour, I doe not say for about a Thousand yeeres as they doe, but for a Thou∣sand and foure hundreth yeeres after Christ, that they are precisely twoe and no more nor lesse: so consequentie they ought not to require of vs that which they themselues are not able to performe in their owne cause and case.
Neuerthelesse that our aduersarie may plainely see we are not behinde with him, but rather farre before him and the rest of his bro∣thers in this particular, I answer farther that all those Fathers who by expresse places of scripture proue euerie one of those Sacraments in particular, and no other, which the Roman Church houldeth for truely & properlie such, doe thereby also shew at the least tacitly, that those and no more nor lesse are beleeued for such by faith. For testimonie of which trueth because it would be too tedious in an∣swere of one argument to produce so many of the Fathers as might be alledged, I will onely alledge. Cal. Instit. S. Augustine, who beinge euen ac∣cording to our aduersaries oppinion of him, a faithfull witnesse of antiquitie, his testimonie may iustly serue for all the rest: and because of the Sacramēts of Baptisme and Eucharist there is no controuersie, I will onely produce those testimonies which conuince the other fiue. Wherefore that confirmation is truely and properlie a Sacrament S. Augustine affir∣meth lib. 2. contra lit. Pet. cap. 104. where he saith thus. The Sacrament of Chrisme in the nature of visible signes, Sacrosanctum est, is a sacred and holy Sacrament as Baptisme; and he hath the like of order lib. 2. cont. Epist. Parm. cap. 13. sayinh. They are both Sacraments, and both by a certaine consecration are giuen to man,
that when he is baptzed, this when he is ordered and in the same place he also saith, that both of them be Sacraments which no man doubteth. Of Pennance he saith lib. 1. de adult. coniug. cap. 26. & 28. eadem est causa Baptismi & reconciliations, fine quibus Sacramentis homines credunt se mori non debere. The same cause or reason is of Baptisme and Reconciliation with out which Sacraments men beleeue they ought not to dye. Matrimonie he compareth with Baptisme lib. 1. de nuptijs & concup. cap. 10. where he saith that the matter of this Sacrament is, that man and woman ioy∣ned in mariage may inseperably perseuer toge∣ther as long as they liue. And the like saying he hath of the perpetuall effect of this Sacra∣ment comparing it with the perpetuall effect of Baptisme. And in the 14. chapter of his booke de bono coniugali, he compareth matri∣monie with the Sacrament of Order, which order as we haue cited before, he compared with Baptisme in another place. Finally of Extreame vnction he maketh mention lib. 2. de visit. infir. cap. 4. and in his 215. Sermon of the saints. Where although he doth not in expresse tearmes affirme extreame vnction to to be one of the Sacraments, yet he expressely affirmeth there, and serm. de temp. 115. that the ceremonie of vnction which S. Iames mentioneth, and the promisse, belong vnto the faithfull, and are to be practized by the Priests
as the Apostle commaundes: all which proues plainily that S. Augustin held it for a Sacrament as well as the other six, and altho' some doubt may be made whether the booke de visit. infir. be truelie S. Augustines worke, yet certaine it is that the authour of it is both good and auncient. And thus much out of S. Augustine for the proofe of euerie one of the seuen Sacraments in particular, besides that which he speaketh in generall of them, and of the benefit which the Church hath receaued from God by the institution of them, in his first sermon vpon the 108. psalme, where he saith thus. What a greate gift is the office of the admi∣nistration of the Sacraments in Baptisme, Eucharist, and in the rest of the holy Sacraments? so that we see that S. Augustin stanneth plainely against the doctrine of Sir Humfrey. And doth fully answer his question touching the number of the Sacraments defended by the Roman Church. And supposing he makes soe spe∣ciall mention of these seuen as he doth more then of any other externall signe or ceremonie of the Church (to some of which neuertheles he giueth also the name of Sacrament) and supposing also he cōpareth or all most of them with those two which the reformers them∣selues hould for proper and true Sacraments, in their effects and sanctitie, as also amplifying the benefit which God hath conferred to the
Church by the institution of them (that which he doth not with the rest of the holie signes and ceremonies which the same Church also vseth) supposing all these circumstances I saie, it is more then certaine that he speaketh of them as of true and proper Sacramants which for such haue beene recreaued and belieued in the vniuersall Church euen euer since the time of Christ the institutour of them. And so let this suffice for an answere of that vast deman∣de of our Thrasoniā knight, and to demōstrate, that notwithstanding all his circumspection, his owne conditionall curse is turned into an absolute, and so is fallen vpon him with all it weight and forces as a iust punishment of the temeritie and excesse of that boldnes, which he committeth in protesting, against a truth confirmed with such authoritie and te∣stimonie as may satisfie the most tender con∣science and settle the most wauering minde in the world. And yet for confirmation of the foresaid answere, we may further adde, that supposing the Master of Sentences so manie yeeres past defended the seauen Sacraments with the institution of them by Christ himselfe and their necessitie and profit in the Church of God: and supposing the same authour writ nothing but what he found in the auncient Fathers, from the collection of whose senten∣ces he tooke his appellation: supposing I say
all this which his workes doe witnesse, it is most apparent in the morall iudgment of anie indifferent man, that the doctrine which he deliuered concerning the foresaid number of Sacraments, was no other then the faith of the vniuersall Church & also the verie same which by the generall consent of schoole diuines in later ages hath binne taught & preached euen by those of the Grecian Church, as by the te∣stimonie of Hieremie the late Patriarch of Constantinople in his answer to the Augustan Confession doth plainelie appeere; where the septenarie number of Sacraments is expresse∣lie maintained against the Lutherans as his wordes here quoted in the margent clearelie testifie with shame enuffe to the reformed bro∣thers: for thus he saith. Sacramē∣ta verò ri∣tusque in hac ipsa Catholica recte sen∣tentium Christia∣norum Ec∣clesia, sunt septem. Baptisma, Chrysma sancti vn∣guenti, di∣uina com∣munio, manusim∣positio, matrimo∣nium, Pae∣nitentia & sacrum O∣leum Et statim. Quod ve∣ro haec so∣la sint nec plura nu∣mero: etiā diuisione clarum fit &c. Patriar∣cha Con∣stantinop. Res. ad Doctores Wittemb. fol. 11. Truelie the Sacraments & rites in this same Catholike Church of right vnderstanding Christians are seuen: Baptisme, chrisme of holie oyntment, the diuine commu∣nion, imposition of handes, Matrimonie, Pen∣nance, and sacred oyle. &c. But the knight goeing yet further in the proofe of his duall number, telleth his reader, that the two Sacraments which his Church defends are properlie Sacraments because they haue element and institution: but the other fine are not such because they want eyther of these. But to this I answere that the fiue Sa∣craments which the reformers reiect, haue not
onelie this which Sir Humfrey requires to his two defaced Sacraments, but also besides this, they haue promise of iustificant grace, which according to the description he maketh heere, his two doe want; and so I retort his prrofe vpon him. For if our fiue be not properlie Sa∣craments because in his conceipt they want institution and element; surelie neither are his two properlie Sacraments because they want grace, as being but signes or elements institu∣ted by God not giuing grace both according to his former declaration, Caluin. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 14. & 15. and also in the common doctrine of the reformers: And so we see that the knightes discourse touching the propertie of his two ministeriall elements is but a grace∣lesse peice of doctrine, especiallie considering that if he had binne but halfe so conuersant in our diuines as he will needes seeme to be, he might most easilie haue found both institution element, and grace, annexed to all those fiue Sacraments which he renounceth: which Ca∣tholike diuines altho' they doe not all agree in the assignation of the seuerall matters and formers of the same, yet doe they neuerthelesse with great conformitie consent in the number & generall definition of them, to wit that they are all externall and sensible signes which by diuine institution haue the promise of iusti∣fying grace annexed. And least the knight take exceptions and complaine that I doe not
satisfiie his argument my selfe, but remit him to others for an answere; I will breiflie shewe out of scripture both the institution and ele∣ment of euerie one of the foresaid fiue Sacra∣ments in particular. Confirmation therefore was instituted by Christ in those places of scripture where he promiseth to his Apostles the Holie Ghost after his ascension, as S. Iohn the 16.5. Luke the 24.48. which collation of the holie Ghost was exercised by the Apostles Act. 10. & 19. by imposition of hands after they had receaued the same holie Ghost by that ex∣traordinarie manner which is described Act. 2. which impositiō togither with the words vsed Act. 8. whē they prayed for thē on whom they put their hands, are the matter and forme of this Sacrament. And now heere we see both the institution and the element in this Sacra∣ment, which is all Sir Humfrey requireth of vs; and so I will say vnto him that which S. Hierome said to his aduersaries the Luciferians the 4. chap. Si quaeris quare in Ecclesia baptiza∣tus non nisi per manus Episcopi accipit Spiritum Sanctum, disce hanc obseruationem exea authori∣tate descendere quod post ascensionem Domini Spi∣ritus ad Apostolos descendit, That is to say, If thow doest aske me, why he that is baptized doth not receaue the holie Ghost but by the hands of the Bishop, learne that this obseruation descended from that authoritie that after the ascension of our Lord
the Spirit descended vpon the Apostles. Secondlie the Sacrament of Penance hath both element and institution; the element is the acts of the penitent declared by sensible words or signes, the institution is the collation of power conferred by Christ to remitte sin∣nes, to his Apostles and in them to all true Preistes according to that of the 20. of Saint Iohn, Receaue yee the holie Ghost, whole sinnes you shall forgiue they are forgiuen, and whose sin∣nes you shall retaine they are retayued. In which words both the institution and the element be sufficientlie declared; especiallie if we ioyne the declaration of the Church, without which euen those two which the reformers hould for Sacramēts cānot be conuinced to be truly and properlie such, if one were obstinately disposed. Thirdlie in the Sacrament of Extreme Vn∣ction both the element and institution are plai∣nelie enough found in the 5. chap. of S. Iames: where the Apostle sayth. If anie man be sick a∣mong you, let him bring in the Priestes of the Church and let them pray ouer him annointing him with oyle in the name of our Lord, and the prayer of faith shall saue the sick, and our Lord shall lift him vp, and if he be in sinnes they shalbbe remitted him. In which place to the externall signes of prayer and oyle, remission of finnes is annexed, as the reader may plainelie perceiue: which effect euen according to the doctrine of the refor∣mers
themselues as I suppose cannot be found but onelie in such ceremonies as properlie are instituted by Christ himselfe for Sacraments. Fourthlie the like I say of Order, the sub∣stance of which is so plainelie conteyned in the scriptures, Vid. Cal. l. 3. Inst. c. 4. §. 20. &c. 19. §. 31. that some of the greatest reformers haue not had the face to exclude it out of the number of the Sacraments of the new lawe, and the places of Scripture which conuince the truth of it are 1. Timo. 4. and 2. Thimothie 1. where both the sensible element which is the imposition of hands, and the effect of grace an∣nexed, are cleerlie described; which effect I thinke our aduersaries confesse, cannot be pos∣siblie conferred but onelie by Gods authoritie and institution. The wordes of the Apostle are these in the first place. Doe not neglect the grace which is in the: which was giuen the by pro∣phesie with the imposition of the hands of preisthood. In the second place the wordes are these. For which cause I admonish the to resuscitate the grace of God which is in the by the imposition of my handes. Now lastlie concerning Matrimonie, a mā might iustlie maruell that our new Euāge∣listes should make anie question of it in this nature. For supposing their extraordinarie affection that way, and that single life is so vn∣sauourie to them that if it lay in their power, they would rather suffer the whole quire of
virgins to perish, then they would make a re∣ligious vowe of perpetuall chastitie, or liue without a woman: supposing this I say in my opinion they ought in all reason sooner to haue honoured matrimonie with the title of a Sa∣crament, then to haue quite depriued it of that which the scripture it selfe doth giue it. Yet supposing they be so preposterous, that they will rather impugne that which they other∣wise loue best, then seeme to agree to the Ro∣mane doctrine, I tell them all and particularilie him with whome I dispute, that although ma∣riage was by God himselfe onelie ordayned in paradise as a ciuill contract: Neuerthelesse Christe who came not to dissolue the lawe, but to eleuate it to a higher degree of perfection; amongst other things he pleased to honore the same with the true nature and properties of a Sacrament; giuing also tho' not immediatlie by himselfe, yet by his Apostle S. Paul, the verie name and title of a Sacrament; whereas not∣withstanding neyther he himselfe nor anie of his Apostles or Euangelists euer gaue that name to anie of the rest of the Sacraments. Wherefore to come nearer to the purpose; I say that the institution of this Sacrament was by Christe himselfe, who in the 19. chapter of S. Mathewe ordayned the coniunction of man & wife to be inseperable to the end it so might be a sacred signe of the indissoluble coniun∣ction
of Christe and his Church, as it is decla∣red by the Apostle Ephes. 5. where he expreslie giueth it the name of a great Sacrament in re∣gard of the sacred coniunction (partelie by the hypostaticall vnion, and partelie by the vnion of charitie) betwixt Christe and his spouse the Church which it signifieth. Which foresaid coniunction of man and wife explicated by words of the present tense is the element; and Christs ordinance and application of the same to the foresaid signification, is the institution, by virtue of which it also conferreth grace to the receiuers, to the end they may liue in that perpetuall vnion of mindes which is required to the representation of the inseperable vnion of Christe and his Church; which is all and more then our aduersarie himselfe demaunded of vs before in this particular matter. To which if we adde the authoritie of the Church and auncient fathers for the interptetation of those scriptures which we haue produced for proofe of the truth of this, and the rest of the foresaid fiue Sacraments (which authorities of the fathers if need required and the place did serue for them I could easilie produce) it would yet more plainelie appeere with how little rea∣son the pretensiue reformed Congregations doe exclude them out of the number of true and proper Sacraments. And so now according to this a verie easie
answere may be framed to all that which the knight bringeth against the septenarie num∣ber of Sacraments in the rest of this paragraph, and particularilie to the testimonies of those Romane authours and Fathers which he pro∣duceth in fauour of his cause. And first tou∣ching the Fathers which hee citeth besides that which hath binne alreadie spoken I fur∣ther adde, that there was not one of them which was of the reformers opinion in this matter as is most apparent in that Sir Humfrey himselfe could not produce so much as one Father that auerreth the onelie duall number of Sacraments: Nay they are so farre ftom this, that there is not one of them, who doth not in one place or other make expresse men∣tion of more then two, if professedlie they make mention of anie at all. Secondlie I say, that as the reformers can∣not with anie probabilitie inferre out of those Fathers who affirmed that the two Sacraments Baptisme and the Eucharist haue flowed out of the side of Christe, that there are no more nor lesse then two; so neyther can they in anie sort thence inferre that the same Fathers taught not the septenarie number of Sacra∣ments. And more then this if the reformers stand vpon this so much that the Fathers by the bloud which issued out of our Sauiours side, vnderstood the Sacrament of the bloud of
Christe, then they must consequentlie eyther confesse that the same Fathers held the reall presence of the bloude of Christe in the Eu∣charist, which yet they themselues denie, or else at the least that the reformed Churches haue no true Sacrament at all, for that accor∣ding to their confession, there is in it neyther bloud nor bone. And out of this generall ans∣were to the testimonies of the auncient Fa∣thers, we may inferre how falselie Sir Hum∣frey in the end of his 149. page affirmeth, that they did insist sometimes in the number of two and so restrayned the Church to the definite number of two onelie, which saying of his is a manifest falsitie and iniurious to those Fathers whome he so chargeth, as that which I haue produced out of S. Augustine in this period doth plainelie conuince in these fiue Sacra∣ments which the reformers denie: Neyther was he able to produce one testimonie out of anie of them for proofe of his fayned position; but so leaueth it vnconfirmed more then with that fame vntruth by which he belyeth most impudentlie the foresaid Fathers all at a clappe. Neyther hath that which he further addeth of the same Fathers in the next page anie greater truth or foundation then this, where he sayth that had the Fathers beleeued that those fiue Sacraments had binne instituted by Christe they would of necessitie haue concluded them
for true and proper Sacraments, and haue ea∣silie found in them the number of seuen: Thus in effect Sir Humfrey discourseth, to which I answere first that doubtles if the Fa∣thers had had but halfe the occasion which the Church hath had since their time, and especial∣lie since the foundation of the reformed Chur∣ches; they would of necessitie haue treated and spoken expresselie of the septenarie number, and haue distinguished as now the Church and diuines doe betwixt proper and improper Sacraments: But the occasion fayling, they neyther had necessitie nor conueniencie to speake otherwise of them then they haue don∣ne: Nay some of them, especiallie those who writ against the Gentiles, were rather obliged by the course of those times, not to mention the secret misteries of our faith at all, then to reueale them to the profaners of them, more then was preciselie necessarie for the answere of their obiections, Vid. Theo∣doret. Dial. 2. which indeed is the true reason, why diuerse of the foresaid more aun∣cient Fathers haue spoken so obscurelie and sparinglie euen of some of the cheife misteries of Christian Religion. Secondlie I say, that howsoeuer the auncient Fathers spoke of the expresse number of the Sacraments, certaine it is, they eyther expres∣lie taught, or at the least supposed for certaine doctrine of faith that all those which the Ro∣mane
Church now holdeth for true and pro∣per Sacraments doe giue diuine grace to the receiuers, as it is apparent out of those places which I cited before out of Saint Augustine for the proofe of euerie seuerall Sacrament and their seuerall effects; and consequentlie they held implicitelie at the least, and if either ne∣cessitie or iuste occasion had required they would haue concluded expresselie the septe∣narie number of Sacraments, and that they were instituted by Christe for such truely and properly. And now for the more moderne diuines who wrote since the time of P. Lumbard, of which Sir Humfrey citeth to the number of twelue or thirteene, there is not one of them who holdeth onely two proper Sacraments as the reformers doe: nay there is not one of them that doth not expreslie defende the septenarie number of true and proper Sacraments, excep∣ting perhaps Alexander Hales and Durand may seeme to opinate otherwise to the incir∣cūspect reader, of which two authours neuer∣thelesse I say first that Hales doth not denie all those seauen, nor anie one of them in particu∣lar which the Romane Church defendes to be trulie and properlie Sacraments, but he one∣ly is of opinion that onelie fower of them are to be called Sacraments of the new lawe, for that as he imagined the other three, to wit Pen∣nance,
Order, and Matrimonie, had their be∣ginning before. True it is, Hales cannot be ex∣cused from errour in that he affirmeth Confir∣mation to haue binne instituted by the Coun∣cell of Melda (except he meaneth onelie, that there it was declared to be properlie a Sacra∣ment as I am persuaded he doth) but ne∣uerthelesse supposing this his singular opi∣nion, yet notwithstanding it being with all cer∣tayne, that he holdeth the same Sacrament to be one of the seauen no lesse then he doth Pen∣nance which yet he held (as it seemeth to some later writers) to haue binne instituted by the Apostles, Iuxta nu∣merum malorum spiritualiū debet sumi numerus Sacramē∣torum, se∣ptem sunt differentiae morborū. Hal. 4. part. q. 8. mem. 7. act. 2. notwithstanding all this I say, he is impertinentlie alleaged by the knight as an impugner of the Romane doctrine in the sep∣tenarie number of Sacraments, which not∣withstanding his other allucinations, he as ex∣presselie maintaines as other diuines doe as his owne wordes plainelie testifie saying thus in his 4. parte and eight question. According to the number of spirituall diseases, the number of Sa∣craments is to be taken, there are seauen differences of diseases. What therefore can be more mani∣thē that this authour tought the compleat number of seuen Sacraments? And as for Durand, certaine it is that he doth not denie Matrimonie to be a Sacrament ab∣solutelie as the reformers doe, but he at the most onely affirmeth that it is not properly
and vniuocallie a Sacrament conferring grace in the same manner the other six doe; which opinion of his altho' as it sounds it can not stand firme with the doctrine of the Church: yet this not our question, and in case it were, yet is there no reason why one mans priuate tenet, nay nor the priuate tenet, or errour of more then one or two should preiudicate the common doctrine of the Church both before and after him, nor diminish her antiquitie and vniuersalitie in anie point of doctrine especial∣lie where there is no obstinacie in the authour, as in these there was not: neyther can the ad∣uersaries drawe anie argument of force against the same in anie case, out of one onelie authour or more, if more there were, contrarie to the torrent of all the rest. To omit that as vasques noteth, the same Durand in the same place ex∣preslie affirmeth that it is an heresie to denie that Matrimonie is a Sacrament, which doub∣tlesse is a cōcluding argumēt that when Durād affirmed Matrimonie not to be vniuocallie or iuste as the rest be a Sacramēt, he did not abso∣lutely deny it to be one of those seuē which the church did both then hold, & now houldeth to betrue Sacramēts; but at the most he onely de∣nied the truth & propertie of it in that strict & vniuocall manner of conferring iustificāt grace, as he and other diuines affirme of the rest: which being so, then cannot the Reformers
haue anie colour to alledge this testimonie ei∣ther against the absolute truth of that Sacra∣ment, or against the Septenarie number of it with the other. Nay more then this hauing now exactelie examined the matter I finde that Durand besides that he expresselie defendes the total number of seuen Sacraments disputing seuerallie of the nature of euerie one of them, he doth in particular affirme of Matrimonie euen in his resolution or direct anser to the que∣stion, absolutelie that it is a Sacrament; and puts it in the last place for one of the seuen. And these are his wordes in their seuerall places noted in the margent.Tenendū est absolu∣te quod matrimo∣nium est Sacramē∣tum. Quia hoc deter∣minauit Eccle. in 4. d. 26. q. 3.Et ita sunt invniuerso septē Sa∣cramenta. Idem d. 2. q. 2. n. 6. To which if we adde that which Capreolus doth testifie of the same durand, all doubt of his true meaning in this point will quite vanish away. Coactus fuit in vl∣timo ope∣re cautius loqui, vt scilicet confitere∣tur matri∣monium esse vere & proprie Sacramē∣tum, sed non vni∣uoce cum alijs nouae legis Sa∣cramentis &c. Ca∣preolus in 4. sent. d. 26. q. 1. §. For Capreolus saith that in his last wor∣ke or edition he was constrained to speake more cautelously soe that he confessed matoimonie to be truely and properly a Sacrament, but not v∣niuocally. By which, and that also which I haue said before touching Alexander Hales the learned reader may perceiue that both the one and the other are against truth and reason al∣ledged against the septenarie number of Sa∣craments, and against the vniuersalitie of the doctrine of the Roman Church in that point, supposing they differ not from the rest of the Romanists as their owne wordes witnesse,
Except it be in the manner of defending that same number, yet both agreeing in the sub∣stance of the Controuersie here proposed by the knight our aduersarie, Quantum ad tertium durandi. and absolutelie af∣firming that there are truelie seuen Sacraments in the Catholike Church. Moreouer in the citation of the other mo∣derne diuines, Sir Humfrey vseth much fraud and cosenage: and remitting the rest till after∣wardes which I will examen in their due places as they are quoted by the knight, I will first produce those two whose bookes I had at the first, and both of whome he egregiouslie abu∣seth. Bellarmin is corrupted by him in three seuerall places cited in this one paragraph. And first he is corrupted in his Second booke of the effect of Sacraments chap 24. where the Car∣dinall saying onelie that the aduersaries ought not to require of the Romanists that they shewe the name of the Septenarie number of the Sacraments either out of scripture or Fa∣thers; Primo no∣tandū non debere ad∣uersarios petere vt ostenda∣mus in scripturis aut Patri∣bus nomē septenarij Sacramē∣torum, nā nec ipsi possunt o∣stendere nomē Bi∣narij vel ternarij &c. Bellar. l. 2. de ef∣fect. Sacr. c. 24. yet honest Sir Humfrey translates out of the Latin quoted in his owne margent the number of seuen for the name of the number of seuen, repeating the same twise for fayling, and so daceiues his ignorant reader persuading him there by that euen by Bellarmins confes∣sion the number of the seuen Sacraments is not to be found either in scriptures or Fathers, whereas neuerthelesse Bellarmin saith no such
thing, but onelie that the name of the foresaid number is not to be required in that manner supposing that the substance of a thing is of∣tentimes found both in scriptures and Fathers, and yet not the name it selfe, as appeares in the worde Trinitie of persons, and in the name of the number of two Sacraments, neither of which is extant in scriptures. Secondlie Bellarmin is corrupted in his booke of Extreme Vnction cap. 2. Non om∣nes cōue∣niunt an cum Apo∣stoli vn∣gebant o∣lto infir∣mos (Mar∣ci 6.) & curabant, illa fuerit vnctio sa∣cramenta∣lis an solū fuerit fi∣gura quae∣dam &c. Bellar. lib. de Sacr. Extrem. Vnct. c. 2. Where the false knight makes his reader beleeue that Bellarmin was one of those who disagreed from the doctrine of other diuines in the do∣ctrine of the fiue Sacraments, which he and his companions denie to be truelie and proper∣lie Sacraments, and yet the Cardinall onelie affirmes with some other authours that that vnction which the Apostles vsed aboute the sick and restored them to health the 6. of S. Marke, was not the Sacrament of Extreme Vnction, but rather a figure or obumbration of it: Which as you see is a farre different mat∣ter from the deniall of Extreme Vnction as it is vsed in the Church, to be properlie a Sacra∣ment or one of the fiue reiected by the preten∣siue reformed Congregations. Thirdlie the knight corrupteth Bellarmin whome he cites in the nynth chapter of his first booke of the Sacraments, where he peruertes both the tran∣slation of the wordes and sense. The wordes
in that he Englisheth these, non est ita notum, it is not so certaine, whereas he ought to haue translated, it is not so knowne: The sense he corrupteth in that he persuades his reader that Bellarmin confesseth that the foresaid fiue Sa∣craments haue not their institution from christ immediatelie: whereas he speakes not a worde of the institurion, but affirmes onelie that the sacred things which the Sacraments signifie are three; iustifying grace, the passiō of Christ and eternall life; all which, that Baptisme and Eucharrst doe fignifie saith he, res notissima est, it is most notorious, de alijs Sacramentis non est ita notum, of the rest of the Sacraments it is not so notorious or knowne. Yet further ad∣ding that it is certaine that euen these fiue Sacraments which the reformers reiect signifie all those three things at the least impli∣citlie: But to saie that the foresaid fiue Sacra∣ments haue not their institution immediatelie from Christ, neuer entred in to Bellarmins thoughts. tamen cer∣tum est saltem im∣plicite ea omnia si∣gnificare &c. Bellar. loco cit. And so if the knight had dealt play∣nelie and sincerelie in the citation of that place of the Cardinall, he could haue found nothing for his purpose, but rather the contrarie. Furthermore Sir Humfrey also corrupteth vasquez most shamefullie in the 3. parte d. 2. cap. 5. n. 3. de Sacram. Matr. Where he impu∣dentlie belyeth him affirming that Vasquez knewe well that neither moderne diuines nor
auncient Fathers did conclude Matrimonie for a true Sacrament of the Church. And yet the knight could not be ignorant that the same authour professedlie defendes the same to be trulie and properlie a Sacrament in the third chapter of the verie same disputation which he himselfe cites: and in his 4. chap. Vasquez proueth it by the testimonies of diuers Fathers, putting for parte of the title of the same chap. that the Vasquez de Mat. definition of the Church touching the truth of this Sacrament had foundation in the testimo∣nies of the Fathers, and who will please to read vasquez will finde it so. In so much that Sir Humfrey in this particular is wholelie inexcu∣sable, especiallie considering that out of the place cited nothing can possiblie be collected or inferred wherebie it may in anie sorte be imagined that vasquez euer dreamed that ei∣ther auncient Fathers or moderne diuines (ex∣cepting durand and perhaps the Master of Sentences of whome he speakes doubtfullie, not daring to affirme him absolutelie to haue beene of the same opinion with Durand, as in truth he is not) did conclude matrimonie not to be a true and proper Sacrament, but onelie affirmes that none of the places which diuines alledge out of S. Augustin to proue the truth and propertie of that Sacrament, conuince the same in the sense in which (saith Vasquez) we now dispute. Which imagination of Vas∣quez
tho' it were true, as in my iudgement ap∣parentlie it is not, yet doth it not proue Sir Humfreys intent in disprouing the septenarie number of Sacraments. Especiallie supposing, as the same Vasquez affirmes, Cō. Carth. 4. that the fourth Councell of Carthage (in which S. Augustin was present as a great member of the same) makes mētion of the Benediction of the Preist vsed in mariage as in a holie and sacred thing. Graunt I say that Vasquez opinion were true, yet would it not serue the knights turne, ei∣ther for the poofe of his intent, or for the ex∣cuse of his false and craftie dealing. Next after Vasquez I will put Suarez althou' according to the order of Sir Humfrey he is the first man he belies in this Poragraph. in 3. part d. 12. sec. 1. where he charges him to saye that the councell of Florence did insinuate the number of 7. Sacraments, Propter quod tan∣dem haec veritas de∣finita est in Con. Flor. in decreto Eugenij quā Graeci & Armeni facile cum Latinis suceperūt. Suar. loc. cit. and the councell of Trent did expresselie decree it for an article of faith, yet suarez sayes in plaine termes, that the same was defyned in the councell of Florence. So that here is false dealing with suarez and with the truth to make the point of the septe∣narie number of Sacraments seeme newe, as ther is also in the wordes following in which the same Sir Humfrey affirmes that the Roma∣nists relie wholely vpon the Tridentine coun∣cell. Ambrose, Austin, Chrysostome and Bede
be impertinently alleged. For they none of them denie that the Sacraments are no more nor lesse then seuen. And of S. Isidore it is fal∣sely affirmed by Sir Humfrey that he accoun∣teth but of 3. Sacraments for altho' in the place quoted by him he speakes onely of three (which yet is more then the knight will alowe of) yet doth he not affirme that ther are no more: yea & in other seuerall places he mentioneth three more, Pennance, Order, matrimonie. And of them all he treates onely occasionallie not professedlie as the reader may easilie perceiue, and therfore doubtlesse there is no mention of Extreme vnction among the rest, of which neuerthelesse he was not ignorāt how plainelie S. Iames describes it, neither would haue omit∣ted it if occasiō had serued to treate of it. Of Pen∣nance he treates lib. 8. orig. page 83. & lib. 2. de offi. Eccles. of Order in his 2. booke de offic. Eccles. page 597. and 598. and of matrimonie he hath expresse wordes in the same booke page 69. Touching S. Chrysostome, Ambrose, Cyrill and Theophilactus it is false that they maintained onely two Sacraments, and as for Chrysostome and Theophilactus, vpon the 6. of S. Paule to the Hebrewes, they both make mention of Confirmation. S. Ambrose lib. 1. de Penit: makes a kynde of comparison betwixt Baptisme and Pennance, saying: vnum in
vtroque ministerium est, &c. and S. Cyrill of Ierusalem lib. 12. in so. cap. 56. doth alsoe compare these two Sacraments together, and both of them mention the Sacrament of Chris∣me. the one Catech. 3. the other lib. 3. de Sacra. cap. 2. & de ijs qui mysterijs initiantur cap. 7. so that none of thes Fathers which Sir Humfrey produced for the number of 2. onely Sacra∣ments, doe agree with his doctrine: and yet more not one of them treates in anie one place of their workes of the precise number of Sacra∣ments, but onely soe farre as their matter and drift required. Pascasius also is falselie dealt with by Sir Humfrey, both in his meaning and in the trans∣lation of his wordes: for the doth not saye, the Sacramets of Christ are Baptisme, Chrisme, and the bodie and bloude of our lord, as Sir Humfrey doth put in English but. Sunt autem Sacramenta Christi in Ecclesia: that is: but Sacra∣ments of Christ in the Church be Baptisme Chrysme &c. Meaning onelie that Baptisme, Chrysme and the Eucharist are such Sacraments as he treates of makeing mention of those onely, not to showe the precise number but the nature of a Sacrament in generall, especiallie touching the signification and effects of the same, and therfore he doth exemplifie in those onely which are most notoriouslie knowne for such and their matter and formes most obuious,
omitting the rest as being lesse to the purpose he ther handleth. And for Sir Humfrey to affirme that Chrisme is crept in to the text of the later editions, that is but an idle imagina∣tion of his owne, otherwise sure he would haue produced some other more auncient edition in which the worde Chrysme is not found. And certainelie he that should compare the faith∣fulnes, and sinceritie of the Romonists in that nature, and the care they haue to publish au∣thours purely, with the insinceritie of the sectaries, he would presentlie iudge that copie which wantes the worde Chrisme to be razed by them that haue of late yeares abolished the vse of it in their Church, rather then haue the least suspiciō in the world that the same should be added by Romanists whose doctrine and practice in that particular is so frequent and auncient. Especially considering that it makes no more to our purpose of maintaining the sep∣tenarie of Sacraments against the pretended reformers, whether the worde Chrysme be in Pascasius or no, then if it were vndoubtedlie true that he had made no mention of it. Suppo∣sing it is sufficient for vs to knowe that this author in that place neither intended to proue the number of three Sacraments, nor yet to exclude the number of seuen. Howbeit, I doe not denie but that the worde Chrysme being in the text, it suffices to conuince that the
Sacraments of Christ are more then two. And in deed I maruell why the sectaries especiallie those of the English Church should labore so much to exclude Cōfirmation frō the number of the Sacramēts, supposing they either doe pra∣ctice if or at the least ought to practise it accor∣ding to their owne ordināces, altho' ther is no∣thing prescribed by them touching the vse of Chrysme, but onely or cheefelie mētion is made of the blowe which the confirmer giues to the confirmed with a certaine phrase or forme of wordes. Concerning which ceremonie I haue heard that vpon a time, a certaine nominall Bi∣shop of theirs at the time of administration, was so extraordinarie well pleased with one of the cōpanie, of the feminine gender, that in steed of the ceremoniall stroake he gaue her a kisse of kindenesse, by which the yonge maide assured her selfe she receiued more grace thē if she had receiued Confirmation it selfe accordnig to their ordinarie manner. And now this may be sufficient for the true meaning of Pascasius. Hugo a sancto Victore is most peruer∣selie dealt with when out of Perkins he is produced by Sir Humfrey against the Sacra∣ment of Pennance. For I haue read him lib. 1. de Sacramentis cap. 12. where he sayes thus in expresse termes. Septem sunt principalia Sacra∣menta quae in Ecclesia ministrantur. ther be seuen principall Sacraments which are ministred in the
Church. And he numbers them in particular and Pennance for one: And in his summa sen∣tent. tract. 6. cap. 10. he saith. Sacramentum Paenitentiae redeuntibus ad Deum semper est ne∣cessarium. Est enim secunda tabula post naufra∣gium, quia post baptismum si quis vestem inno∣centiae peccando amittit per paenitentiam recuperare poterit. And by this you plainelie see this Ro∣manist is groaslie abused both by Perkins, and his imitatour, as if he were a denier of the septenarie number of Sacraments who soe par∣ticularlie doth acknowledge them. As in like manner the same authour is abused by the knight page 128. Touching the custome of the communion of the people at euerie Masse in the Primatiue Church, by omission of his ensuing wordes which are these. Sed propter peccatum circumstans nunc statutum est vt com∣municaremus solum semel in anno. That is to saie. But by reason of sinne which doth compase vs aboute, it is now decreed that we communicate thrice a yeare. Whereas likewise neither in the former wordes of this authour cited by Sir Hū∣frey, ther is a iot against priuate Masse, as he would haue it, but onelie a relation of diuers customes of the Church in that particular point of practice, as I haue declared in the pa∣ragraph of that matter. Bessariō in his wordes rehearsed by Sir Hūfrey doth not denie the septenarie nūber, nor doth
absolutely affirme that there are onelie two Sa∣cramēts, but onelie saith that we read of two onely manifestly deliuered in the Gospell: which is not contrarie to the Tridentine Councell, nor yet that which the knight intendes to proue, to wit that the doctrine of seuen Sacraments is no article of faith. And what if Bessarion should saie that some of the seuen Sacraments are found not in the Gospell but in the Epistle, what would Sir Humfrey replie to that? But in earnest I haue vewed Bessarions treatie of the Eucharist where I finde that, altho' he ma∣kes no plaine mention of the seuen Sacra∣ments as not hauing anie iuste occasion there offered to handle that matter, yet out of some passages of his discourse with other circumstā∣ces there vnto annexed, it is euidentlie gathe∣red what his meaning, and faith was touching the same. For in the place cited by the knight and ther aboutes, Cardinall Bessarion treates particularlie of the forme of the Sacrament of Eucharist, prouing that it consists of no other wordes then those same which our Sauiour himselfe consecrated with, and deliuered to the Church videlicet. This is my bodie: This is my bloud. And by occasion of this he men∣tioneth Baptisme, as being one of the two Sa∣craments which onelie haue their formes ex∣presselie and in speciall termes contained in the Gospell and specified by Christ himselfe. And
therefore a little before that which Sir Hum∣frey cited out of this authour, he saide. Illud quoque haud contemnendum videtur quod cum duo nobis Sacramenta à Saluatore traditae fuerint Baptismus & Eucharistia vtrumque verbis suis confici iussit: By which wordes it is certaine & cleare that he there speakes onelie of such Sa∣craments as our Sauiour most verbally or most expresselie ordained his disciples to consecrate and administer. And now that this Cardinall did beleeue that there are more Sacraments then these, it is euidentlie conuinced out of those his wordes fol. 169. saying. Ante omniaigitur sciendum est tam hoc Sacrosanctum Communionis de quo agi∣mus quam caetera Ecclesiae Sacramenta ideo sacra vocitari, quoniam aliud in se habent quod videtur aliud quod non corporis oculis sed solo intellectu comprehenditur. And after in the same page. Etenim in Sacramento Baptismatis ablutio carnis per aquam ita est Sacrementum vt duntaxat sig∣num sit ablutionis peccatorum. Ipsa enim pecca∣torum remissio res est significata nihil vltra signi∣ficans. And to these wordes he presentlie addes that which is plainelie to our purpose, to wit: Hoc idem in reliquis Sacramētis. Ergo & in Sacra∣mento Eucharistia. And yet more plainelie f. 175. Quēadmodum in caeteris omnibus, ita etiam in hoc Sacramento concordes sunt Occidenibus Orien∣tales. That is. Euen as in all the rest so in this
Sacrament the Occidentals (that is the Roma∣nists) doe accorde with the Orientals) that is the Grecians). Besides, this authour was a Greek Cardinall of the Roman Church, and a cheefe agent, and promoter for the vnion of the Latin and Greek Church in the Councell of Florence, where the number of seuen Sacra∣ments was defined and declared. To omit that the same Bessarion fol. 181. makes expresse mention of the Sacrament of Confirmation for so he saith. Quod manifestum fiet si quis ad Sacramentum Chrysmatis mentem conuerterit. So that Sir Humfrey could scarce a chosen a worse Patron for proofe of his pare of deformed Sa∣craments, then is this Cardinall, if he had sought all Greece ouer: it being manifest that he was a professed defender not onelie of the two Sacraments he mentioneth in the place cited by him, but also a firme beleeuer of the other fiue which the pretended reformers renounce & thrust violentlie out of the rancke of true Sacraments. It is true I haue aduerti∣sed some smale sleight of Sir Humfrey in translating or transforming the worde mani∣feste in Latin, into the worde plainelie in En∣glish: but this but one of his diminutiue trickes and so I passe it ouer. Onelie I desire the in∣different reader to reflect how peruers and in∣credulous a generation this is which refuseth to beleeue points of doctrine because they are
not manifestelie contained in the scripture. Whereas on the contrarie this most learned and Catholike Cardinall Bessarion altho' he graunted that two onelie Sacraments of the Church are so expressed in the written worde of God, yet doth he with a firme and constant faith imbrace the rest. S. Aug. is impertinētlie cited both in his third booke of Christian doctrine c. 9. and also de sim∣bolo ad Cathecu. l. 2. c. 6. in regarde that in neither of the places he speakes of two onely Sacramēts as his wordes cited by Sir Humfrey himselfe doe manifest. Nay in the latter place he spea∣kes not at all of proper Sacraments, as his wor∣des following faithleslie omitted by our ad∣uersarie, doe declare, for thus S. Austin fini∣sheth his sentence. Aqua in qua est sponsa puri∣ficata, & sanguis in quo inuenitur esse dotata: That is, water in which the spouse is purified, and bloud in which she is founde to be en∣dowed: in which passage no mention is made of anie of the seuen Sacraments, as the reader may plainelie perceiue. Of S. Cypriā I saie the same I saide of S. Am∣brose, Austin & the rest. Vid. lib. de operib. Card. sub nom. Cyp. And yet more, I know Sir Hūfrey will be loath to graūt fiue Sacramēts as S. Cyprian doth altho' we should giue him leaue to put the lotion of feet for one, as S. Am∣brose did put it for an vnproper Sacrament. Dominicus à toto cited out of Bellarmin cap.
4. de Sacramento Ordinis doubteth not of Order in generall, but he onelie makes a question of Episcopall Order in particular, whether it be trulie a Sacrament: and so he is ignorantlie and impertinentlie here alledged, with abuse both of him and the reader. As in like manner Suarez or rather Hugo, Lombard, Bonauen∣ture, Hales, and Altisiodor. Of whome altho' Suarez Tom. 4. de Sacramento Extremae Vnctio∣nis affirmes that they were of opinion that Ex∣treme Vnction was not instituted by Christ, but by S. Iames from whence suarez saith id plainelie followes not to be a true Sacrament, yet suarez himselfe addes (which Sir Humfrey fraudulentlie left out) that those authours de∣nied the consequence. By which it is manifest that those diuines absolutelie beleeued Ex∣treme Vnction for one of the seuen Sacra∣ments: not obstanding their material errour aboute the institution of it, which errour being impertinent to this present question of the sep∣tenarie number of Sacraments, their testi∣monie was impertinentlie alledged and pro∣ueth nothing to our aduersaries purpose. S. Bonauēture also is abused by the knight p. 165. where out of Chamier he carps him saying: that for wante of better proofes, he was pro∣digall of his conceiptes in honour of the septe∣narie number of Sacraments. But here I finde greater prodigalitie in the dishoneste procee∣ding
of Sir Humfrey, and his master minister chamier in their iniuste taxeing of Bonauen∣ture, then I finde wante of proofes in that au∣thour, for if either Chamier or the knight had beene disposed, they might haue found warrantable allegations in him out of scripture for the probation of euerie Sacrament in par∣ticular as his seuerall questions vpon them doe testifie. But these men being much more dis∣posed to cauille then to finde the truth: they would not caste their eyes so farre, but onelie layed handes vpon that which came nearest in their waye, I meane vpon some of the con∣gruences onelie (and yet purposelie omitting the cheefe) which that pious diuine makes vse of more for explication then for proofe of the doctrine. And thus these ill occupied Pedants trifle with him who had more learning, and grauitie, without comparison, then they and their whole Congregation nor yet had they both wit to cite the place they alledged trulie, but quoted the second booke for the fourth. Iuste according to this manner of proceeding the knight also dealeth with S. Thomas, the Councell of Trent, and Bellarmin and others, as if they had beene so destitute of arguments of scripture and Fathers for their proofes of the seuen Sacraments, that they were glad to refuge to figures and similitudes of seuen vir∣tues, seuen capitall vices, seuen planets, seuen
defects proceeding from Originall sinne, seuen dayes of vnleauened bread, the offering of se∣uen Rams, seuen lauers of naaman, seuen can∣dlestickes, seuen seales, seuen bookes and the like: whereas in truth these mysticall numbers are applied to the seuen Sacraments by the fo∣resaid authours whereby to confirme and de∣clare the matter more plainelie ouer and aboue their other most pregnant and authenticall proofes of the same as in them all and particu∣larlie in S. Thomas, and bellarmin, is too plai∣nelie to be seene in their workes, to be brought in question by anie one of reading and vnder∣standing; S. Thomas hauing seuen seuerallie distinct questions of the seuen Sacraments a parte, besides that he hath of them in generall: and the like I say of Bellarmin. And as for the Councell of Trent it either produceth proofes of scripture and Fathers actuallie for euerie particular Sacrament, or remittes the reader to other former Councells and decrees which haue them. And so wee see by this that Sir Humfrey doth but cogge and trifle for wante of solid subiect. Touching the citation of Caietan vpon the 5. cap. of S. Iames, it is true I finde the same which Sir Humfrey relates at the least in sense, and so I cannot accuse him in this place of the ordinarie imperfection which he vseth in ci∣ting authours. Neuerthelesse he might easilie
haue knowne that the same Caietan in his Commentarie vpon the 65. question of the 3. parte of S. Thomas art. 1. doth agree with him in the septenarie number of Sacraments: and therefore in his glosse vpon the second article of that same question he numbers Extreme Vnction for one of the seuen, saying: In titulo intellige per ordinem praedictum, ordinem quo nu∣merata sunt Sacramenta in praecedenti articulo. videlieet Baptisma, Confirmatio, Eucharistia, Paenitentia, Extrema Vnctio, Ordo, Matrimo∣nium. By which it is manifest that Caietan de∣fended with his master S. Thomas Extreme Vnction to be a Sacrament, and consequentlie he is no fauourer of Sir Humfrey in this point of which now we treat. And the same I saye of the same Caietan alledged by the knight as saying that the reader cannot inferre out of the wordes of S. Paule, Sacramentum hoc magnum est, that matrimonie is a Sacrament, because sainct Paule saith not, Sacramentum hoc magnum est, sed mysterium hoc magnum est. But what soeuer out of the predominating subtiltie of his wit, Caietan held of the interpretation of this place of sainct Paule: in which as also in the exposition of some other scriptures, he is noted and notorious to haue beene more subtil then solid, yet certaine it is that he absolutelie defended Matrimonie to be one of the seuen Sacraments of the Church as both his wordes
aboue cited doe manifestlie conuince, and also the great pūctuality with which he is knowne to haue obserued and followed his much res∣pected and reuerenced Patron sainct Thomas in all points of doctrine, swearing in a manner euerie where in the wordes of his master; so that the knight cannot haue as much as anie conlorable reason to imagin that Caietan stan∣des for him in this matter and against the Ro∣manists: As neither he hath to conceiue the like of Canus, whome he in the same manner cites as if we were a denier of matri∣monie to be a Sacrament, or at the least a testi∣fier that other diuines pronounce doubtfullie of the same: whereas in reallitie Canus in de∣fence of his owne priuate opinion that matri∣monie is not a Sacrament nor conferreth grace except when it is administred by a Preist, doth onelie name some diuines which varie in their opinions concerning the determinate matter & forme of matrimonie, and touching the māner how or whē it giues grace, yet both he and the rest constantlie & expressely teaching, that ab∣solutelie it hath both matter and forme and giues graces in one sorte or other, and numbe∣ring it among the rest of the seuen Sacraments as their writings doe testifie. So that it was great preposterousnesse in Sir Humfrey to vse the testimonie of Canus against the truth of the Sacrament of Matrimonie since neither he
nor those other diuines which he names viz. Lombard, Scotus, sainct Thom. Ricard. Pa∣lud. Durand. Vid. Magi∣strum. in 4. & vid. S. Th. in 3, part. q. Except they be detorted from their true sense and meaning can possiblie be imagined to haue beene others then professed Patrons and assertours of the whole septenarie number of Sacraments, as by all or most of their owne wordes cited by me in other places, may euidentlie appeare to the reader. And these being all the authors which the knigth cites is this paragraffe, or at the least all that deserue anser, we may plainelie see that not obstanding all the arte and skill which he hath vsed to make them seeme his owne, yet the. Roman faith touching the seuen Sacra∣ments of the Churche standes still firmelie auncient, vniuersall, and visible, which is that he intended to destroy, and I maintaine. Whence we may inferre for the cōclusion & censure thereof, that all which our aduersarie bringeth in it to proue that there is neither an∣tiquitie, nor vniuersalitie in the Fathers, nor consent in the schoolemen (as he spea∣keth) sufficient to shew the seuen Sacraments to be instituted by Christ, is meare Sophistrie, founded vpon his owne misinterpretations, falsifications, and corruptions of the authours he citeth, and that consequentlie his owne conditionall curse is absolutelie fallen vpon him, in which we must of necessitie leaue him
till such time as by humble recantation of his errours he shall desire absolution. And now hence I passe to the next Para∣graffe which is of the Communion vnder one kinde. In which the knight by a speciall paren∣thesis which he makes in his 172. page, peruer∣sely persuades his reader that the foresaid man∣ner of Communion in one kinde, was decreed as it were in dispite of God and man by the Coūcell of Constance, & that from the time of that Coūcell the Cōmunion vnder both kindes was adiudged heresie, which is not so, for the Roman Church doth not teach that the com∣munion in both kindes is hereticall, but onely that it is heresie to condemne the communion in one kinde for vnlawfull, or repugnant to Christs institution, and so his position is both false and calumnious, as appeares not onely by the decree of the same councell, but also by the tenour of the decree of the Councell of Trent neither of which councels defined communion in both kindes either conformable or discon∣formable to anie precept of either God or man in the nature of faith, but they onely declare the practise of the communion in one kinde as a thing not vnlawfull, or cōtrarie to Christs institution or precept, but otherwise conueniēt for the present state of the Church, in respect of the reuerence due to the Sacrament: Si quis di∣xerit ex Dei prae∣cepto, vel necessita∣te salutis omnes & singulos Christi fi∣deles vtrā∣que speciē sāctissimi Euchari∣stiae sacra∣menti su∣mere de∣bere, ana∣thema sit. Cōc. Trid. de cōmun. sub vtraq. specie. can. 1. vid. can. 2. and for other iuste causes also condemning them that
shall affirme that all and euerie faithfull person is bound to receiue both kindes either by the commaundement of God, or as necessarie to saluation by vertue of Christs institution: or that the communion in one kinde is vnlawfully appointed by the Church, or that the Church did erre therein. Which doctrine is so plainely declared by the two foresaid Councels and es∣pecially by the Councell of Trent, and so often repeated and inculcated by moderne diuines, (to say nothing of the more auncient) that if our aduersaries were not ouer much disposed to cauill they would neuer haue the face to ca∣lumniate the same by their misconstructions, as Sir Humfrey doth in this place. The knight cites some ten or eleuen Roman diuines, and a∣mong them to increase the number he foysteth in Cassander, whom yet he either knowes or ought to know he is none of ours: but the mat∣ter is not great because neither he nor the rest teach any thing here, cōtrarie to the doctrine of the Romā Church in this point: but they onely relate the custome of the Primatiue Church to haue beene that the lay people commonly re∣ceiued in both kindes: yet not denying but that the same succeeding Church hath vpon iuste reasons altered that manner of communion. Yea and the same authours here cited defen∣ding the lawfullnes thereof either in the verie same or in other places of their workes: nay and
Cassander. consult. de vtraque specie. some of them if not all, teaching with all that some times the communion in one kinde was practized in auncient ages, so that it was great madnesse in Sir Humfrey to produce then ei∣ther as confessers of want of antiquitie and vni∣uersalitie in the Roman Church, or for the proofe of them in the doctrine of the preten∣siue reformed Churches, since that out of their testimonies, as shall be declared, neither the one nor the other can with anie colorable pro∣babilitie possible be collected: and for this rea∣son and because I haue in an other place an∣sered what our aduersarie can say in this mat∣ter, I knowe I haue no need to proceed to particulars, but onelie pronounce my sentence of this whole Paragraph in generall termes: yet because I finde all, or manie of the authours cited to haue their sentences and meaning mangled and peruerted, therefore I deemed it conuenient to giue the reader notice in parti∣cular of the authours ill proceeding. And first altho' Vasquez with some others, is of a con∣trarie opinion to Taper & manie other diuines to wit houlding as more probable that those who receiue the Sacrament in both kindes doe receiue some more spirituall frute then the re∣ceiuers of one alone, yet neither doth he con∣demne the contrarie opinion and practice, not yet doth he conclude that it is absolutelie bet∣ter or safer for the laytie to receiue both formes
then one onelie: but rather defendes the quite contrarie expresselie in his 216. disputation and last chapter: where not obstanding his owne opinion defended in one of his former que∣stions, yet he solues the sectaries argument in this latter place, and so cleareth the difficultie of their obiection, that it is impossible for Sir Humfrey or anie of his confederates to gather anie thing in fauour of their position out of that authour, as his owne wordes doe make apparent to the reader of them, as here I place them in the margen.Licet se∣cundum aliquorū opinionē quam prae∣cedenti disput: de∣fendi, laici aliquo fru∣ctu priuē∣tur dum ipsis calix denegatur, tamen cū sumentes tantum v∣nam spe∣ciem nulla gratia ne∣cessaria ad salutem careāt (vt notauit Conciliū) omissis a∣lijs causis postulan∣tibus, recte potuit Ec∣clesia lai∣cis alterā speciem denegare. Vasq. to. 3. in 3. p. dis∣put. 216. cap. vlt. Salmeron is abused by Sir Humfrey in re∣garde he takes onelie some certaine wordes of his which seeme to make for his purpose, and omits others which make against him which follow in the verie next leafe, and doe so tem∣per the sense of the former that taking them together neither the one nor the other fauoure the reformed doctrine. For thus he saith.Nos enim &c. For we quoth hee, doe so confesse the custome to haue beene of communicating the laye people vnder both kindes, that yet allwayes in some cases, the vse of one kinde hath beene practized. Which wordes quite dashe Sir Humfreys de∣signe of prouing that the Church of Rome in this particular, hath created a newe article of faith manifestlie repugnant to Christs worde, institution, & practice of the primatiue Churh, except hee will be so audacious as to condemne
here also of sacriledge for her practice in those cases, as he doth our present Church. In which passage I much wonder at the slownes of him that otherwise vseth to be so nimble and actiue as that in this place he tooke not paines to turne one leafe further for the discouerie of the truth. And the same I say of Valentia who speakes iuste to the same sense and purpose de legit. vsu Eucharistiae cap. 10. as also did Father Fisher and Castro in the places cited by our aduersarie. And as for sainct Thomas vpon the 6. of sainct Iohn. And lyra in 1. Cor. 11. they neither of them disproue communion in one kinde, as Sir Humfrey doth alledge, but expresselie de∣fendit. Vide S. Thom. in 3. part. S. Thomas relates that the custome of the auncint Church was to communicate in both formes which custome he saith was ob∣serued euen till his dayes in some Churches where also, quoth hee, the ministers of the al∣tar doe continuallie communicate the bodie & bloud. But for danger of effusiō, saith he, in some Churches it is obserued that the Preist onelie receiue the bloud, and the rest the bodie. Nei∣ther is this, saith he, contrarie to the sentence of our Lord, because he that communicates the bodie, communicates also the bloud, since that Christ is whole in both the species or kindes euen in respect of both his bodie and bloud. Thus sainct Thomas. By which it is cleare howe farre he was from patronizing
Sir Humfreys new tenet maintaining that the communiō of the laitie in the Roman Church is but a halfe communion. Now touching Lyra, Sir Humfrey hath de∣ceiptfullie omitted those wordes of his, which include the verie reason & approbation of the change which the Roman Church hath made, it being the same which sainct Thomas alled∣geth in parte as his wordes in the margen declare.Fit autem hic mentio de duplici specie, nā in primi∣tiua Eccle∣sia sic da∣batur fide∣libus: sed propter periculū effusionis sanguinis, modo da∣tur tantū sub specie panis. Sa∣cerdos ta∣men cele∣brans ac∣cipit sub vtraque specie non tantum pro se sed etiam pro alijs Lira. in 1. Cor. 11. So that both these authours are so plaine against Sir Humfrey, and for vs, that a man may almost perceiue that he now re∣pents that euer he cited them, as also the au∣thours following. To the wordes of Arboreus: but now the communion of both kyndes is abolished: Sir Humfrey ought to haue added that au∣thours reason of the abolishment to wit this. Propter scandala quae con∣tigerunt, & adhuc continge∣re possūt. Arb. Theos. lib. 8.11. For the scandals which haue happened, and which yet may happen. And the like I say of Taper, to whose wordes should haue beene ioyned that which followes, videlicet. This communion of the people in both kindes hath danger of Sacriledge annexed vnto it in sheding the bloud of Christ, and in the omission of the chalis no danger doth occurre nor anie losse of Spirituall grace. The Councell of Constance is impertinen∣tlie alledged as I haue declared before. Bellar∣min in the same place and wordes cited by Sir Humfrey, doth directlie impugne that for which he is alledged by the knight, to wit for
the Communion of all the people in both kindes. For so he saith. Bellar. de Euchar. l. 4. c. 24. And besides▪ all did not receiue in both kindes. As for Cassander altho' we haue him not in the rancke of Romanists; Ex his ita∣que confi∣ci puto hanc inte∣gram in v∣traque panis & vini com∣munica∣tionē etsi simplici∣ter neces∣saria non habeatur, ei cōmu∣nicationi quae in al∣tera tantū specie fit, etiamsi mandato contraria non pute∣tur, multis nomini∣bus esse anteponē∣dam &c. Cass. loco. cir. yet for anie thing I can perceiue, hee doth not absolutelie stand for Sir Humfrey in the sub∣sustance of this Controuersie, as neither houl∣ding it absolutelie necessarie for the laytie to communicate in both kyndes, nor yet contra∣rie to Christs institution, as his owne wordes in that treatie page 1046. Doe plainelie either suppose or insinuate. And for as much as con∣cernes priuate or extraordinarie communion, he himselfe relates diuers examples of it. So that the reader may perceiue how smale rea∣son Sir Humfrey hath to vse Cassanders au∣thoritie for diuers respects in this matter, espe∣ciallie if he consider his owne drift in this place, altho' I cannot denie but the same Cassander leanes vnto him, in that he desires the present practice of the Roman Church might be chan∣ged as lesse perfect & legitimate then the con∣trarie, in his conceipte. And this being all I need to say touching the testimonies of the cited authours and of Sir Humfreyes proceedings about them, I will now conclude the censure of this whole Para∣graph; that directly it containeth nothing which requires so exacte a discussion as I haue made of it. And that I haue oftentimes mar∣uailed why the reformers should stand so per∣emptorily
against the Communion in one kinde, supposing that euen according to their owne principles, neither the words of Christ nor the intention of the minister, nor both these together, are of force and efficacy to make any change or alteration in the matter of the Sacra∣ment, but that when they haue said and done all they can, they shall remaine bread & wine as truely as if they had receaued them in the tauerne; especially if we consider yet far∣ther that, according to the reformed doctrine, the intention of the minister is not necessarily required to the constitution of any Sacrament; and yet without the same it is cleerly vnpossi∣ble to conceiue how the Eucharist can be re∣ceaued by them in remembrance of the death and passion of Christ more in both the formes of bread and wine then in one alone, especially supposing that by virtue of the institution and commaunde of Christ each of them in parti∣cular is to be receiued in memorie of him. And this I say hath caused me many times to won∣der, euen yet persuading my selfe the Nouel∣lists can haue no other motiue then the satisfa∣ction of their owne contentious spirits, to stand so nicely vpon this puntillio with the Church of Rome; which refractory proceeding of thē in this matter may yet seeme more vnreasonable to the reader if he consider that, altho' Vasquez and some other Romane diuines are of opinion
that greater fruites of grace are reaped by the communion in both kindes then in one, yet doth it not thence followe that the communion in one kinde cannot be lawfully practized, as our Precisians will needes haue it, nor yet that the communion vnder one kinde is but a halfe Communion, as the knight doth heere mali∣tiously inculcate; but in either of the two kinds it is most euident there is a perfect and intire Sacrament according to the true definition thereof, in regard there is found in either of the consecrated formes a visible signe of an inuisi∣ble grace instituted by God: as also because the body of Christ euen according to the tenet of our aduersaries being truely, really and sub∣stantially receiued vnder the forme of bread onely altho' they meane onely by faith; it doth follow infallibly that vnlesse they graunt that Christ can dye againe by separatiō of his bloud from his body, or that his perfect and intire body is not there receaued but onely a part of it: it doth I say necessarily follow that vnder the forme of bread alone there is Christs bloud with his body, and so a perfect communion of them both receaued in that one kinde. The Parahraph following is about prayer and seruice in an vnknowne tongue, in which point Sir Humfrey saith true in that he affir∣meth that the Roman Church celebrates Masse and publick seruice in Latin, and it is also true that the Councell of Trent hath de∣clared
it not to be expedient that it be celebra∣ted euerie where in the vulgar language. But yet it is false to say that either the Church or Councell hath commaunded it to be celebra∣ted in an vnknowne language; for Latin can∣not trulie be said to be an vnknowne language, but rather it is a generall language, a knowne speech, more vsed then anie one language in the world: And altho' it be not vnderstood of the ignorant sort of people, yet it is lesse vn∣coth vnto them then anie other language ex∣cepting their owne mother tongue, yea then anie other publike language, I meane then ei∣ther hebrew or greeke, and finallie it is a lan∣guage fitter for mutuall communication in re∣ligion then anie other tongue, and among the more learned sort of people of all nations, the most familiar of all. And I would faine knowe of the reformers what they haue to doe to call that in question which hath binne generallie practised in the Church for manie hundred yeeres before they and their reformation were hatched. Who appointed them for iudges in this matter? Let them meddle in their owne affaires, their cause is not ours, we are all one both in our religion, and in the forme, and rites of our religion; we communicate with all the members of our Church euen in the same ex∣ternall Ceremonies in what place soeuer they be, and they with vs. But you in England haue
built a new Church different euen from the rest of the pretended reformed Churches of o∣ther Countries; you are not vniforme, neyther in doctrine nor Ceremonies, and so it is not amisse for your purpose that you vse a language in your publick seruice in which you as little agree with your brothers as in your religion: Nay in my opinion supposing your separation in communion of religion, you haue taken a politick course to separate your selues also in the language of your seruice, otherwise it might happen vnto you and your French and dutch brothers, as it hath donne alreadie betweene the Gūmarists and Arminians, (espe∣ciallie now whē Arminianisme begins to spred itselfe) who are knowne to haue entered into the Church with zealous communication one with another and yet the feruour of their spi∣rits hath so much increased, that before the sermon was ended, there hath appeered good store of broken pates and perhaps worse; for auoyding of which inconueniencies our En∣glish Nouellists as it may be supposed haue their seuerall Churches and formes of seruice, and doctrine for themselues, the French, and the Dutch: whereas one the contrarie the pro∣fessours of the Romane Church by reason of their publick seruice or Masse is in a common language, are put to no such shifts, but where∣soeuer they meet, they finde meanes to serue
God and to communicate together in the verie same manner they doe in their owne Coūtries, whether they be old or yong, learned, or igno∣rant; of which great comfort the reformers by reason of their new forme of seruice in the vulgar tongue, in manie occasions doe wilfully depriue themselues. To say nothing of the dignitie which the seruice of God receiueth from the grauitie of the Latine tongue, and the disparagement which it suffereth by a vulgar language, supposing also that by that meanes euen the secret misteries of the Christian faith come to be as familiar in the mouthes of euerie apish boy as they be to the greatest Do∣ctour of the Church, a thing both much re∣pugnant to the practise of auncient times, and also which giueth great occasion to manie to vilifie, and disesteeme the sacred wordes of God included in the publike seruice; yea and oftentimes the thinges themselues by the wordes signified, as experience doth daily teach vs: to omit the alteration & corruption which it is more subiect vnto in a vulgar tongue then in Latine which is alwaies the same, as the same experience doth make manifest. But Sir Humfrey goeth on, and tells his reader, that some of the Trent Bishops adiud∣ged the first part of the decrec of the Councell to be questionable, for that it seemed to con∣tradict itselfe in that it affirmeth the Masse to
containe much instruction for the faithfull, and yet commaundeth that parte of the seruice to be vttered with a lowe voyce, and in an vn∣knowne tongue, and for this, for want of better authours, he citeth the historie of the Councell of Trent. But all this is but a meere cauill grounded in the relation of a false historiogra∣pher: for that if anie such thing had happened after the foresaid decree was once confirmed, it is not so long a time since the Councell was finished, but that the fact of those Bishops would haue binne knowne to the world, yea and their punishment for such their temeritie, if they had remayned refractorie, would haue binne so published, as at the least some one or other writer would haue taken notice of the same, as well as the authour of that relation: neyther is their anie contradiction in the said decree, in regard it is manifest that by the in∣struction of the people, the Councell meaneth eyther wholie or cheeflie the epistle & Gospell of the Masse; as also for that the same Coun∣cell withall doth expresselie giue Order that the Pastours of the Church interpret and de∣clare the misteries of the Masse to their paris∣honers, which order taketh away all colour of contradiction which can be imagined in the wordes of the decree; especiallie supposing that in what language or with what voice so∣euer the Masse be celebrated, the foresaid ex∣position
will supplie all the obscuritie which from thence can arise. But how be it this which I haue said is true: yet I haue discouered by reading that passage in the foresaid Historie, that it doth not so relate it, but quite in an o∣ther manner, for that historie doth not affirme that the Tridentine Bishops made that doubt or question of the decree which ordaineth the celebration of Masse in a lowe voyce and vn∣knowne language as ambiguous in the con∣struction: Mandat sancta Sy∣nodus pa∣storibus & singulis curam a∣nimarum gerentibus vt frequē∣ter inter missarum celebra∣tionē vel per se vel per alios ex ijs quae in Missa leguntur aliquid exponant &c. Con∣cil. Trid. Sess. 22. cap. 8. but the historie saith expresselie that the Protestants made that doubt by way of obiection, to which the Bishops ansered in that forme which the same historie relates. Which is so foule a falsification in Sir Humfrey that I confesse I had smale mynde to make anie fur∣ther examen of the rest of the citations of this booke if otherwise I had not alreadie so farre engaged my selfe. Let the reader suruey the 650. page of the Trid. historie printed in Latine at Franckford 1621. and he will easilie finde the deceipte. And now you see this is but a fiction of a contradiction deuised in discredit of the do∣ctrine of the Councell in this point either by the knight, or some other Sycophāt of whome he receiued it vpon truste. Besides that if anie such thing had happened in the time of the dis∣cussion of the doctrine of the Councell, yet certaine it is that all such doubt was cleered and quite taken away by the establishment of
the decree itselfe; whence it also appeereth how false a consequence Sir Humfrey dedu∣ceth out of the same decree, to wit that because the Councell affirmeth that the Masse doth affoard great instruction to the people, and for that end ought to be interpreted vnto them, therefore sayth the knight the Fathers of the Councell doe consequentlie affirme that the seruice and prayer in the reformed Churches in the vulgar tongue was better for the edifica∣tion of the Church. For it is manifest out of the verie same place cited by our aduersarie himselfe that the Councell of Trent doth com∣mand that the Pastours doe frequently expoūd some parte of those things which are read in the Masse, not for that it hauing decreed the contrarie, could possiblie hold it better to haue the Masse in a vulgar language then otherwise, but because that, supposing for other rea∣sons it was better for the Church the Masse should not be in a vulgar tongue, and that besides this, it includeth matter of great in∣struction for the faithfull people, therefore the Councell prudentlie decreed not for one onelie, but for both these causes, that it should oftentimes by the Pastours and Preists be de∣clared to the common people for their greater edification and better vnderstanding of the do∣ctrine contayned in it. And this is all that in substance the Councell eyther sayth, or from
the wordes of the decree can be trulie inferred; and so, that from the Romanists owne con∣fession it can be gathered that the seruice and prayer in the vulgar tongue was better for the edification of the Church, is but such a dreame as Sir Humfrey vseth to haue the night before whensoeuer he citeth the Councell of Trent in fauour of the reformed doctrine. After this the knight endeuoureth to proue that the Masse ought not to be celebrated in a silent and vnknowne voyce, because sayth he the Apostles were cōmanded to showe forth the Lords death till his comming: and to this end he citeth Haymo vpon the 14. chapter of the firste to the Corinth, and Iustinian the Em∣perour in Nou. Const. out of Cassander, also the Greg. Decet. Tit. 31. de Off. Iud. Ord. cap. 14. But to this I answere that both the knights reason and the testimonies of these authours are impertinent, because the command layd vpon the Apostles was not that in this misterie they should shewe forth Christs death in words, but principallie indeedes, and therefore our Sauiour in the institution of the Eucharist did not bid his Apostles, say it in remembrance of him, but doe it in remembrance of him. Hoc facite in meam commemorationem. Otherwise the Sectaries themselues should be conuinced to violate Christes commaundement, since that those who receiue their communion say
not one worde. In like manner let the reader veiw and vnderstand perfectlie the sense of the the wordes cited out of other authours, and he will easilie perceaue there is not one sillable in them against Latine seruice or prayer as con∣demning it eyther for vnlawfull in itselfe or o∣therwise contrarie to the commandement of God. Haymo doth onelie comment vpon that passage of sainct Paul 1. Cor 14. If I am ignorant of the virtue of the voyce, I shall be to him to whome I speake barbarous, onelie declaring in playner words that which the Apostle spea∣keth breiflie and obscurelie, but sayth not a worde against the office of the Church in La∣tin. Iustinian (if anie such constitution he made, of which it is much doubted, by reason this clause is not founde in the auncient translation, neither is it expounded by Cuiacio) ordaineth onelie in generall that Bishops, and Preists ce∣lebrate the oblation, and minister the Sacra∣ments of Baptisme and the Eucharist non tacito modo not secretlie, but with a lowde voice; but he speaketh not in particular of all partes of the Masse, and at the least he speaketh not of the Canon except he meanes of the wordes of consecration which the Romanists doe not denie but the Grecians haue a custome of pro∣nouncing them loude. And as for other partes of the Masse, the most of them are pronoun∣ced commonlie in the Romane Church so that
the auditours may heere. And according to this Iustinian peraduenture might aduise the Preistes of his time to doe, when neuerthelesse it is certaine the Masse was in no vulgar lan∣guage. The decretalls speake not of anie vul∣gar tongue but onelie of Greeke and Latin, as, the decree of Innocent the third which may be seene in the ninth chap. of the Generall Councell of Lateran, doth declare. Neyther doth the Roman Church so strictlie command that the publike seruice be ministred in the La∣tine tongue, that she doth condemne eyther the Greeke or Syrian Church for vsing the Grecian or Caldaian tongue in the diuine of∣fices or publike seruice, but onelie comman∣deth as more couenient that they be not per∣formed in a vulgar language. Lastly Sir Humfrey citeth some eight or nine Romanists who confesse (sayth he) that in the first ages publike prayers were vsed for the vn∣derstāding of the people. But to omit that he v∣seth no great sinceritie in the citation and tran∣slatiō of the testimonies of some of the authours he citeth in this paragraph, as may appeere par∣ticularlie in the quotation of Waldensis; I say not to stand here vpon this which I shall more conuenientlie examen afterwardes: I answere, that those authours affirme that which we doe not denie, to wit, that perhaps (which worde Sir Humfrey deceitfullie leaues out in
his translation of S. Tho. testimonie cited out of his 3. lection vpon 1. Cor. 14.) In 1. Cor. 14. lect. 3. the case of the primitiue Church was different from the practise of the ptesent time in this matter: yet withall the same authours doe affirme that the alteration was made vpon iust causes, which causes are so sufficientlie deliuered by Bellar∣mine and others, euen those whome the knight heere citeth, that I need not rehearse their rea∣sons they being so easilie to be found as they are to those that reade their bookes: And al∣tho' sainct Thomas aduertiseth his reader, that it might haue seemed madnesse in the primitiue Church to haue performed all the Ecclesiasti∣call offices in the Latine tongue, for that they were rude & ignorāt in the rites of the Church and ceromonies, yet doth he adde that now all are so well instructed that tho' it be in Latine, the people vnderstands what is donne in the Church: whose saying is most true, at least in generall yea and in particular so farre as is ne∣cessarie for euerie person, state, and vocation; for that throu' the diligence of their pastours and preachers, and their owne industrie, they may haue sufficient instruction. Howbeit that if it were necessarie for euerie one that prayes or sings to vnderstand all they say, the Puritans themselues might put vp their pipes, it being most certainely true that there be manie things in the psalmes which they sing so merilie, and
in the scriptures which they read so readilie, Conscqui∣tur ergo Canonem clare & a∣perte le∣gendū vt ad gratia∣rum actio∣nem Sa∣cerdotis populus respōdeat, Amen. Cassander. ex Gerar∣do Lori∣chio p. 65. which by reason of their great obscuritie they cannot possiblie vnderstand euen in their owne mother tongue. And from hence I passe to a breefe Suruey of the rest of the authors cited in this paragraph, among which I finde Cassander in the first rancke of corruption: for altho' the testimonies which Cassander cites doe not proue fully his intent yet is it euident by the wordes of those he produceth that he speakes in that places of the Canon of the Masse espe∣ciallie when he sayes in the title of his chapter canonicam precem &c. And Sir Humfrey tran∣slates it not the Canō of the Masse as he ought to haue done, but Canonicall prayers, so odious and reformidable vnto him is the reporte of that great Canon that he durst not name it. Moreouer the testimonie of Cassander is de∣torted by Sir Humfrey quite from the sense in which he speakes it. For he speakes not there of the vulgar tongue one worde, but whether the Canon of the Masse ought to be pronoun∣ced with a lowde voyce (especiallie the con∣secration) that the people may heare it and an∣ser, Amen. And the same I (or Cassander forme me) anser to the constitution of Iustinian which Cassan∣der himselfe alledges to that same purpose and in no other sense. And so in like manner the wordes of the Decretals are violentlie drawe
to a sense repugnant to the authors meaning that is from doctrinall tongues to vulgar lan∣guages. To the wordes of Lyra, if he had dealt sin∣cerelie, Sir Humfrey ought to haue added those which immediatlie ensue and explicate his minde more clearelie: Sed postquam populus mul∣tiplicatus fuit & consueuit se conformare ministris Ecclesiae vtpote stando cum dicitur Euangelium deposito caputio adorando Eucharistiam, & consi∣milia fiunt in Ecclesia Latina in Latino, & sufficit quod Clericus respondeat pro populo, expeditius enim fit hoc modo quam in vulgati. But since the people increased and is accustomed to conforme it selfe to the ministers of the Church, to wit by stan∣ding at the Gospell, by puting of their bonet to adore the Eucharist and such like, are done in the Latine Church in Latin, and it is sufficient that the clearke ansers for the people, for it is thus more readilie per∣formed then in the vulgar tōgue. Lyr. in 1. Cor. 14. Which wordes are so plaine against Sir Humfrey in diuers respects that he may be ashamed to heare them. Belethus cited out of Cassander to proue that seruice and prayer must be in the vulgar language, is abused by them both. Inde etiam inoleuit v∣sus vel lau∣dabilis cō∣suetudo in Ecclesia vt pronūtia∣to litera∣liter Euā∣gelio sta∣tim in vul∣gari, po∣pulo ex∣ponere∣tur. Belet. in Proae. Exp. di∣uinorum offic. For Belethus ex∣presselie supposeth that the Masse and office of the Preist are in Latine, and therefore euen in this same place and euen in some of the wordes cited by Cassander he mentioneth a
laudable custome of some places an which, sayth he, the Gospell being pronounced, it is presentlie expounded in the vulgar tongue. Now if it were read in the Masse by the Preist in the vulgar tongue, then it had beene vaine for Belethus yea and impertinent to haue made mention of that custome in the entrance of his worke of expounding the diuine offices for the vse of the lesse learned sorte of the Clergie as he professeth to vndertake. It is true he hath in the same passage that it was prohibited to speake with tongues without an interpreter, but that is nothing els but the very same which the Apostle himselfe declared 1. Cor. 14. vn∣derstanding by tongues the miraculous speech of strange languages which the speakers them selues did not vnderstand, aboute which saith this author there was in the Primatiue Church a prohibition except it were with an interpre∣ter. And this is that which by accomodation Belethus applyes to the argument of his booke by way of Prologue. In the rehearsall of D. Hardings wordes Sir Humfrey takes onelie those which testifie that in the Primatiue Church prayers were in the vulgar language. But he leaues out the iuste reasons which the Doctor alledges for the al∣teration of the same made by the authoritie of the Church euen with in the first foure hun∣dreth yeares: as also he omits those pregnant
proofes which he brings to showe that six hundreth yeares after Christ the seruice of the Church was in no other language then in Greeke or Latine: By all which the reader may perceiue this author is not sincerelie dealt with in this passage, that which yet will more plainelie appeare if he will please to see his an∣ser to Iewels chalenge the 3. article. The testimonie of Waldensis is vsed by Cassander onely to proue that diuine seruice or Masse ought to be pronounced with an intelli∣gible voyce that the people may anser; Amen, but not to proue that the publike office must be in vulgar language, and so it is imperti∣nent. Honorius cited by Sir Humfrey page 193. is falsified in regarde he is alledged for the cause of the alteration of the ancient custome of the vse of seruice in a knowne tongue. For that author speakes not a word of the vulgar language but onely of the secret pronoūcing of the Canon which was decreed, saith he, (I knowe not howe truely) by occasion of a strange accident which happend in times past touching that matter. Vnde sinodali decreto sub anathemate est praeceptum vt nullus Canonem nisi in libro & in sacris vestibus, & super altare, & super sacrificium legat. In which words I knowe not what linx except our Egleeyd Humfrey can see seruice in the vulgar tongue.
Gretzer is abused both in sense and wordes. In sense because he speakes onely of the Latin tongue and of that time when it was either vulgar or very common to manie nations: and yet the knight applyes his speech to proue that publike seruice ought to be deliuered in the vulgarly knowne tongue of euerie nation and at all times, not contenting himselfe with lesse then this. In wordes he doth also abuse Gret∣zerus, for that he cites them neither intirely nor consequenter in English, omitting or at the least altering those which haue relation to the authors precedent sentence, to wit: hinc illae ex∣hortationes &c. hence are those exhortations of the Fathers &c. and also others before them which he ought to haue rehearsed compleatly because they are to the same purpose. I will put the whole tenour of his wordes in the margen that the reader may more plainely see the fraude:Latini Pa∣tres quos citat. (Whita∣kerus) lo∣qunn tur De eo tē∣pore quo lingua La∣tina erat multis gē∣tibus vul∣garis, aut valde cō∣munis, hinc om∣nes simul psallebant & Missae linguae populo nota cele∣bātur quia Latina lingua erat omnibus vel pleris∣que nota. Hincillae Patrū ex∣hortatio∣nes vt om∣nes simul psallant, vtque fa∣ciant at∣tēte & in∣telligibili∣ter vocē∣que suam cum Sa∣cerdotum vocibus coniun∣gant. Quae admoni∣tiones iu∣stissimae erant quā∣doquidem lingua au∣ditoribus non igno∣sa omnia peragebā∣tur, & cō∣suetudo ita ferebat vt tota ec∣clesia si∣mul psal∣leret. Nūc alia est ra∣tio anti∣quato vul∣gari lin∣guae Lati∣nae vsu, quam lin∣guā prop∣ter inter∣missum communē vsum, ex Ecclesia diuinisque osficijs minime conuenie∣bat extur∣bari, inque locū eius vulgares & verna∣culas sub∣stitui. Mul∣ta etiam dicta Pa∣trum &c. Gretzerus defens. lib. 2. c. 16. and how repugnant Gretzerus is to Sir Humfreys tenet in this particular as pro∣fessedly he must of necessitie be, as being a pro∣fessed defender of Bellarmins doctrine in mat∣ters of Controuersie. But now because I haue already treated in part of this before, and breifly giuen sentence already of that which Sir Hum∣frey produceth for the defense of his doctrine, I will include the contents of this whole para∣graph in the same censure, and so passe along to the next which is of the worship of images,
where we are to examine whether the knight bringeth any sounder matter then he hath donne heere, where (as I should haue noted before) he falsely relateth a historie of certaine shepheardes out of his false frend Cassander, which shepherds he affirmeth according to his emendicated relation, to haue transubstantia∣ted bread and wine into the body and bloud of Christ by pronuntiation of the words of conse∣cration which they had learned; whereas in∣deed the authenticall historie of that strange accident written by Sophronius, saith onely that the bread and wine were suddenly burnt by fire from heauen and the shepheards stru∣ken speachlesse for a time. But this howsoeuer it happened, being it can serue Sir Hum∣frey for no greater purpose then to replenish his pages, I leaue it to the reader to consider of this his proceeding as he pleaseth. Presently in the entrance of the 7. Paragraph Sir Hūfrey pronoūceth a very sharpe sentence against the Coūcell of Trent for decreeing that due honour and veneration is to be giuen to the images of Christ and his Saintes, condem∣ning it for a wicked and blasphemous opinion. Loe heere the sentence of condemnation, which is to be iudged so much the more rash and temerarious in respect the peremptorie Iudge leaueth out the greater part of the do∣ctrine he censureth, which if he had added at
large as it standeth in the Councell it would sufficiently haue iustified it selfe: and because Sir Humfrey for reasons of state would not take so much paines, I will doe it for him. The Councell therefore in the 25. Sess. page 202. decreeth in this manner, The images of Christ the Virgin the Mother of God and o∣ther Saintes are cheifly in Churches to be had and retained, and due honour and veneration is to be giuen vnto them, not that it is beleiued there is in them any diuinity or virtue for which they are to be worshipped, or that any thing is to be asked of them, or that confidence is to be put in them, as in times past the Gen∣tiles did who put their trust in Idols, but be∣cause the honour which is exhibited vnto ima∣ges is referred vnto the Prototipes which they represent, so that by the images which we sa∣lute, and before which we vncouer our heads and kneele, we adore Christ and reuerence the Sainctes whose similitude they haue, that which by the decrees of councels especially of the second Nicene Synod hath binne establi∣shed against the oppugners of images, thus the decree of the Councell of Trent; in which we finde not one word either wicked or blasphe∣mous, nay rather euery word soundeth nothing but piety and religion towards Christ and his Sainctes, whom it will haue honoured not only in themselues but also in and by their images,
which manner of honour as it is declared by the Councell is not onely not contrary to scriptures as Sir Humfrey falsely affirmeth, but also very conformable to them, both in regard the scriptures make mention of honour due vn∣to materiall things for the relation of represen∣tation which they haue to God or other his holie creatures: Psal. 95. Matth 5. as also for that we vse no other reuerence to images thē the Church doth teach vs, whose authority the same scripture com∣mendeth and commandeth vs to follow and obey, & more then this the Coūcel is so farre frō attributing to images anie vnlawfull manner of honour, that it doth not once vse either the worde worship, or adore, except where it spea∣keth of Christ himselfe: which wordes neuer∣thelesse if they be taken in the sense in which diuines doe commonlie take them, include no offence at all, as signifying an exteriour action of honour indifferent euen according to the phrase of scripture both to God and creatures, and being distinguished onelie according to the diuersitie of the internall affection, and submission of the minde, which submission and affection in the honouring of an inanimate creature, as an image is, is neuer by the wor∣shipper exhibited to the image it selfe, but onelie to the thing it representeth: nay nor yet the exteriour signe of adoration as genuflectiō, or inclination of the bodie, is giuen to the image
itselfe for itselfe and to remaine in it, but rather by the image which we salute, or before which wee prostrate our selues, the same signe of ho∣nour is transferred ioyntelie with the affection of the mynde to the thing which is adored. Which doctrine is both so cleare in itselfe and so plainelie declared by the Councell expreslie teaching that the honour exhibited vnto thē is referred to the Paterne, Cōc. Trid. Sess. 25. de∣cret. de imag. that a verie child may conceiue it to be free from all superstitious worship and adoration, in so much that it is but grosse ignorance, malice, and madnesse in our aduersaries to exclaime against the Romanists as idolaters for the honour they giue to images. And I would faine knowe of Sir Humfrey or anie other of his reformed companions in what place of scripture this proposition. The images of Christ and his saints are to be duelie honou∣red: is condemned for wicked & blasphemous? and the same I say of the auncient Fathers. And if they cannot produce as much as one onelie place either out of scripture or Fathers which doth truelie serue to that purpose, I meane which doth truelie condemne the foresaid pro∣position in that manner, as I knowe neither they nor the knight can performe, let him con∣fesse that is censure of the Romanists is teme∣rarious and false, and nothing els but a reno∣uation of an old Iewish complainte against the Christians of more auncient ages.
It is true I knowe the reformers vse com∣monlie to alledge for their denyall of honor to images both scripture and Fathers as also Sir Humfrey doth in this paragraffe, and particu∣larlie they vse to produce the wordes of that which they call the second cammaundement, to wit, thou shall not make to thy selfe anie grauen image. But touching this I haue showed aboue In the 4. Period. that according to the doctrine of S. Au∣gustin there is no such second commaunde∣ment, those wordes being onelie a parte of the first. Secondlie, howsoeuer the matter stands, certaine it is that except the sectaries will turne Iewes or Turkes they ought not to take those wordes in that rigorous sense which they doe, for so by consequence if they tye themselues so strictlie to the letter of the text, they must doe the same in the commaundement of the Sa∣baoth and so they will be come Sabatizing Iewes indeed. Wherefore except Sir Humfrey will turne plaine Talmudist, he can proue no∣thing against Christians out of the foresayd wordes. Now touching authorities of auncient Fa∣thers he confesseth that hee for beareth to cite anie in particular, and what soeuer he falselie pretendeth, the true reason was because he founde none to cite except hee had produced such places as they vse onelie against the ido∣latrie of Gentils and Ethnikes as, Chamier lib. 21. de imag. Daniell Cha∣mier
and others of the reformed Doctours commonlie doe, which places neuer the lesse secluding their owne glosses vpon them doe not in anie sorte fauore their cause. And so Sir Hūfrey insteede of Fathers hee cites Iewes and Gentils in whose doctrine touching this point, hee showeth himselfe to be more con∣uersant then in Christian writers as finding more for his purpose in them then in these, and therefore also as I imagin hee vseth no other answere to Bellarmin affirming that the ma∣king of images is not absolutelie prohibited by the lawe of God because God commaunded images to be made, the knight I say vseth no other anser then the anser of the Iewes, to wit that God did laye a generall commaunde vpon them, and not vpon himselfe: and so I say no more of it, but leaue to the reader to iudge howsolid and good such an ansere may be, and whether it sauoreth not much more of Iu∣daisme then of Christian religion. True it is hee cites diuers authours which haue writ since the Councel of Francford, but some of thē as Agrippa, Erasmus, Cassander & Chemnitius, are of no authority with vs, others are suspected of corruptiō, I meane to haue ben corrupted by malignant publishers, as Polidor Virgil and Agobardus. Others are impertinēt∣lie alledged in regarde they eyther speake onelie of the image of God himselfe as Philo
Iudeus and S. Augustin, or of the manner of worship not of the substance of the honor, as Peresius Bellarmin. Wicelius, Hincmarus: for that they eyther onelie condemne the adora∣tion of pictures takeing the word adoration for that kinde of honour which is due vnto God onelie, or els they speake onelie of the priuate errous of some simple people: of which sorte is Polidor & Biel when they reprehend the abuses and superstitions of some simple people, who out of ignorance giue more honour to images then eyther they ought to doe or the Church alloweth, yet doth Polidor expresselie approue of due honour of the same as his owne wordes declare euen in those places where he vseth that reprehension: for thus he saith after he had made relation of diuers images of Christ and his Apostles mentioned by Eusebius and others euen in the most primatiue yeares of the Church. Hinc igitur natum vt merito tam ipsi Salua∣ri quā ei¦diuis sta∣tuas in templis po∣ni & vene∣rationi ha∣beri consue∣uerit. Polid lib. 6. cap. 5. Hence therefore grewe the vse of put∣ting in Churches and honoring as well the sta∣tues of our Sauiour, as his Saincts. And he adds Ecquis igitur tam dissolutus tamque audacia prae∣ditus est qui velit possitne dubitare seu aliter som∣niare ne dicam sentire vel cogitare de imaginum cultu ac demum sit tot longe Sanctissimorum Pa∣trum decreto constitutum. By which wordes it is manifestly conuinced that is other wordes razed by order of the In∣dex haue either beene foisted in by the new
sectaries, to wit those which auerre that till the time of S. Hierome all the auncient Fathers reiected worship of images for feare of ido∣latrie; or els he meanes onelie that they durst not practice the same least their action might seeme idolatrous either to the ignorant Gentils, or to such as were then latelie conuerted from Gentilisme and as yet but infirme in faith, and easilie scandalized in this nature. All which neuerthelesse cannot possible preiudice the do∣ctrine and practice of the Church it selfe in ge∣nerall: So that neither anie of these authours seuerallie nor all of them together proue that absolutelie to honore the images of Christ and his saints is wicked or blasphemous, which is the assertion the knight here maintaines; and yet he is not ashamed to call their testimonies the confession of his aduersaries, among which also that his impudencie might more clearelie appeare, he foysteth in to that rancke Bellar∣min and Vasquez, which authours if the reader be not ouer grosselie ignorant he will easilie perceiue, at the least by the rest of their workes, that they cannot truelie fauore Sir Humfreys tenets in this point of Controuersie, they ha∣uing both writ professedly of it against the re∣formers doctrine and in defense of the practise of the Roman Church touching the vse and honour of images. And as for the Emperours Valens and Theo∣dosius
whome he citeth out of Crinitus saying they made proclamation to all Christians a∣gainst the images of Christ. It is false that those two Emperours euer published anie decree a∣gainst the images of Christ, but expresselie in honour of of the same by establishing by lawe that the image of the Crosse of Christ should not be framed vpon the ground, as vpon the stones of sepulchers or graues where it might easilie be prophaned by the feet of those that passed ouer them, and that this is the trueth of that passage of those two Emperours, or at the least of Theodosius, Crinitus his verie wordes would haue plainelie declared if they had not shrunke in the wetting I meane if they had ben intirelie related by the knight who is not the first that hath corrupted the te∣nour of Theodosius his lawe by leauing out the worde, humi, vpon the grounde for the wordes of the foresaid lawe being thes, let not the Crosse of Christ be painted vpon the gro∣unde, or some such like, by leauing out the wordes, vpon the grounde, the sense as you see cometh to be quite contrarie, that is the sense falleth out to be this, let not the Crosse of Christ be painted, which trick of the sectaries was discouered long since by Alanus Copus in his 4. Dialogue the 11. chap. to their vtter shame and discredit. And yet besides this, I maruell greatelie that either Sir Humfrey or
his predecessours offer to make vse of the foresaid wordes of the lawe which as they are cited by him are so generall that they quite cōdemne the practice of the reformed brothers themselues, none or verie few of them being as yet mounted to that degree of puritie as ex∣presselie to proclame a generall lawe against the pictures of Christ as not to be painted or grauen at all, and so I conclude that either those wordes of the two Emperours are to be read as the Romanists doe vse to read them, and then they plainelie prooue the reuerence of the Crosse to haue beene practized in auncient times: or if they be to be read so generallie as the sectaries will haue them, then if they proue anie thing, they doe no lesse then reproue euen the Puritans themselues and their practice in that particular. To the testimonie of Tertullian whom also so the knight produceth l. de idolat. c. 5. saying. Thou hast his law make thou no image. And presēt∣lie after, make no image against the law vnlesse God commaunde the as he did moyses: I answere first that if it be against the lawe to make anie image at all, then be these wordes of Tertul∣lian as much against the reformers as the Romanists. For both the Church of England and all the Lutheran Churches at the least, make both the images of Christ and his Apo∣stles. And I know a famous Puritan I meane
a pure Caluinist (whose name is Daniell Cha∣mier) who expresselie defendes that images are not absolutelie prohibited by that precept which he calleth the second commaundement, Chamier lib. 2. de imag. but onelie to the end to honore them reli∣giouslie. So that the wordes of Tertullian must of necessity be either otherwise tempered then they be by Sir Humfrey, or they will fall vpon his owne Church, as well as vpon the Roman Church. Wherefore I answere secondlie that Tertul∣lian speakes onelie against idolatrous images, or Idols, as the verie argument of his booke doth shewe, which is intituled against idolatrie not against Christian images, as is manifestlie conuinced out of an other worke of his, De Pudi∣citia. in which he maketh expresse mention of the pi∣cture of Christ himselfe grauen in the chalices of his time, which he also mētioneth as a thing frequentlie practized: so that vnlesse Sir Hum∣frey will say that Tertullian plainelie contra∣dicted himselfe, he cannot possiblie be imagi∣ned to haue spoaken against the images of Christ and his saincts, but onelie against such as the Gentils in his time, or the Iewes made in time of the old Testament contrary to the lawe of God as being representations of false and fained gods and godisses as is owne wordes in his booke aboue cited plainelie testifie, where thus he discourseth against the Christian ma∣kers,
of Idols. Potes vnum Deum praedicare qui rantos efficis? Canest thou preach one God who makest so manie? Tot a die ad hanc partem zelus fidei perorabit ingemens Christianum ab idolis in Ecclesiam venire, de aduersaria officina in domum Dei. The zeale of faith will plead all the day long on this side lamenting a Christian to come from idols into the Church, from the aduerse officine in to the house of God. And a little after: to reach those handes to the bodie of our Lord, which giue bodies to deuils.Eas manus admouere corpori Domini quae dae∣monijs corpora conferūt. The same I say of Origē cited out of Cassāder by Sir Hūfrey, whome they both abuse in that they vse his testimonie against the veneration of images in the primatiue Church. For I haue diligently read his 7. booke cited by thē wher I finde him to speake much against idols but nothing against Christian images his wordes are these. Illarum enim gentium nemo ab his alie∣nus est quod vereatur numen ob viles has ceremo∣nias detrahere quae versantur circa aras & mate∣rias effigiatas varijs imaginibus, nec quod intelli∣gat daemonas inhaerere certis locis & statuis siue in∣cantatos quibusdam magicis carminibus siue alios incubantes locis semel praeoccupatis vbi lurconum more se oblectant victimarum nidoribus volupta∣tem captantes nefariam & vetitā diuinis atque na∣turae legibus. Caeterum Christiani homines & Iu∣daei sibi temperant abhis propter illud legis: Domi∣num Deum tuum timebis & ipsi soli seruices. Et
propterillud non erunt tibi dij alienipraeter me, & non facies tibi simulachrum nec vllam effigiem &c. Non adorabis ea neque seruies illis. Aliaque multa his similia quae adeo nos prohibent ab aris & simulachris vt etiam emori iubeant citiùs quam cotaminemus nostrā de Deo fidem talibus impieta∣tibus. Et postea. Liquet enim haec dedicari ab ho∣minibus falsam de Deo opinionem habentibus. For none of those nationes is free from these things be∣cause they feare to dishonore the diuine power in respect of thes vile ceremonies which are vsed before the altars, and tables carued with diuers images: For that they neyther vnderstand that deuils inhabit in certaine places, and statues either inchaunted by certaine magicall verses, or others lying in places once preoccupated, where they delite themselues life gulliguts with the sauore of the sacrifices, taking nefarious delyte prohibited both by diuine lawes, and the lawes of nature. But Chri∣stians and Iewes temper themselues from these for that of the lawe: Thou shalt feare thy lord God, and shalt serue him alone. And for that. Thou shalt not haue strange Gods besides mee. And. Thou shalt not make to thy selfe anie semblance, or anieli∣kenes &c. Thou shalt not adore them nor serue thē. them, and manie o her things like to these which so debarre vs from altars, & likenesses, that they com∣maunde vs sooner to dye them to contaminate our faith of God with such impieties. And afterwardes he addes. It is cleare that these things are de∣dicated by men which haue a false opinion of God
&c. Thus origen aboute the end. By whose owne wordes the reader may euidentlie per∣ceiue, he discourseth onelie against the images and altars of false Gods. Which authors wordes I did therefore so largely relate that he himselfe might demonstrate howe much he is abused both by Cassander and Sir Humfrey touching this matter. And indeed I haue often times much wondered to see the great stupiditie of the sectaries in this point, and especiallie the most learned sorte of them, in they be either so sotishlie ignorant or so Iewishlie super∣stitious and blind, that they are not able to di∣stinguish betweene the honour which Chri∣stians giue to the picture of Christ true God and man, and the worship which the Gentils giue to the images of their imaginarie and counterfeit Gods. Not ceasing either in their sermons or ordinarie discourses to compare most grosselie the one with the other, and to pronounce sentence of idolatrie against them both a like, and applying most absurdelie vnto the condemnation of the reuerence which the Romanists vsuallie practise towardes the fo∣resaid images of Christ and his saincts those same sentences of scripture and Fathers which by them were onelie spoken against the per∣nicious errour of the Pagans, whereas in truth there is as much distance betwixt the one and the other as there is betwene Heauen and
earth, God and the deuill, Christ and Belial. the person represented by the picture of Christ being both capable and worthie of honour, but the persons represented by the images of the false gods being neither capable nor worthie of worship as being either wicked men or plaine deuills. And moreouer, the honour ex∣hibited to the picture of Christ being not gi∣uen to the picture for the picture or by the pi∣cture itselfe I meane nor without relation to the Prototipe, nor yet in the picture perma∣nentlie, but rather to the Prototipe in and by meanes of the picture or by the picture transi∣torilie: not much vnlike to an arowe or darte which altho' it passeth by the ayre and in the ayre, yet doth it not stay there but in the marke onelie: whereas one the contrarie the Gentils went grosselie to worke, for the ho∣nour which they gaue to the statues and fi∣gures of their Gods the same they gaue to the images themselues by themselues and for them selues attributing diuinitie, or at the least di∣uine operations vnto them, and adoring them with actions of honour proper to the true God alone as sacrifices, and the like, all which is so farre different not onely from the pra∣ctice, but also from the cogitations of anie Christian man, that it can be esteemed no lesse then most grosse ignorance in the reformers to bring it in question.
And altho' it is true that the leight of na∣ture onely is not sufficient to establish the ho∣nour of images which the Councell of Trent decreed as the knight doth captiously inferre out of the wordes of a moderne diuine whom he citeth: neuerthelesse the leight of nature doth sufficiently teach vs the difference be∣tweene true and idolatrous worship of ima∣ges, and doth also plainely dictate vnto vs that those are both ignorantly blinde who are not able to conceiue it, and temerarious and rash who not being able to conceiue it, condemne it as contrary to the lawe of God, our as sectarie commōly doe. And thus much for the answere to the testimonie of Tertullian and to shewe that antiquity is neither for the reformers nor against the Romanists in this matter, as the knight doeth vanely indeuour to prooue, but expressely for them in regard that as I haue shewed out of the same authour euen in those most pure and primatiue times ther was vse of the picture of Christ, yea and of a grauen image (which is that the reformers most dire∣ctly impugne and exclaime against) and that euen in the chalices where of necessitie it must needs haue beene honoured, the same authour further affirming that the foresaid image was much vsed in his time being the second hun∣dreth yeare after Christ our Sauiour when ido∣latrie was not yet extinguished, which is an ar∣gument
cōuincing that it was not a thing then first inuented but long before established, nor offensiue to the most sincere and intire Chri∣stians of those prime ages as nowe it is to the Nyce nouelists of our dayes, many of which are so superstitiously precise that, as an honest Protestant writer affirmeth, Sir. Th. Ouerb. Caract. of a Precis. they had rather see Antichrist then the picture of Christ in the Church Windoe. And now let this suffice for a breefe Scantlin of the antiquitie of the reuerent vse of images to omit others, as S. Augustin who in his booke of the Trinity cal∣leth images religious signes. Lib. 3. cap. Greg. l. 7. epist. 53. And S. Gregory who speaketh of prostration before thē which is one of the greatest actions of honour that the Romanists vse to exhibit towarde any image. So that by this the reader may plainely see the Romanists want neither antiquity nor vniuer∣salitie for their doctrine in this point as contra∣riwise the misreformers want them both, for their pure negation of the same. And if they demaunde scriptures of vs be∣sides that which I alledged before, we may truely answere them as a graue diuine in the se∣uenth Synod answered the heretikes of that time. If they aske vs (saith he) in what place of scripture we read that the picture of Christ is to be honoured, we answere that there where we read that Christ himselfe is to be honoured.
And if nowe the reformers demaunde of vs what reason we haue for the honour of the images of Christ and his Saincts: we may answer them that we haue the same reason that they haue to honore the image of their King or his dearest fauorits. For as in ci∣uill honour, to respect or honore the Kings pi∣cture, doth not diminish the honour due vnto the King himselfe, but increaseth it so it passeth in the worship of the image of Christ, and if the Puritans deny this, there we leaue them as guiltie of treason against God and man. And now here before I conclude I must of necessitie aduertice the reader of such abuses as Sir Humfrey hath committed in his citations of some of the authours he produceth in this place. Wherefore in the first place I put the two councells he alledgeth as being as I sup∣pose of greatest authoritie in our aduersaries conceipte. The one is the Councell of Franc∣ford which because it is corruptedlie rehearsed by Chemintius, we may iustelie disclame from it, if ther were no other reason. Yet Sir Hum∣frey knowes besides this that the Romanists hould that councell for illegitimate. As for the Councell of Eliberis, it is not absolutelie reie∣cted by Romanists, yet they knowe it was but Prouinciall consisting of 19. Bishops which whatsoeuer they defined in this matter which as yet is vncertaine, yet could it not be anie
Generall doctrine or practise for the vniuersall Church, but at the most for their owne whole Countrye as the circunstances of that time, and place required. But of what authoritie soeuer they were, neither of those two coun∣cels condemned the adoration of images as it is vnderstanded and vsed in the Roman Church, for vnlawfull and much lesse for wicked and blasphemous as the knight here contendes: but if they truely condemned anie worship of images, it was onelie diuine not honorarie worship they condemned, and so they neither of them preiudicate the antiquitie and vniuer∣salitie of the Roman doctrine in this point, and much lesse doe they establish the anti∣quitie or vniuersalitie of the misreformed Churches, which for the most parte will not suffer anie images either painted or vnpainted to appeare in their sinagoge, either vpon walles or windowes. And yet besides this, it is well knowne the Councell of Nyce as consi∣sting both of Latin and Grecian Fathers, was much more generall then either the Francfor∣dian or Eliberitan Sinod; and in the Nycene it is certaine that the honor of Images was de∣fended, and established, as our aduersarie not vnwillinglie confesse, and the decrees of it plainelie testifie; wher as in the other two it remaines doubtfull and ambiguous euen till this day what was truely deliuered in them
touching this point, ther being onelie some cer∣taine fragments of them extant touching this matter: out of all which incertaintie it is plaine that no assured antiquitie or vniuersalitie can be extracted for Sir Humfreys cause. In the citation of Clemang is he takes onely that which seemed most for his purpose, and couninglie left out that which makes against him: Postquam vero satis in fide (Christia∣ni) imbuti, satis cōfir∣mati fue∣runt, salu∣berrima rursus ra∣tione visū est illud statutum debere a∣boleri, & per gene∣ralē decre∣tū est Sy∣nodū ima∣gines at{que} picturas in Eccle∣sijs fieri, quae á lai∣cis & sim∣plicibus pro libris haberētur. Clemang. de nouis celeber. non inst. for also that author affirmes that the vniuersall Church induced by iust occasion did decree in the Primatiue Church that no Images should be placed in Churches in re∣garde of those who were cōuerted from Gen∣tilisme to Christian faith (which how true or false it is importeth not much for the present dispute) yet the same Clemangis presently after affirmes also that the same Church did alter that lawe and ordaine that Images should be vsed in Churches for the instruction of the vulgar sorte and for memorie of Christ and his saints, and yet further adding that he brings this but for an example to showe that this being but an Ecclesiasticall lawe it may be chā∣ged at the Churches pleasure: so that if Sir Humfrey had cited this author home, he could haue founde nothing to proue his position to wit that the doctrine of Image-honor is a blas∣phemous opinion, but rather the contrarie is expressed sufficiently by Clemangis, for that to set Images in a holie place that is in the temple
of God, as he expressely affirmes the same Church did for most holesome reasones, is one of the greatest acts of honour that the Romanists exhibite vnto them. And by this we se that our aduersarie hath neither dealt sincerelie in the alledging of this author, nor in the rehearsall of his wordes in which he passeth in silence the cheefe parte of them viz: those in which he shewes that prohibi∣tion of the primitiue Church which he men∣tiones touching the placing of pictures in Churches, to haue beene onely an Ecclesiasti∣call precept and changeable, yea and de facto changed by a generall Councell, as his wordes related in the margen declare. That which Cas∣sander also doth plainely insinuate when in his consultation of the vse of images, he saith (tho falsely) the Fathers in the beginning of the Church did abhorre all veneration of images: yet afterwardes in the same treatise, he graūtes conuenient, and due honor, vnto them as in another place I will shewe by relation of his owne formall wordes. So now this being all which I need to speake of this matter seeing that by this I haue saide it will manifestly ap∣peare that Sir Humfrey hath fayled both in the authenticall proofe of the antiquitie, or vniuersalitie of his owne position touching the vse of images, and in the disproofe of ours, I
passe to the next paragraph in the which doctrine of Indulgences vsed in the Roman Church is impugned by him most coura∣giously by virtue of an old chalenge made in Martin Luthers dayes but as yet neuer perfor∣med, therefore let vs see howe our newe Cham∣pion Sir Humfrey vseth his armes. First he relates the decree of the Tridentine Councell Sess. 25. yet in a some thing different manner then it runneth there. But the true te∣nour of it is this in substance: that whereas by Christ the power of Indulgēces was graūted to the Church & that shee hath vsed that power deliuered vnto her by diuine ordinance euen in the most auncient times, the sacred Synod doth teach and commaunde that the vse of them as verie prositable to Christian people, & approued by the authoritie of sacred Coun∣cells ought to be retayned, and doth condemne those with a curse who either affirme them to be vnlawfull, or denie that there is in the Church authoritie to graunt them: this is the true tenour of the decree which Sir Humfrey hath not so sincerelie rehearsed as he ought to haue done, which whether he did it to aduan∣tage his cause or onelie out of an ill custome he hath gotte by his frequent exercise of such trickes in diuers places of his booke, I knowe not; onelie of this I ame sure, that he produceth nothing of anie force for the im∣pugnation
of it in all his paragraffe, not∣withstanding he bouldlie auerreth that it will be founde (I knowe not where) that neither Christ nor the primatiue Fathers euer knew, much lesse euer exercised such pardons as are nowe daylie practized in the Church of Rome. this he affirmeth most stronglie, but proueth his affirmation so weakely that its hard to iudge whether his temeritie in affirming, or his defectiuenesse in prouing that which he affir∣meth, be more excessiue, how be it most cer∣taine it is that neither the one nor the other can be iustified, for that if he had vsed the least circumspection in the world, he might haue founde not onelie in Bellarmin, and other di∣uines but also in the Councell of Trent which he citeth, mention both of scripture & Fathers copiouslie cited & quoted for the proofe both of the power and vse of Indulgences in the Church from time to time, of which as it seemes he durst not take anie notice, but pas∣sed it ouer in silence, to the ende his greate wordes which he vttered in the beginning might carie a fairer colour of trueth, which other wise would presentlie haue discouered themselues to be false. True it is he describeth one kinde of miti∣gation or relaxation of punisshment imposed vpon offenders for denyall of their faith, or sacrificing to idols, which he graunteth to haue
beene called by the name of pardon or Indul∣gence, and to haue beene deriued from sainct Paule who released the incestuous Corinthian from the bonde of excomunication, all which tho' it be true in itselfe, yet is it but an eua∣sion which he vseth to the end he may with greater colour reiect those pardons which are truelie and properlie Indulgences that is a re∣laxation from a temporall punishment due vnto a penitent sinner according to Gods iu∣stice for satisfaction of the paine of his offenses alreadie remitted touching the guilt and eter∣nall punishment of the same, by vertue of the keyes, that is by the power of bynding and loosing sinnes which Christ gaue to his Church, and in her particularlie to the cheefe visible pastour thereof. Of the power and practize of which Kynde of pardon, if Sir Humfrey had not beene disposed to cogge, he might haue found good store of testimonies both out of scriptures, Councells, and Fathers alledged for the same by Roman diuines. And as for scriptures there are two places especiallie which doe plainelie enuffe conuince the foresaid truth of Indulgences if they be reight vnderstanded according to the interpre∣tation of the auncient Fathers. The one is that generall sentence of our Sauiour Math. 18. in which he giueth an illimitated power to his Apostles and in them to their lawfull succes∣sours
for binding and loosing without anie restriction either to this or that one matter, or to this or that manner of remission, and conse∣quentlie in that most generall power is inclu∣ded the authoritie of remitting the temporall punishment due to sinnes which is that we call the power of Indulgences of which generall power graunted to Preists we haue diuers testi∣monies of Fathers and particularlie of S. Aug. who vpon those wordes & iudicium datum est Apoc. 20. Sayth: Non hoc putandum est de vl∣timo Iudicio dici, sed sedes Praepositorum est, & ipsi Praepositi intelligendi sunt per quos Ecclesia nunc gubernatur. Iudicium autem datum nullum melius accipiendum videtur quam id quod dictum est: quae ligaueritis in terra ligata erunt & in Caelo: & quae solueritis in terra soluta erunt & in Caelo. ug. lib. 2. e Ciuit. c. 9. idem: act. 49.  Ioan. d. tract. . Vide etiā il. can. 8 math.  Hier. in p. 18. ath. The like he hath vpon the Gosp. of S. Ioh. Ideo cum processisset mortuus adhuc ligatus, confitens & adhucreus vt soluerentur peccata eius ministris hoc dixit Dominus, soluite illum & sinite abire quid est soluite & sinite abire. Quae solueritis in terra so∣luta sunt in caelis. S. Ambrose also speaking of the same power l. 1. de Paenit. c. 2. saith: Deus di∣stinctionem non facit qui misericordiam suam pro∣misit omnibus, & relaxandi licentiam Sacerdotibus suis fine vlla exceptione concessit. God, saith S. Ambrose, makes no distinstion, who promised his mercie to all, & gaue to his Preists licence to re∣lease without anie exception. Neyther can anie reason be assigned why the pastours of the
Church should haue power to applie the me∣rits of the passion of Christ for remission of the guilt of the sinnes themselues with the eternall paine and yet not haue power to applie the same for the remission of the temporall punishment as due vnto them, after the remis∣sion according to the order of Gods iustice, as the eternall punishment was due before it, especiallie considering that the temporall paine as being farre inferiour in nature and qualitie to the sinne itselfe, it requires much lesse power and fewer conditions for its remission then doth the guilt of the sinne and eternall paine to the guilt annexed. The other place of scripture is not onelie for the proofe of the power to graunt Indulgences, but also of the practice of the same by S. Paule himselfe the 2. chapter of the second epistle to the Corinth. where speaking to the same Corinthians, he sayth of himselfe: And whome you haue pardoned anie thing, I also. For, my selfe also that which I pardoned, if I pardoned anie thing, for you in the person of Christ that we be not circumuented of Satam. Which wordes altho' they be obscure in the Gramaticall con∣struction, yet doe they sufficientlie declare those partes and conditions which are found in such Indulgences as are now practiced in the Roman Church that is to say power in the col∣lator or giuer, pietie in the cause, and grace in
the receiuer. S. Paule sheweth his authoritie in that he affirmeth he gaue perdon to the ince∣stuous Corinthian in the person of Christ that is by authoritie from him receiued: he sheweth the cause to haue beene the common profit of the Corinthians themselues, to wit least they should be circumuented by the deuill so that they in the like occasion might fall in to des∣peration by ouer much rigour as the incestuous man might haue done if he had not beene par∣doned in the performance of some parte of the punishment due to his offense. Lastelie he in the precedent wordes sheweth the receiuer to haue beene in the state of grace in that he sig∣nifieth his sorowe and pennance to haue beene so great that he was readie to haue beene swa∣lowed vp by the excesse of it. And so by this we may perceiue howe deceitfullie Sir Hum∣frey proceedeth in his 220. page where he in∣sinuateth that S. Paule in the place now cited did onelie release the incestuous Corinthian from the bonde of excomunication, whereas indeede the Apostle did not onelie that, but also did absolue him from that temporall pu∣nishment & affliction in which if he had plea∣sed he might haue constreined him to continue longer, and so supplyed by his authoritatiue and suffragatorie pardon that parte of satisfa∣ction which otherwise remained to haue beene performed by the continuation of the punish∣ment
imposed and due to the penitent accor∣ding to the exaction of Gods iustice, he sup∣plyed it I saie by application of the merits or satisfactions of Christ, which application also, and not onelie the authoritie by which sainct Paule did it, is included in those wordes, in the person of Christ. Theod. in 2. Cor. 2. That which by the comen∣tarie of Theodoret vpon this passage doth plai∣nelie appeere who discreetlie noteth that saint Paul is said here to pardone the incestuous Co∣rinthians sinne because it was greater then his pennance. And S. Ambrose lib. 2. de Paenit. cap. 2. speaking of the same matter, saith of S. Paule: Donauit Corintho peccatum per paeniten∣tiam. And a little after: Etenim qui de remit∣tenda praedicauit paenitentia, debuit & de ijs qui iterandum putant Baptismum non silere. By which testimonies of these two most famous and aun∣cient authours Sir Humfreys euasion saying that the Apostle did onelie free the incestuous Corinthian from the bond of Excommunica∣tion, doth euidentlie appeare to be false & fri∣uolous. And thus we see that not onelie the relaxation of a punishment enioyned, as the knight would haue it, but also the same or very like forme of pardon which the Romā Church vseth at this present tyme, was practiced by S. Paule himselfe in the foresayd case. And in trueth supposing at the least certaine receiued maximes of diuinitie which might
easily be demōstrated by scriptures if the place did serue for it: to wit that after the guilt of sinne is remitted, some temporall punishment remaineth which according to the exigence of iustice must be remoueed before the soule can attaine to perfect blessednesse, either by iust indurance or mercifull remission: and more ouer that the same temporall affliction which many suffer in this life euen after their sinnes be intirelie remitted, is not for corre∣ction and commination onely (as the secta∣ries doe friuolouslie contend) as appeareth plainelie in the example of Dauid who altho' he knewe from the mouth of a Prophet that the guilt of his adultry was pardoned, yet vnderstanding neuerthelesse by the same Pro∣phet that ther remained no smale punishment behinde to wit no lesse then the death of his dearest child, and that as the scripture it selfe te∣stifieth neither for correction nor commina∣tion onely, but because by his scandalous actiō he had caused the enimies of God to blaspheme his name and as the text declareth in the 2. Booke of the Kings the 12. chapter, propter ver∣bum hoc that is for this thy fact taking word for action as it is most frequently taken in the scriptures: and yet besides all this the same Da∣uid did voluntarie pennance composing the whole miserere Psalme and crying out with an amplius laua for a perpetuall testimony of the
same. And now supposing as I say all this, the doctrine & practice of Indulgēces now vsed by the cheefe Pastours of the Roman Church is so well groūded that except onely in those in whom obstinacie reigneth more then reason, it admit∣teth no trergiuersation in the credibilitie and faith of it. For as God is infinitly not onely iust but also mercifull in himselfe by essēce, so hath he cōmunicated to the gouernours of his church a kind of participatiue mixture of both those at∣tributes betweene which according to that of the psalme iustitia & pax osculatae sunt, he hath made a most louing league to the end that ac∣cording to diuers causes and occasions his spiri∣tuall officers may so vse them in earth as the vse may be approued in Heauen, sometimes v∣sing rigour of discipline for the satisfaction of Gods iustice, other times lenity for the exercise of his mercy. But now touching the confirmation of this doctrine by the authority of Fathers I will o∣nely produce the testimonies of Tertull. and S. Cyprian who being both so ancient as they are knowne to be, they may iustely serue for sufficient witnesses of the ancient practice of the same in those primatiue times. Tertullian therefore in his booke to the Martirs and first chapter speaketh of the re∣mission of the paine due to sinnes which the Bishops gaue vnto the sinners either at the
petition of martyrs, or for other causes, calling it by the name of peace. Which peace faith he some that haue it not in the Church are accu∣stomed to aske it of the martyrs in prision, and therefore you also (meaning the Bishops) ought for that cause to haue, norish, and keepe it in your selues to the end that if perhaps you may communicate it to others. where Tertul∣lian by the worde peace vnderstandes the Bishops absolution at the least frome some parte of the sinners pennance by application of the superabundant satisfactions of the martyrs which application is also in the worde peace included, as manifestly may be gathered out of the same Tertullian, who afterwardes falling in to heresie in his 22. chap. of his booke of cha∣stitie recalled that which he had tought before, to wit that indult could not be giuen to those that had fallen, at the petition of the martyrs, because saith he (now turned Heretike) there remaine no satisfactions of martyrs, (which satisfactions hee calleth oleum faculae) which can suffice for themselues & others. All which as the reader may clearelie perceiue is nothing els in substance but such an Indulgence as is now practiced by the Bishops of Rome, of whome and others by their comission, the fore∣sayd authour doth speake in the place rehear∣sed. And the same saith S. Cyprian in his last
Sermon de lapsis saith, paenitenti, operanti, ro∣ganti, potest clementer ignoscere, potest in accep∣tum referre quicquid pro talibus & petierint mar∣tyres, & fecerint Sacerdotes. To the working or laboring penitent (the Bishop of whome he speaketh as I suppose) may clemently pardon, & accept as receiued whatsoeuer the martyrs demaunde, & the Preists doe, or performe. And the like the same S. Cyp. hath l. 3. epist. 15. or 11. I omit Sainct Gregorie whome yet both S. Thom. and Atisiodorus his predecessour te∣stifie to haue graunted Indulgences in forme, which altho' it is not founde in his workes now extant, yet it is farre more credible, and certaine that those two authours would not haue vsed that testimonie with out infalible grounde that it was S. Gregories, then that it was feigned because kemnitius and other no∣uellists reiect it as suppositious. And if they will not admit of this testimonie because they see it not. At the least they must of necessitie admit of that which being yet more auncient is to be seeme in the Chappell of S. Crosse of Hierusalem in Rome written in legible letters, that S. Siluester who was Bishop & Pope aboue 1200. years paste did consecrate that Chappell and adorne it with maine reliquies of saints and indulted diuers perdons to the visiters of it. I could alsoe cite the Popes which since the time of S. Greg. in seuerall ages haue very
frequentlie graunted Indulgences, but because I knowe our presumptuous aduersaries con∣temne their authority (tho' iniustlie for that they haue ben of as great authoritie as their anticessours) I will saue the labour, and onely aduertice the reader that ther is farre greater reason for a prudent man to giue credit vnto them in the affirmatiue of this question then there is to rely vpon the authoritie of the sectaries for the negation, in regard that euen by their owne confession the affirmatiue hath ben tought and practiced publikelie in the Christian world at the least for the space of 400. years euen according to Kemnitius, who (tho' most falsely for that it may be proued That Leo the third who liued in the 8. or 9. hundreth yeare gaue pardons according to the manner of those our times) affirmeth that Indulgences began aboute the yeare 1200. who neuertelesse on the contrary contradic∣ting himselfe graunteth that the first denyers of the same were the Waldenses, a company of pore ignorant beggarlie fellowes. From whence we may inferre how impudentlie the kinght affirmeth antiquitie & vniuersalitie in his owne Church for the denyall of Indulgen∣ces, yet dinying the same in the Church of Rome for her defence of them: supposing he could not produce as much as one authour ei∣ther more or lesse auncient for the negatiue
parte liuing before the pore men of lions, who hauing no other saint for their founder then one waldo a verie idiot, appeared aboute the yeare of our Lord 1170. that is manie hundreths of yeares after Indulgences had beene pra∣ctized in the Christian world euen accor∣ding to the forme now vsed. It is true Sir Hum∣frey alledgeth diuers Roman diuines as he vseth to doe, but it is but a meere shift he vseth to colour his position as being destitute of all other auncient authoritie & proofe. For I haue examined those authours & I finde there is not one of them which is not a zelous defen∣der both of the power which Christ gaue vnto the Church to graunt Indulgences, & al∣so of the lawfullnes & profit of them; nor doth anie one of them confesse the want of an∣tiquitie & consent of the same: but some of them onelie confesse indeed there is no certai∣netie of their beginning, or when the vse of them came into the Church in the manner they are now vsed. To which purpose the te∣stimonie cited out of B. Fisher may seeme to serue, who yet doth not say (as the knight falselie relates) that it is not sufficientlie manifest from whome Indulgences had their Originall, but he onelie sayth non certo constare a quo primum tradi caeperunt, that it is not certainelie apparent who first began to giue them. And altho' that au∣thor hath the rest of the wordes which Sir
Humfrey cites, yet hath he others in the same place which doe sufficientlie declare his mea∣ning in that manner of speech; for he presentlie addes that S. Gregorie is sayde to haue graun∣ted Indulgences, & they saye (saith he) that there was some most auncient vse of them among the Romans which the stations of the Citie, giue vs to vnderstand. And hence it is that the same Bishop in the same place turning his speach to Luther his aduersarie, sayth vnto him, wherefore thou art a meere imposter, or deceiuer of the people, not the Popes to whome (in this point of Indulgences) both the Gospell fauoreth, and a generall Councell subscribes, & also the vniuersal companie of moderne interpreters vpon those wordes of Christ math. 16. whatsoeuer you shall bynde in earth shall be bounde in heauen, & whatsoeuer you shall loose in earth shall be loosed in heauē thus hee. So that it is plaine that Bishop Fisher neuer duobted of the power of Indulgēces, or that the vse of them is not lawfull or profitable, as nei∣ther doth he bring in question whether the auncient Fathers & diuines did denie, or not acknowledge these particulars, but as I saide before, he onelie treates of the antiquitie of the vse of the same, as manifestlie appeares euen by the same wordes which the knight cites where he sayth that, Indulgences began not till a while after the sainte, or tremble of Purgatotie.
By which also it doth further appeare that in his passage that renowned Prelate who not onelie with his pen, but also with his sacred bloud defended the Roman faith as well in this as all other points, is not sincerelie dealt with, nor pertinentlie alledged to the true state of the question proposed by our aduersarie. Now other authours which Sir Humfrey cities, onely affirme that much can not be said of Indulgences of certaintie, & as vndoub∣tedly true seeing scriptures speake not of them expresselie as Durand affirmes: to which purpose also Antoninus speakes, & yet neither of them say that nothing can be spo∣ken with certainetie of them. Which is not contrarie to the doctrine of the Romanists who, altho' they beleeue there is sufficient grounde of the power & truth of them in the Bible, yet they willingly graunte with all, that diuers particulars concerning them are disputable among diuines. And it is cleare that Durand & S. Antoninus as they say onely that pauca fewe things can be sayde with certaine∣tie of pardons or Indulgences, & that the scripture doth not speake expressely of them, so by the same reason euident it is that the same authours graunte that both some things may be pronounced certainly of them, & also that at the least, ther is implicit & vnexpressed mention or containement of them in the scrip∣ture:
to wit of power of the Church to graunt & vse them, which a lone is sufficient to shewe that they consequētly maintaine the vniuersalite & antiquitie of the Roman do∣ctrine in this point & impugne the contrarie position of the false reformers who absolutelie & obstinatelie denie such power to reside in the Church of God. And as for that which Durand affirmes, that diuers of the auncient Fathers make no mention of Indulgences, yet he doth not say that it doth thence followe that they did reiect the power or vse of them in the Church, & much lesse doth Durand affirme that other auncient Fathers did not mention them; yea if he had affirmed this, yet he him selfe kewe well enuffe that this being but a negatiue argument at the most, it proueth nothing. But that which followes of those auncient Fathers silēce in this matter, is that they had not occasion to speake of them as others had, or at the most, that In∣dulgences were not much in vse in their tymes which doth not contradict the Romanists, who doe not stand vpon defense of the fre∣quent vse of them in the Primatiue Church, but of the power which they maintaine to be as auncient as the spirituall power of binding & loosing giuen by Christ him selfe to the Pastors of his Church in most generall and ample manner.Mat. 16. And to this I adde that which Sir Humfrey for his owne aduantage omitted
in the citation of both Durand & Antoninus, to wit, that they both alledge the testimonie of S. Gregorie for the vse & actuall graunte of Indulgēces, Gregorius tamen lo∣quitur qu etiam In∣dulgentias Rom iu∣stituit in∣stationibus, vt dicitur. Durand. id 4. sent. d. 20. q. 3. which Pope, say they is reported to haue instituted the Roman stations, which wordes of Durand, & the like of S. Antoni∣nus if the knight had rehearsed as he ought to haue done according to the lawes of plaine dea∣ling, the vse of Indulgences would haue appeared not to be so newe as he indeuores to persuade his reader. Touching the citation of Caietan Sir Hum∣frey proceedes no lesse insincerely, for in the same place which is his 15. Opuscle, Ex his hā∣betur tex∣tibus non solum quod Indulgen∣tiarū gra∣tia antiqua est in Chri∣sti Ecclesia & non no∣ua inuētio, sed haben∣tur clarè quatuor &c. Caiet. Opusc. 15. c. 1. he addes that in the fourth of the sentences it is alled∣ged by S. Thomas that S. Gregorie did insti∣tute the stations of Indulgences, & producing manie other testimonies out of the Ecclesia¦sticall decrees he concludes thus. Out of those texts it is had that the graunte of Indulgences is not onely auncient, but &c. Where also the reader is to be aduertised that Caietan is corrupted by Sir Humfreys translation of the worde hunc or hanc, them, which the author referres to the begining, or certaintie of their begining, not to the Indulgences themselues or power to gra∣unte them. And doubtlesse siluester Prierias had the same meaning where he sayde, if so he sayde, that Pardōs are not knowne vnto vs by the autho∣ritie
of the scripture but by the authoritie of the Church of Roman, for the sense is that they are not expressely declared & deliuered vnto vs by the text of the scripture in plaine wordes but by the Church whose office it is to propose such doctrine in particular to the faithfull as she findes not so plainely deliuered in the scripture as they themselues can without her directions come to due knowledge of it. And surely this athour is so farre frome denying the Antiquitie of the power & vse of perdons that he professedly defended the same against his professed aduersarie Luther. And the same I saye of Eckius & Tecelius, who as Sir Humfrey can not be ignorant were also Luthers Antagonists euē in this particular, to omit that he cites those two authors onely v∣pō relation of the Councel of Trents historie in English to which as I haue alreader noted we giue no credit. Nay & since I writ this at first, I finde that Prierias Eckius & Tecelius are falsely charged by the same false historie of Trent to haue layde for their grounde of Indulgēces the Popes authoritie in their impugnation & con∣uincement of Luther. Pag. 6. And the marginall note of that place is yet more false, then the text, saying that the aduersaries of Luther proued the doctrine of Indulgences by com∣mon reasons onely. And as for Eckius I haue read his whole treatise of Indulgences & so I
ame sure he foundeth them not vpon the Popes autheritie either onelie or cheefelie, but principallie vpon scripture, for so he sayth page 313. Indulgentiarum figurae fuerunt Iubilei in veteri Testamento. De his sumus contenti eo quod habeamus solidum S. Paul fundamentum ne credamur diligentiores in lucrosa. Porro &c.2. Cor. 2. And to the sense of these authors may be re∣duced that which Cunerus sayth of the doubtfull manner of writing of some Ca∣tholike authors, of Indulgences, if the place be sincerely related which a man may iustely suspect especially for that the knight hath it out of Chamier & at second hand. And in deed the truth is if that authors sentence had not ben violentlie abrupted before the end of the same period which he deliuered with one breath, it would haue plainelie declared that there is nothing for Sir Humfreyes purpose of prouing that neither Christ nor the Primatiue Fathers (as he speaketh) euer knewe or ex∣ercised such pardons as are now dayly practi∣sed in the Church of Rome. For the wordes omitted are those. Cunerus declam. Cum in clauibus Ecclesiae & symbolo Apostolico clarissime fundatae deprehen∣dantur. That is since that (Indulgences) are most clearely discouered to be founded in the Apostolicall symbole or Creed, & in the power of the keyes of the Church &c. And so now we see that those testimonies
doe not proue want of antiquitie or consent in either scripture, Fathers or schoolemen for the doctrine of Indulgences themselues, but onelie at the most in some accessorie points of that Controuersie, yet not one of them prouing anie such want in the maine of the question aboue declared, no more then he should be thought to proue want of antiquitie & vniuer∣sallitie in the doctrine of three persons, & one God, who should affirme the same not to be in expresse termes contayned in the scripture, Fathers, & schoolemen iuste in that manner in which the Church beleeueth & defendeth it. And yet graunting neuerthelesse that it is true∣lie contained in the same scripture in an other equiualent manner, or inexpresselie. As also the same doth yet more plainelie ap∣peare euen by those same wordes which Sir Humfrey cites here out of Alfonsus, which altho' they be not sincerelie related by him, as leauing out that which most conduceth to the explication of that authours true meaning, to wit that, who but an heretike can denie transub∣stantiation, the procession of the holie Gost & Purga∣torie because they are not mentioned by auncient authors sub his nominibus, by these names or wor∣des. And after: what maruell therefore is it if it happened in this sorte of Indulgence that, saith Castro there be not mention made of them in the auncients. By which wordes it is
plaine this author speakes not absolutelie of the substance of Indulgences or of the autho∣ritie to graunte them which indeede is the cheefe question of Controuersie in this place, & of which he makes no doubt but that it is sufficientlie contayned in scripture & Fathers altho' as he saith minus expresse lesse expresselie. But he onelie speakes of the name as his wor∣des now related doe testifie; or at the most of the antiquitie of their cōmon vse, which not withstanding it is no matter of faith, yet doth he shewe it not to be so new as the sectaries of our times will haue it: & therefore he addes by way of conclusion. Quod non est tam recens Indulgentiarum vsus quantum isti haeretici (mea∣ning the Lutherans) exprobrant, nam apud Ro∣manos vetustissimus praedicatur earum vsus vt ex stationibus Romaefrequentissimis colligi vtcum∣que potest. Et de Beato Gregorio huius nominis pri∣mo fertur quod aliquas suotempore concesserit. And in the same tenor of wordes he adioyneth that, et si pro Indulgentiaram approbatione sacrae scriptu∣rae apertum testimonium desit, non tamen ideo con∣temnendae erant quoniam Ecclesiae Catholicae vsus à multis annorum saeculis receptus, tantae est au∣thoritatis vt qui illum contemnat haereticus merito censeatur &c. By all which it is euident that nothing can be proued by the wordes of Al∣fonsus against the substance of Ecclesiasticall Indulgences nor contrarie to the antiquitie &
vniuersalitie of the Roman doctrine in that point, but rather Sir Humfrey & his brothers are manifestlie conuicted of heresie for con∣temning the same. Now Maior in 4. d. 2. q. 2. is impertinentlie alledged for he onelie affir∣mes that it's harde to founde authenticallie in scripture iuste that manner of Indulgence which is vsed at this day in the Church: & that some of the auncient Fathers made no mention thereof, which the Romanists doe not denie for they saye difficilia quae pulchra. And so that which is hardelie founded is truelie founded. Yet the power & vse of Indulgences euen as they are now practised the same Maior defen∣des as well as other moderne diuines, yea & deduceth the vse of them from S. Gregorie the great, & thus this author is excused & the citer reprooued. Touching Siluester Prieras altho' I cannot haue that same worke of his which Sir Hum∣frey cites. (if anie such be extant now in the world) yet I haue viewed the treatise of Indul∣gences which he hath in his summe, & there I finde that he doth not saie all that with which our aduersarie doth charge him, nay nor scarce halfe so much, for he neither excludes scripture from the grounde of Indulgences, 2. Cor. 2. but expres∣selie cites the same place of S. Paule for them which others cite, altho' it be with a licet at the and. And much lesse doth he affirme that the
authority of the Church of Rome & the Popes is greater then the authoritie of the scripture, which proposition if he had vttered & defen∣ded obstinatelie in my opinion he had deser∣ued the fygot almost as well as his aduersarie Martin: but I persuade my selfe the discre∣tion of Prieras was greater then so. And in the same manner. I vehementlie suspect our aduer∣saries hath vsed some of his Gipsian sleights in the citation of the place he quoteth. But yet is meaning is onely that Indulgences, that is the present vse of them, is not manifestlie declared vnto vs by scripture & Fathers as his wordes cited here in the margen insinuate, absolutelie graunting both the power & practise of them.Indulgētia nobis per scripturā minime innotuit: licet indu∣catur il∣lud. 2. Cor. 2. Si quid do∣naui vo∣bis; sed nec per dicta antiquo∣rū docto∣rum, sed moderno∣rum. Dici∣tur enim Gregorius indulgen∣tiam sep∣tennem in stationib{us} Rome po∣suisse. Et quia Eccle∣sia hoc fa∣cit & seruat credendum est ita esse quia regi∣tur Spiritis Sancto. Syl∣uester in sum. verbo Indult. Bell de In∣dul. l. 2. c. 1. Lastely touching Bellarmine & Valētia, I saye they are neyther of them cited by Sir Humfrey either with any great sinceretie, or to any great purpose. For altho' Bellarmin doth insinuate that there are not manie of the more auncient authors which make mention of Indulgences; yet he doth not affirme that there is want of antiquitie & consent in the Fathers in this matter as Sir Humfrey doth falselie deduce out of his wordes, but onelie insinuateth that the defect of number of the more auncient Fathers which mention Indulgēces, is sufficientlie sup∣plyed by the vse & custome of the Church without writing, by reason (saith he) that ma∣nie things are retayned in the Church by that meanes onelie.
And as for Valentia who as he is cited by the knight, relates out of S. Thomas the opi∣nion of some who called Indulgences a pious fraude to allure men to the performance of those pious workes which are requyred in the forme of the Indulgence graunted, it is true there was such a tenet in those dayes: but as it is true that S. Thomas relates it, so is it also true that he condēnes the same for verie dangerous, that which our aduersarie if he had dealt ho∣nestlie ought not to haue omitted. And yet not obstanding, he could not but see that po∣sition censured by S. Thomas in the verie place cited by Valentia, as also he censureth another little better, to wit that by virtue of the Indul∣gence itselfe no punishment neither in the iudgement of God, nor the Church could be remitted: notwithstanding all this I saye, yet Sir Humfrey subtillie let it passe, making by that meanes his reader beleeue that the fo∣resaid tenet was long before the dayes or Lu∣ther according to the relation of Aquinas (as he saith) an vncondemned opinion of some di∣uines, & reiected as erroneous by Valentia alone: who neuerthelesse expresselie affirmeth it to haue beene an opinion hised at by all Or∣thodox writers, opinio ab Orthodoxis omnibus ex∣plosa. Nay & which is yet more grosse, Sir Humfrey leaueth quite out some parte of the
wordes of the foresaid opinion as it is rehearsed by Valentia, to wit those which mention satis∣faction made to God by reason of the deuotion of the gainer of the Indulgence & value of the pious workes in ioyned him for the obtaining of the same, all which because it sounded con∣trarie to the doctrine of the pretensiue refor∣med Churches, it struct Sir Humfrey deafe one that eare, & so he left it out. I omit diuers particulars which our aduer∣sarie vtters here & there in the progresse of his Paragraffe. Because they either consiste of some inauthenticall relations aboute the vse or rather aboute the abuse of some particular graunts of Indulgences as that out of the office of Saram & out of Guitcherdin: or els they cōsiste in his owne plaine calūnious vntruthes, as that Indulgences are graunted onelie to drawe money frome the grainers: & that the Romanists pretēd vniuersalitie of Fathers for euerie point of faith: & that the article of Indulgences wantes authoritie of scripture, of all this I saye I need to make no further dis∣cussion in regarde the apparent falsitie of it doth sufficientlie confute it selfe & shewes that it proceeds rather frome a man malitiouslie affected & ignorant of the state of the que∣stion, & more disposed to cauille then care∣full to attaine to the truth of the doctrine. For suppose the abuses were neuer so true (which
as in all other things so in this I confesse there haue ben some especiallie in the questors or inferior administrators of Indulgences, & may be more: neuerthelesse these abuses of particu∣lar men, doe not impeach the power, & autho∣ritie, & lawfull vse of the same, which onelie is that which my aduersarie & I haue now in question. And so now for conclusion of this matter we may hence inferre how impiouslie the se∣ctaries proceed in the denyall & impugnation of the Indulgences vsed in the Roman Church, which altho' they had no other vtilitie or pro∣fit in them then to induce people to the exercise of such pious workes as are requyred in the te∣nor of them, that is fasting, prayer & almes so heighly commended in the scriptures, & recei∣uing of the Sacraments, yet in common reason ought they not to be reiected, but rather maintained & sought for with great zeale & deuotion. And so now let this suffice for the intyre discussion of this paragraffe, in which I haue founde nothing to the excuse the author frome the same censure I haue layd vpon him in the precedent matters.
THE IX PERIOD. VVE are now come to the 10. section of the booke in which Sir Humfrey produceth the testimonies of the Romanists touching the infallible certaintie of the Prote∣stant faith, & the vncertaintie of the Romish. this is his designe, but I ame verily persuaded he will fayle of his purpose. I will examen parti∣culars that the truth may appeare. But before this I must aduertise the reader that in this se∣ction ther is litle substance to be founde, & it consists cheefly in a large recapitulation of the supposed confessions of the Romanists: as that they haue confessed that iustificatiō is by faith onely, that the conuersion of the bread in to Christs bodie, was not generally receiued by the Fathers, that the certaine & definite number of Sacraments was vnknowne to scripture & Fa∣thers, & that the Indulgences now vsed, haue no authoritie from scripture or Fathers, & the like all which particulars we haue allreadie dis∣proued in their seuerall places. In substance a great parte of it is but an idle repetition of those falsities which the kingh hath vttered before, with some newe additions to make the number of his lyes more ample & complete & this he performeth with great abundance of wordes of amplification: & thinking to make all sure
calleth to witnesse both men & Angels: And thus for space of a leafe or two, he bringeth nothing but verbal discourses which with the very breath of any iudicious reader presently vanish away, & so they need no other confu∣tation. Afterwardes he comes to some parti∣culars which I haue not yet touched & of these I will make a breefe examen. And to omitte those points which I haue before discussed, in his page 242. he indeuo∣reth to proue out of Bellarmin that the Church of Rome hath ouerthrowne in one tenet all certaintie of true faith, & he performeth it very solidly, because for sooth Bellarmin affir∣meth that none can be certaine by certaintie of faith that he receiueth a Sacrament by reason of the vncertainty of the intention of the mini∣ster without which the Sacrament can not be made. And the argument the kinght framed of the doctrine of the Cardinall is this. It is a posi∣tiue grounde of the Romā Religiō that a Sacra∣ment can not be made without the intention of the minister but the intentiō of the minister can not be knowne by faith, therfore the Church of Rome hath ouerthrowne in one tenet all cer∣taintie of true faith. I ansere first that altho' this is the forme which Sir Hūfreys argument must be reduced vnto if anie it cā haue, neuerthelesse if we should examen it according to the rules of logique ther will scarcely be founde either
forme or figure in it, yet least the knight should hould himselfe too rigorously delt with as not making profession of that arte, I am con∣tent to let that passe and answere secondly that I graunt the maior in this sense viz. That whensoeuer the Preist doth administer a Sa∣crament it is required that he intends at the least in generall to doe that which the true Church vseth to doe in that action I meane either formally or virtually, & this is defined by the Councell of Trent as a certaine trueth. But in the minor there lyeth secretly a certaine false supposition which is this. That to the faith of a Sacramēt is necessarilie required that the intention of the minister in particular cases be knowne by faith which is not true, nor de∣fined by the Councell; because to the faith of a Sacrament is sufficient that faith by which a Christian beleeueth that euery one of those visible signes which the Church propo∣seth to the people to be beleeued & receiued as Sacraments of the new lawe are instituted by Christ to conferre grace to the receiuers, & that to euery one of them is required a sincere intention to administer or performe that particular action as is was instituted, or as the Tridentine decreeth, intentione saltem fa∣ciendi quod facit Ecclesia, that is at the least with intention to hoe that which the Church doth; & that seriously & not in mockrie: but notwith∣standing
it is not necessary that either he that performeth that ceremonie, or he that re∣ceiues the same, haue certaine knowledge of faith that this or that indiuidual Sacramēt hath ben instituted with the forsaid intention, but to this a morall certaintie doth suffice both in the minister & in the receiuer, & the reason is because to know whether one hath receiued, or doth truely receiue a Sacrament or not, fal∣leth not vpon the essence, or making or mar∣ring of a Sacrament as a thing necessarily pre∣cedent vnto the constitution of it, but it is onely a thing consequent or following the same as seruing onely to rectify & quiete the consciences of those that either administer it or receiue it, to the which as being but a morall matter, morall certainty onely is required. And surely if all true faith should therefore be ouerthrowne, as Sir Humfrey infereth because of wāt of certainty of faith in the receiuers that they receiue true Sacraments euerie time they reciue thē, then should it followe by an argu∣ment ad hominem, that the faith of the refor∣mers were also ouerthrowne; for that they themselues neither haue nor can haue any such certaintie of faith: or if they say ther is no faith of any such intention of the minister in their religion, so doe we say the same of ours: for altho' it is a matter of faith in the Roman Church that the intention of the Preist is ne∣cessary
in generall to the constitution of a Sacrament, yet that intention is not necessarily knowne by faith in euerie particular case, & in this consisteth the equiuocation of the whole argument, & if the knight had distinguis∣hed between the intention & the faith of the intention, he might easilie haue perceiued that his discourse was founded vpon a false foun∣dation. To say nothing of the conclusion which although the premises were neuer so true, yet had they not ben able to inferre such à vast consequence as is the ouerthrowe of all certaintie of true faith, precisely in respect of the supposed want of faith of intention aboute the Sacraments. And now by this generall ansere may be solued what soeuer Sir Humfrey saith after∣wardes of the intention required to the Sacra∣ments in particular. To which I alson adde that if certaintie of faith were required in the receiuers of the Sacraments that as often as they receiue them, the receiue true Sacra∣ments hic & nunc, & that as often as they want that faith they ouerthrow all certaintie of true faith, then the reformers themselues were in a more pitifull case then the Romanists, in re∣garde that it is vnpossible for them to knowne more then either by their owne seight, or by relation of others, that the true matter & for∣me of the Sacraments, be truelie applyed vnto
them: & yet certaine it is that vpon neither of these two knowledges anie supernaturall faith can be founded, but onely either a kynde of naturall cognitiō or knowledge at the most, taken from the senses, or a certaine morall cer∣titude proceeding from the relation of their parents or others, all which is farre inferior to the knowledge of faith as no man can denie. That which may by a speciall reason be yet more plainelie vrged against the receiuers of the Sacraments in the reformed Churches, in regarde they are so farre from certaintie of faith of the trueth of their Sacraments in par∣ticular, that they cannot possible haue as much as a morall certaintie of the same nay nor mo∣rall probabilitie I meane such an one as may iustlie moue a prudent man to giue credit, by reason they haue no certaintie, nor yet pro∣babilitie of the trueth of the vocation & ordination of their ministers, without cer∣taintie of which two conditions, it is well knowne on both sides, that no certaine know∣ledge of the truth of indiuiduall Sacraments can possiblie he had. And so we see that whe∣reas Sir Humfrey thought he had framed a stong argument against the doctrine of Bel∣larmin, he onelie heapeth coles vpon his owne head. And from hence also we may gather an easie solution to that which he addeth against the necessitie of the Preists intention in some
of the Sacraments which he specifieth as bap∣tisme, Order, & Matrimonie. Touching which matter I desire the iudi∣cious reader consider whether it is not much more conformable to reason, to the dignity of the Sacraments, to the honour of Christ who instituted them, & to the confort & securitie of the receiuers, that a sincere intention of the Preist Gods substitute, be required to the truth & due administration of them as the Roman Church doth teach & ordaine: or onely so, that if the receiuers take them in the name of God, as the reformers speake, it is sufficient for the minister to performe that externall actiō which Christ did institude, tho' he doeth it in iest or morkery as Luther teacheth, or animo illusorio, that is with an intention or meaning to delude as kemnitius affirmeth, or to haue no intention necessarily required as Sir Humfrey here pro∣fesseth: this I say I leaue to the iudgement of any indifferent man to discerne whether the Romanists or the reformers proceed more sa∣fely & religiously. And as for the illations which the knight deduceth out of the necessity of the intention of the minister in administration of Sacraments they are so ignorant & sotish, as I ame asha∣med to rehearse them, for example when he sayth that if the Preist fayles in his intention at the tyme of solemnization of matrimonie
the maried people liue all their dayes in adul∣trie, or fornication: which is a most grosse er∣rour in the knight: for that the Romanists & the reformers agree in this that altho' Matri∣monie were no Sacrament, & consequentlie that the maried people should not receiue it as a Sacrament, yet were it sufficient to free them from adulterie, in regarde they receiue it at the least as a ciuill contract, whatsoeuer the Preists intention bee. And if it were not so, certainely all sectaries of this time, & particularilie Sir Humfrey himselfe for one should liue perpe∣tuallie in that damnable state of adulterie which he mentioneth. And yet this sequele I am sure it importes him to denie as earnestlie as he can if it be but onelie for the conseruation of his owne, & his wifes honour. And the like foolish & false inferences he ma∣kes aboute all the rest of the Sacraments, as also aboute the succession of the Popes & pastours of the Church as if by the confession of Roma∣nists themselues there were no certaintie in anie of them: whereas yet he himselfe citeth Bellarmin in this verie place as teaching that in all these things there is at least morall & suffi∣cient certaintie of their reall existāce & truth. Certitudine autem mo¦ralem & humanam quae sufficit & vt homo quiescat ex Sacramētis, habemus etiāsi pen∣diāt ab in∣tentione al∣terius. Bel. de Sacr in genere li. 1 c. 28. So that all these deductions are voyde of all sēse reason, & trueth, meerlie framed by the knight out of the superfluitie of his braine, & ob∣truded vpon his reader as confessions of his
aduersaries in a peremptorie & odious man∣ner in disgrace of that Church whose doctrine he is not able to impugne in anie more substan∣ciall manner. In a semblable fashion doth he also prose∣cute the like captious kinde of argument against diuers other points of the Roman do∣ctrine, as for Example because he findeth in Biel & Peter Lombard that they speake not with anie certaintie of the manner how Saints doe vnderstand the prayers of their supplicāts, he inferreth that the Romanists are vncertaine touching the doctrine of inuocation of Saints it selfe, which neuerthelesse is a most false illa∣tion for that although there be some vncer∣taintie in what manner or by what meanes the Saints doe come to knowe our prayers by rea∣son of the diuers opinions of diuines in that particular, yet as well those who Sir Humfrey citeth as also all the rest of the Romanists agree and hould for certaine that Saints are piouslie & profitablie to be inuocated & prayed vnto, all without exception teaching & in∣culcating the same expresselie in their bookes & writings. Gabriel Biel is so plaine for the doctrine of the Roman Church, that if the knight had not corrupted him both in wordes & sensc, he could not haue alledged him with anie coulorable pretense: For in the verie pre∣cedent lection to that which he cites against vs.
Biel resolues the question in our fauor saying. Whence it is apparent that our prayers, & hope of obtaining beatitude by the mediation of the Saints, are not voyde in Heauen: but by order constituted by God himselfe; we ought to recurre to their helpe, & assistance: & perpetuallie implore them with due veneration that we may be saued by their merits. In which wordes, & the rest following, I am sure there is sufficient to make the author a plaine Papist, yea & much more then Sir Hum∣frey desires to heare in fauor of the Roman doctrine & so it is cleare he hath corrupted his sense. And nowe for his wordes, he hath li∣kewise corrupted them most peruerselie, by displaceing, & tranferring them from one pur∣pose to an other. For these wordes: non est certum per omnia: By which Biel ansers onelie to that question, whether it pertaines to the accidental Beatitude of the Saints to heare our prayers (which question as you see is onelie aboute the manner, or qualitie of the Saints vnderstanding our petitions, not of the maine substance) he respondes: Non per omnia certum est. It is not altogether certaine. And yet Sir Humfrey applyes this, as if Biel had said, that it is not certaine that the Saints heare our pray∣ers at all. Yet further connecting vnto the same, those other wordes: vnde probabiliter dicitur: Which he also soma't. Insincerelie Englisheth: it may seeme probable: & rehear∣sing
them in one series, or tenor, whereas yet they are vttered by their author, manie lynes after, & to an other purpose, where ansering to the question before proposed he said thus: Vnde probabiliter dicitur &c. Whence it is proba∣bly said, that altho' it doth not necessarilie followe the beatitude of the Saints, that they heare our pray∣ers: by congruitie, yet God almightie reuelles vn∣to them all that is offered vnto them by men. All which particulars concerning the corruption of this place by the guilie knight, may more plainelie be perceiued in the author himselfe, then I can possible here expresse. As for the Master of sentences, & Scotus in the 45. d. of the fourth booke, altho' perchance they seeme to one that reades thē superficiallie, not to speake with certainetie of the inuoca∣tion of Saints, yet to the anttentiue reader it ap∣peares clearely they both suppose for certaine, & of which they frame no disputation, that the Angels, & Saints heare our prayers, & that we lawfullie & profitablie praye vnto them, of which points it is most vndoubtedlie to be sup∣posed that those two authors could not be ignorant, nor maintaine the negatiue parte, in regarde the publike letanies in which the inuo∣cation of Saints is expresselie included were vsed in the Church long before their dayes, as histories so commonlie testifie that I need not produce them. Besides that the writings of
the ancient Fathers whose sentences Peter Lombard professedlie collected, as much as was for his purpose, & of which Scotus could not be ignorant, are full of the same doctrine as in our Catholike Controuertists may easily appeare to the reader. And therefore whereas the Master vses the wordes: non est incredibile, & scotus probabile est, they speake not eyther of the absolute in∣uocation of Saints, or of our prayers vnto them of which neyther of them proposes the que∣stion: but they applye those wordes to the manner onely of their vnderstanding our inter∣cession. And therefore the Master puts the title of the question thus: Quomodo Sancti glo∣rificati au∣diunt pre∣es sup∣plicantium Magister in it. quaest. . 45. in 4. ent. quomodo? how or in what manner, or, by what meanes doe the Saints heare our prayers, & how they interced for vs vnto our Lord? To which he ansers, it is not incredible that the Saints which in the secret of the face of God, inioye the illumination of the true leight, vnderstand in contemplation of him so much as appertaines eyther to their owne ioye, or our assi∣stanse. For as to the Angels, so to the Saints who assiste in the Seight of God, our petitions are knowne in the eternall worde. In ab∣scondito facie Dei. By which it is euident that Lombard speakes onelie of the meanes by which the Saints vnderstand the prayers of faithfull supplicants. And there being two se∣uerall wayes cheefelie where by the Saints may vnderstand our prayers: the one by ver∣tue
of their beatitude, or beatificall vision by which they see the prayers directed vnto them by seeing God: the other by special reuelation accidental to their blessednesse. The Master is of opinion, they see them in the worde by ver∣tue of their vision of God, as I conceiue: But Scotus seemes to hould that, the knowlege that Saints haue of our prayers, doeth not ne∣cessarilie followe of their beatitude, but is one∣lie accidental, & by congruitie: & therefore he sayes in his anser to the question. Dico quod nrn est necesse ex ratione beatitudinis quod beatus vi∣deat orationes nostras. Neque regulariter siue vni∣uersaliter in verbo, quia non est necessaria fequela beatitudinis, neque quod reuelentur, neque talis re∣uelatio necessario sequitur beatitudintm: Beatitudo enim in obiectis creatis, non transcendit quiditates seu illa quorum essentia visa est necessaria ratio videndi: tamen quia congruum est beatum esse coadiutorem Dei in procurando salutem electi eo mo∣do quo hoc sibi potest competere, & ad istud requiri∣tur sibi reuelari orationes nostras specialiter quae sibi offeruntur quia illa specialiter innituntur meritis eius tanquam mediatoris perducentis ad salutem quae petitur, ideo probabile est quod Deus beatis re∣uelat de orationibus sibi vel Deo in nomine eius oblatis. That is in English. It is not necessarie by the nature or state of beatitude that the blessed see our prayers, neyther regularlie or, vniuersallie in the diuine worde, because that
is not anie thing which as is it were a necessary sequele of beatitude. Nor that they ar reueiled because neither such a reuelation necessarilie followes bertitude: for the beatitude of the vnderstanding in created obiects transcendes not the quidities, or those things the sight of whose essense is the necessarie cause of seeing. But because it is congruous or conuenient that the blessed man be Gods cooperator in pro∣curing the Saluation of the elect, in that man∣ner in which it grees vnto him, and that to this is required that our prayers be reueiled vn∣to him especiallie those which are represented vnto him, for that they especiallie are foun∣ded in his merits as a mediator conducting to the saluation which is asked. Therefore it is probable that God giues a reuelation to the blessed of the prayers offered to him, or to God in his name. Thus Scotus. By which it is manifest he onelie here discusses the diuers wayes by which according to the diuersitie of opinions in diuinitie, the blessed Saints in Hea∣uen vnderstandes the prayers of vs that liue in this world, houlding for probable that the knowlege which they haue of our supplica∣tions vnto them is not by any other meanes but by reuelation from God. And in this sense he speakes when he saith probabile est it is probable, & not because he held the inuocation of Saints it in selfe as a matter onelie probable,
this being quite contrarie to his cited wordes as being aboute the manner of the saints vn∣derstanding our prayers which necessarily im∣plyes that the prayers them selues directed vn∣to them are lawfully made. And so now it clea∣relie appeares by all these wordes & circum∣stances that these two famous diuine are as ranck Romanists as the rest in this particular, in regarde they call not in question the law∣fulnes of prayer to Saints in it selfe but onelie the condition or qualitie of it. And this I haue added of the doctrine of Scotus not as vsed or abused by my aduersarie but onely the better to declare the true mea∣ning of the Master of sentence. And as for Caietan whome also Sir Hum∣frey produceth to the same purpose, it is mani∣fest euen out of the wordes cited by him, that he onely speaketh of some want of certaintie in the miracles which the Church vseth as an argument in the Canonization of saints by reason that altho' as he confesseth expres∣sely, they be most authenticall, yet are they not saith he, omnino certa altogether certaine, because the credit thereof depends vpon the reportes of men. But for all this neither doth he affirme absolutelie that miracles are the grounde wherein the Church foundes the Canonization of the saints (as Sir Humfrey affirmeth most corruptelie translatinng his
wordes omitting those. Quae maxime authentica sunt: & for ab Ecclesia suscipiuntur, putting in Inglish wheron the Church grounteth the Cano∣nization, and detorting them to that sense as the reader may clearly perceiue by conferring the translation with the quotation in Latin) nor yet doth the same Caietan either in this or anie other place of his wordes deny either the certaintie of the doctrine of the inuocation it selfe, or yet the doctrine of the certaintie of the Canonization, but he onely, at the most, sayth that the Church cannot receiue full, but onely humane certainty from such mira∣cles alone as she hath by relation of particular men, not euidentlie operated in the eyes of the whole Church. And according to this we may easily answere to the saying of S. Augustin, that manie soules are tormented in hell whose bodies are hono∣red in earth, for this S. Augustin speakes onelie of certaine suppositious saints whome the cō∣mon people honored for true saints, as it is ma∣nifest by the example which the same S. Aug. produceth out of Sulpitius who relateth how the vulgaritie did long celebrate one for a mar∣tyr who afterwardes appeared & tould them he was damned. And the like is related of a discouerie which S. Martin made of a false martyr: which particular examples of errour in the common people ought not in common
prudence to preiudicate the certaintie of the doctrine of honour due vnto such as the whole Church in all succeeding ages hath honored for true saints & blessed freinds of God. Neither doth S. Augustin in the cited place speake to anie such purpose of calling in question the generall doctrine & practice of the Church in the points of honour or inuoca∣tion of Saints as may appeare by that in other places of his workes he expresselie auerreth the same as in his first sermon of S. Peter & Paule, & in his 44. ep. where he hath thes no∣table wordes. In Petro quis honoratur nisi ille qui defunctus est pro nobis? Who is honored in Peter but he that dyed for vs? And in his 84. treatise vpon the gospell of S. Iohn he sayth. At the table we doe not so remember martirs as we also praye for them, but rather so that they praye for vs. And in his booke de cura pro mortuis Cap. 14. he expresselie speaketh of the prayer of Saints for those that are buried neare vnto their tumbes. All which sayeings of S. Au∣gustin are plaine enuffe, & yet our noble aduersarie turnes the cat in the pan & persua∣des his reader that he flatly denied inuocation of saints, but to conuince him & his followes yet more plainelie I will conclude this point with the wordes of the same S. Augustin in psal. 99. where speaking of the worship of
Angells against the Gentils, he sayth: vtinam & vos colere velletis, facile enim ab ipsis disceretis nō illos colere. Would to God you also would wosship them for you might easily learne of them not to wors∣hip them. That is not to adore them as Gods but as saints. To this I adde that Bellarmin pro∣fesseth he could neuer finde the foresayd wordes in S. Augustin, neither could I hauing deligently searched for them; euer finde them. In this same manner Sir Humfrey proceeds in the matter of Purgatory. For wher as S. Augusitn in his 69. chapter of his Enchir. speaking not of the existēce of Purga∣torie but onelie of some particulars which are consequent vnto it propoundeth a question whether the soule seperated from the bodie be subiect to those inordinate affections to temporall things to which shee was subiect when shee was united to the bodie, to which question because Sainct Augustin answe∣reth doubtfully & with vncertainetie, the kinght handleth the matter so nimblie & cun∣ninglie that the reader may easilie be persuaded by him that S. Augustin was doubtfull of the existence or being of Purgatorie it selfe & so for the greater furtherance of this persuation, wher S. Augustin speaking onelie of the fore∣sayd question saith▪ it is not incredible that some such thing should be aftfer this life, honest Sir Humfrey to make his market the
better foysteth in the word Purgatory in the beginning of the sentence as if that were it of which S. Augustin saith quaeri potest, it may be questioned, & so deludeth his reader egre∣giously with the falsification both of his wordes & sense. Some other particulars touching this same metter Sir Humfrey addeth partely imper∣tinent & partilie false. Impertinent, for example, is that passage of his 248. page. in which he affirmes that Bellarmine saith it is dpubtfull whether the punishment of Purgatorie be by materiall fyre, or some other meanes? For what incertaintie so∣euer there were in the Church aboute this point: yet this being I say not touching the paine it selfe but onelie the qualitie or maner of the paine, it is out of our controuersie in this matter, which is not here of the circumstances of Purgatorie, but of the existence or being of Purgatorie it selfe: the manner, continuation of time, & instruments by which the soules are punished & the like, being left to Catho∣like diuines to dispute at there pleasure. And so this allegation of Bellarmin by the knight against the certaintie of the Roman doc∣trine concerning Purgatorie, is as farre out of quare as if he had alledged eyther our diuines or his owne to proue there is neyther Hell nor Hea∣uen, because they make disputable questions
or doubts, concerning the paines of the one, & glorie of the other. And yet besides this, it is not true that Bellar∣mine makes any such doubt of the materialitie of the fire of Purgatorie, but he expressely auerres that the common sentence of diuines is for it. Adding that it is not in deed a mat∣ter of faith, because it is in no place defined by the Church. Yet saith he, it is a most probable opinion (besides other reasons he alledges) in regarde of the cōsent of the Scolastikes, which cannot be contemned without temeritie. And now supposing the Cardinal speakes so plai∣nelie: Sir Humfrey proceeded not sincerelie in that he insinuates the contrarie by a defe∣ctiue citation of his wordes. Secondlie he falsely affirmeth that S. Greg. gaue the first Credo to Purgatorie, & that he learned it by reuelations, insinuating also that the Roman Church groundeth the faith of Purgatory vpon the spirits & apparitions of dead men, which is all false & calumnious, for that neither S. Gregorie nor any other Roma∣nists euer founded anie doctrine of faith vpon such groundes, but onelie at the most, vse them for confirmation & illustration of those arguments which are founded in scripture for that purpose as their writings make mani∣fest. And that S. Gregorie was not the first esta∣blished,
or gaue the first Credo (as the knight speakes) to Purgatorie, it is manifestly con∣uinced by the testimonies of such Fathers as liued long before him, & make expresse men∣tion of it. And to omit others yet more aun∣cient, S. Gregorie Nyssen in his oration of the dead, hath these plaine wordes▪ Non poterit à corpore egressus diuinitatis particeps fieri nisi maculas animo immixtas purgatorius ignis abstu∣lerit. The departed can not be partaker of the diuinitie, vnlesse purgatorie fyre take away the spots residing in his soule. adding after wordes: alijs post hanc vitam purgatorio igne materiae labes abstergentibus. Others clensing after this life the corruption of the matter with purgatory fyre. I indeed finde these words smat different in an other translation, as also the wordes of an other pregnant place of the same author to the same purpose in his prece∣dent page aboute the midest of the oration: but the sense is the same in all places & ver∣sions, S. Austin also in the 16. of his 50. homilies saith thus. Qui temporalibus paenis digna gesserunt per ignem quendam purgatorium transibunt, de quo Apostolus ait▪ saluus erit sic tamen quasi per ignem. Those who haue done things deser∣uing temporall paines, shall passe by a certaine purgatorie fyre, of which the Apostle saith: he shall be saued, yet so as it were by fire. So that
all this which the kinght vtters of S. Grego∣rie, is friuolous, & vntrue, as these testimonies conuince. Onelie one place which Sir Humfrey ci∣teth out of S. Augustin, carieth some more apparence then the rest. Where in his booke de vanitate saeculi the first chapter he saith thus. Knowe that when the soule is separated from the bodie, presentlie it is either placed in Para∣dise for it good workes, or cast headlong in to the bottome of hell for it sinnes. To which I say First, that booke attributed to Sainct Austin is not founde in the Index of his seuerall workes collected by Possidonius nor cited by Beda in his commentarie vpon the Apostles of S. Paule consisting of the sentences of S. Aug. Wherefore it is noted by Bellar. de scrip. Ec∣cles. not to be his: yet because it is printed a∣mong his workes & perhaps composed by some ancient author: I answere Secondlie that suppose it is his worke yet S. Augustin spea∣keth onelie of those that either dye in mortall sinne, or of those that die quite free from sinne & all punishment due vnto it, as martyrs doe. Thirdlie I answere that S. Augustin spea∣keth there onelie of those two places to which all soules are finallie destinated, and to one of which generallie speaking, & for the most parte, euerie one presentlie passeth, yet as there is no rule so generall which doth not admit ex∣ception
so doth this generall sentence of sainct Augustin include those onelie who dye in ei∣ther of those states which he mentioneth in that place, that is either absolutely in such good workes as presentlie deserue paradise, or els in such ill workes as presentlie deserue the paines of hell; & yet it admitteth an exception in o∣thers who passe out of this world in neyther of those two states, but are of those whome the same S. Augustin in an other place calleth nec valde bonos nec valde malos: or, mediocriter malos & mediocriter bonos. Enchyr. c. 110. & lib. de cura pro mot. cap. 1. Neyther verie good, nor verie euill, and of whome he also meaneth when in his first booke of care for the dead he sayth non dubium est orationem prodesse de∣funstis, it is no doubt but prayer is pro∣fitable to the dead, which speaches hee would newer haue vttered if hee had euer de∣nyed the faith of Purgatorie & that this is S. Austins true sense, it is plaine in regard it was sufficient for his purpose in that place, whose intent is onely in generall to persuade to virtue & good lyfe, that when men come to die they may be found in state rather to go pre∣sentlie to heauen thē to hell, to which purpose of his because it was impertinent to mention Purgatorie, therfore he passed it in silence, wher as yet in other places where it cometh in his way, he doth not omit it. Lastely I aduertise the reader of the smale fi∣delitie
which Sir Humfrey vseth in the citation of this place of S. Austin traslating those words pro meritis bonis: for his good merits, his good works, flying from the worde merit out of his Puritā∣nicall spirit as a beare doth from the ring. Frō hence Sir Hūfrey passeth to proue the vn∣certaintie of Indulgēces & honour of images by the testimonies of the Romanists, but the trueth is none of them proue anie vncertainlie amōg the Romanists touching the substantiall points themselues, for all the authours which he citeth here for this purpose doe vniformelie consent in both those particulars of exhibition of honour to images, & aboute the power & lawfullnesse of the vse of Indulgences as wee haue showed before. And onelie ther is some vncertainlie in that which is not determined by the Church, as for example how farre Indulgences are extended, & aboute the begining of the practise, what maner of honour is due to images, & the like, which questions are out of the subiect of this section the title of which is, if Sir Humfrey remembreth, of the certainlie of the reformers faith, & vncertainlie of the Romish faith, & not of such disputable questions as the Roma∣nists in the cited places speake of. Wher also it is to be noted by the way that the kinght ahuseth S. Thomas, first in that he affirmeth him to teach that the image of Christ is to be
adored with diuine honour. For although it is true that S. Thomas sayth that seeing that Christ is adored with adoration of latria, it is consequent that his image is to be adored with adoration of Latria: neuerthelesse the same S. Thomas addeth afterwardes, non propter ipsam imaginem, sed propter rem cuius imago est, meaning that altho' both Christ & his image be adored with the same externall action of diuine honour which he calleth adoration of Latria, yet is not the Latria it selfe or diuine honour in spirit & truth attributed or exhibited to the picture, but onelie to Christ himselfe by reason of his diuinitie, which diuinitie as S. Thomas knew it not to be truelie & reallie in the picture, so knew he also that diuine wor∣ship ought not to be giuen to the same not as much as by accident, but onelie that the exter∣nall adoration, or externall action of Latria or the matter of it was so to be exhibited to the image that the formall parte ther of, that is the affection of the mynde ought wholelie to be cast vpon Christ himselfe represented by the same. Secondlie I say that the knight abuseth S. Thomas in that he calleth him the founder of image worship, whereas yet he himselfe had cited the seuenth Synod immediately before which vseth the same terme of adoration, and that which is more the foresayd Synod is al∣ledged
by Sir Humfrey in another place for the authour of idolatrie, which neuerthelesse was celebrated some hundreths of yeares before Sainct Thomas of Aquin was borne. And altho' this doctrine of his is some what obscure in the termes which he deliuereth it, & soundeth har∣shelie in the eares of the common people, yet as it is true in the sense he speaketh it, so may it also be so explicated by pastours, & prea∣chers, that euen children themselues may be capable of it, especiallie if first they be tould in generall that no picture is to be honored by it selfe, without relation, or reference to the pro∣totype, or thing it represents, or for itselfe; & that whensoeuer they exhibit anie act of ho∣nour towardes an image, they must withall fixe their mynde & affection vpon that onelie which it representeth, referring the whole action finallie & lastelie not to the picture, but to the thing pictured: euen as they doe who bowe or make courtisie to a man whome they salute & honour by touching his garment (as the fashion in some places) in which action of honour altho' the exterior signe is directed as well to the apparell as to the man him selfe, or rather more immediatelie to the apparell then to the person, yet the internall affection of the saluter is settled vpon the person onelie where finallie it stayeth & remayneth. An so it is in the worship of the images of Christ & his
Saints, in which there is no more daunger or showe of idolatrie then there is danger of ex∣cesse of ciuill reuerence towardes him whose garment is honored in the manner before des∣cribed. And according to this if Sir Hum∣frey & his blynde mates had but light of vn∣derstanding to conceiue it, they should not need to feare anie danger of idolatrie in the Romanists, tho' they were neuer so ignorant, or simple, but those might more iustlie feare spirituall idolatrie in themselues who doe so much adore the Idol of their owne priuate spirit that they will not yeald to the iudgement of the most vniuersall Church, and to those who are both farre more in number, & incom∣parablie farre more learned & religious then all the impugners of honor due to the images of Christ and his Saints. And yet vpon supposition of this same false idol of his owne conceite that all kynde of re∣uerēce done to any kynde of image is idolatry, Sir Humfrey doth most shamefullie calum∣niate Gregorius de Valentia affirming him to maintaine that there is a kynde of lawfull ido∣latrie. Whereas the foresaid learned diuine onelie sayth that a man might not obscurelie gather out of S. Peters wordes in his first epistle chapter 34. vers. 3. that he insinuateth that some worship of images to wit, of sacred ima∣ges, is lawfull, & reight, by reason that sainct
Peter speaking against idolatrie, he calleth it not absolutelie worship of images, but vnlaw∣full worship of images, illicitos simulacrorum cultus. Which discourse of Valentia how well grounded it may seeme, I will not dispute. But this I assure my selfe that defence of idolatrie was so farre from the toughts of that pious man (as plainelie appeareth by the rest of his doctrine euen in the place cited) that if Sir Humfrey either had not beene verie full of corrupted meaning, or had not had great want of matter for the finishing of his false dealing in this section, & for his last plaudite there in, hee would not haue had the face to abuse so much the innocencie of so sincere a writer. Especiallie considering that altho' Valentia had committed such a grosse errour as to de∣fende some kynde of Idolatrie to be lawfull, yet had his errour ben wholelie impertinent to proue the vncertaintie of the Romish faith in the doctrine of honour of images, which is the point here in controuersie; of which Valentia being knowe not to haue euer doubted in anie parte of his workes, whatsoeuer orher absur∣ditie he might be supposed to haue taught in that matter, it can not argue anie disagreement from the rest of the Romanists in this parti∣cular. The knight also citeteth Bellarmin & Ca∣nus But I haue before sufficientlie declared
their meaning in an other occasion, and as for Canus, he by laboring to establish his owne singular opinion that matrimonie is no Sacra∣ment but onelie a ciuill contract except it be celebrated by a Preist with sacred & solemne wordes as he is an Ecclesiasticall minister, one∣lie alledgeth the vncertaintie of the doctrine of diuines touching the determinate matter, & forme of that Sacrament, and aboute the man∣ner how it giueth grace, or rather when it gi∣ueth grace & when it doth not, by reason he holds it vncertaine amōg diuines whether it be a sacramēt or not, except in those cases in which it is celebrated by the Preist, & by cōsequence he holdes it vncertaine among diuines whether in those occasions it conferres grace to the re∣ceiuers, which he will not haue for a matter of faith, nor yet more then the more common opinion, Si hoc, (ma∣trimoniū) inquā, ar∣gumētētur Sacramen∣tū Ecclesia non esse, tūc Catho∣licus respō∣deat fiden∣ter, animo∣se defendat, secure con∣tra pugnet. Canus l. 8. c. 5. & therefore he saith. Nego scholae cer∣to constantique decreto definitum matrimonium sine Ecclesiae ministro contractum, esse vere & pro∣prie Sacrnmeneum, nego eam rem ad fidem & reli∣gionem pertinere. Yet notwithstāding all diuines agree & Canus with them, that matrimonie is truelie one of the seuen Sacraments: & conse∣quentlie that which Canus sayth in the place cited is not for the knights purpose. And so now I will end this section in which our aduer∣sarie in steed of prouing the infallible certaine∣tie of the reformed faith as he promised in the
beginning, by reason of his vnfaithfull procee∣ding he hath lost all certaintie of his owne hu∣mane faith for which he deserueth a most ri∣gorous censure. The X. PERIOD. THIS Period shall conteine the eleuenth section of the knights booke, in which. He indeuoreth to proue by the testimonies of his aduersaries that there is greater benefit, confort & saftie of the soule in his faith, then in the Romish. And this his taske he beginneth with great grauitie saying that he proceeds from the certaine way to the safe way. A∣gainst which position neuerthelesse if one were disposed to proceed according to rigour of Phi∣losophie, he might easilie demonstrate a plaine impossibilitie in it by an argument ad hominem. For if as Sir Humfrey houldes there is no certaintie in the Romish faith & way, & that all the certaintie is in his owne as he hitherto hath labored to shewe, then can he not truelie say that his way is the safer way, for that the worde safer inuolueth a comparison betweene two which are both safe, because a comparison as Philosophie teacheth, cannot be but betwixt things of the same common nature, comparatio non est nisi inter resciusdem generis. Wherefore since that according to the tenet of Sir Hum∣frey
there is neyther certaintie nor safetie in the Romish faith, & yet that, as he supposeth, they are both in his owne, it is consequent that altho' it were a safe way, yet vpon his supposi∣tion it cannot possible be truelie called either a safer way, or of more confort & benefit then the Romish way. To say nothing of our knights presumption & folly in offering to call that a more safe, more confortable, & more profitable way to the soule, which as yet he hath not shewed with anie probabilitie either before or now in this section, to haue anie one of those attributes in it, but hath beene rather by mee alreadie conuinced to be voyde of them all. Ad altho' this generall ansere might serue for all Sir Humfrey bringeth in this place, as being in substance but a newe repetition of the same points of doctrine of which he treated in seuerall places before: yet to giue him fuller satisfaction, and because tho' the doctrine be the same, yet the application is different: I will descend to particular examen of it. He begins with Bellarmin whom he citeth as a confesser of the all sufficientie of scripture as he tearmeth it, but it is as cleare as day that Bellarmin made not anie such confession ther being not anie such worde or sense to be foūde in his workes, but rather the quite contrarie is founde euen in the same booke which Sir Humfrey here citeth, in which he expresselie
confesseth & professeth traditions to be neces∣sarie besides the scriptures, yea & in the very-next wordes to those which the knight citeth he addeth that all other things (meanig besy∣des those which the Apostles publikelie & commonlie preached to all men) are not writ∣ten. His wordes are these in Latin. Dico illa omnia scripta esse ab Apostolis quae sunt omnibus necessaria, & quae ipsi palam omnibus vulgo praedicauurunt, alia autem non omnia scripta esse. I say that all those things are written by the Apostles which are necessarie to all men, & which they openlie preached to all vulgarlie or commonlie, but all other things are not written. Which last wordes not with standing they are a parte of the same positiō or sentence, & conteine the very point of difficultie in this controuersie: yet by a notorious imposture Sir Humfrey left them out, & so at one stroake quite corrupteth both Bellarmins sense & sen∣tence. Wherfore, qui legit intelligat, he that shall read Bellarmine in the place cited by the knight, that is de verbo Dei non scripto lib. 4. cap. 11. Will easilie preceiue him to be so farre frome the confessing all sufficiency of scripture in that sense in which the reformers take it, that the verie title of his booke, which is of the vnwritten worde, doth manifestlie conuince the contrarie. And as for the wordes which Sir Humfrey cited altho' we take them in that
mangled manner in which he hath rehearsed them yet if they had ben reight vnderstood by him, I ame persuaded he could haue founde no iuste coulor to produce them in fauour of him∣selfe. For that it is manifest by those two limita∣tions, necessarie for all men, & preached generally to all men, that the Cardinalls meaning could not be that absolutelie all things which are ne∣cessarie for euerie person or state of persons in particular, or as the logitians speake, necessarie either pro singulis generum or pro generibus singu∣lorum, are written in the scriptures: but onely Bellarmin meant that altho' all those things are written which all men both in generall & in particular must necessarilie knowe, & haue for the obteining of saluation, yet that there are some other things necessarie to some parti∣cular persons or to some particular states of persons included in that generall number of all men, which are not written, as namelie aboute the Gouernment of the Church & admini∣stration of the Sacraments, & in particular the Baptizme of children, & the rites of the same, & that the beptizme of Heretikes is valid. All which Bellarmin doth so plainelie specify that it is imposible for him that reades & vnderstands him, to doubt of this his mea∣ning. And yet not vnlike to this doth Sir Hum∣frey proceed with the same Bellarmin who∣me
he citeth to the same purpose in his first booke of the worde of God: wher out of these his wordes, the scripture is a most certaine, & most safe rule of beleeuing, the kinght conclu∣deth that it is a safer way to rely wholely vpon the worde of God which can not erre, then vpon the Pope or Church which is the autho∣ritie of man, sayth hee, & may erre. Which conclusion neuerthelesse is most false, & captious, as well in regarde that according to Sir Humfreys owne confession Bellarmin houldeth the scripture to be but a partiall rule of faith; age 258. as also & cheeflie because when Bellarmin calleth the scripture a most certaine, & most safe rule, he doth not exclude the au∣thoritie of the Church or diuine tradition, but expresselie includeth them both as the other parte of the totall rule of faith, which scripture also, so onelie, & not otherwise, he calleth with great reason regula credendi certissima & tutissima, knowing neuerthelesse on the con∣trarie & supposing for certaine that with out the authoritie of the Church & traditions the scripture can neither be knowne to be true Scripture, not in what sense it is to be vnder∣stood, & consequentlie as Sir Humfrey taketh it, it is not either an all sufficient, certaine, or safe rule, & by & an other consequence, it can much lesse be imagined to be a safer way to relie wholelie vpon the written worde as the
reformers doe then to rely vpon both the scriptures, & the authoritie of the Church & diuine traditions, as doe the Romanists, taking God for their Father in the writtē worde, & the visible Church for their mother in the know∣ledge, interpretation, & sense of the same. And thus wee see by this discourse, that Sir Humfrey proueth nothing but his owne dis∣honest dealing with Bellar. whom besides that which I haue alreadie showed, he doth more then impudenlie belie in that he affir∣meth him to allowe the worde of God to be but a pertiall rule of faith, which Bellarmin doth not say, but onelie that the scripture is a partiall rule, Page 258. not denying but the worde of God in all it latitude js a totall rule of all the Christian & Catholike faith, but yet suppo∣sing for certaine that the scriptures are not to∣tallie conuertible with the worde of God, but that they are distinct things the one from the other, as ta parte is from the whole which any man of common iudgement may easilie per∣ceiue. And if these be the trickes & shifts by which Sir Humfrey meaneth to make Bellar∣min a confesser of his reformed religion, in steed of gaining him, he will loose his owne faith & credit. The knight still passeth on his way, & tells his reader it is a safer way to adore Christ Iesus sitting on the reight hand of God the
Father then to adore the Sactamentall bread which depends vpon the intentiō of the Preist. But I tell him againe that the safest way of all is to adore Christ both in Heauen, & wher∣soeuer els he is. And he himselfe hath tould vs his bodie & blood are in the Sacrament, whe if wee will not be accounted infidels wee most constantlie beleeue he is. And so we say with that most auncient & vanerable Father Saint Cyrill of Ierusalem, Hoc est cor∣pus meum: hic est san∣guis meus. Math. 26. Mark. & Luc. 22. since that Christ himselfe affirmeth so, & saith of the bread: this is my bodie, who dareth here after to doubt of it? & he also confirming, & saying: this is my bloud, who can doubte, & say it is not his bloud? And supposing this his reall presence which we Romanists trulie beleeue with auncient S. Cyrill & the rest of the Fethers, the safest way is to adore him in the Sacrament & not as sitting at the reight hand of his Father onelie. But as for you reformers as it can not be safe for you to denie Christs reall presence in the Eucharist, so neither is it safe for you to refuse to adore him there where in the true Sacrament he is truelie present. I knowe Sir kinght you make your comparison betweene the adoration of Christ in Heauen & the adoration of the Sacramentall bread, but it proceds vpon a false supposition, for the Ro∣manists adore not the bread, but Christ vnder the forme of bread, whose existence there,
doth not so much depend vpon the intention of the Preist, but that sufficiēt certaintie may be had of the same & at the least much more then you can haue that you receiue a true Sacra∣ment whe you take the bread at the ministers hand, who if he hath no intention to doe it as Christ did when he gaue it to his disciples, then may you receiue as much at your owne table as at the communion table. But the trueth is that all this is nothing but captious cogging in Sir Humfrey; for proofe of which he most impertinentlie produceth S. Aug. de bono pers. lib. 13. cap. 6. Wher he hath not a worde to this purpose but onelie treateth there of the supernaturall actions of man, saying that to the end our confession may be humble & lowlie, it is a safer way to attribute them who∣lelie to God, because although we will, yet it is God that worketh in vs to worke. All which is quite out of this matter, & serueth for nothing but to stoppe holes with a vaneflorish graunded onelie vpon the wordes safe way which the knight founde in S. Augustin to sounde to his owne tune & ther vpon founded a verball argument. And the like dictionariall maner of proofe doth he vse wherby to showe his safer way in the points of priuate Masse & communion in both kyndes but most redicu∣lously. For whereas he findeth in some of the Ro∣manists
that the Masse as being not onelie a sacrifice but also a Sacrament is both more commendablie administred & more frutfullie receiued when both Preist & people together are partakers of it, Sir Humfrey applyeth this to the Raphsodie of the reformed Churches: which neuerthelesse hath not a scrap in it ei∣ther of true sacrifice or Sacrament, but is onely a pore hungerie scamling of bread & wine not conformable either to the forme of the ancient Lythurgies of S. Chrysostome or S. Basil, nor euer heard on in the Christian world before the dayes of Luther, and of so smale estimation euen among themselues that if it chance to fall, they will scarce take paines to take it from the grounde, as may appeare by a prittie passage of that nature which not manie yeares past I re∣ceiued from the mouth of one who was then of the ministrie, what he is nowe I knowe not, who tould me that coming in to a certaine Church, the minister as he deliuered the com∣munion to his parishoners did let a peace fall from him, but there was not one in the whole congregation excepting a dogge that showed so much deuotion towardes their vnuenerable Sacrament as once to offer to take it from the grounde. It is true he tould me with all that the honest minister by tasting a little to often of the cup was some what distempered in his head, but that me thought was but a pore ex∣cuse
for a man of his coate, & a teacher of re∣formed doctrine, especiallie at such a tyme & in such an occasion. Which want of respect in the reformed brothers towards their commu∣nion, doth yet further appeare if we compare it with the extraordinarie great diligence & care which the Preists & people vse in the Ro∣man Church for the auoyding of all Kynde of irreuerence towardes the holie Eucharist as both the rubrickes of the Missal, the ancient Canons, & dayly practice testifie, in so much that one, & perhaps the cheefest reason of the restrainte of the Sacramentall Cup to the laytie was for the auoyding of such irre∣uerences as might easilie haue happened amōg such multitudes of people as vse to Commu∣nicate at one tyme in the Roman Church. So that now we see it was great absurditie in Sir Humfrey to argue the greater saftie of the do∣ctrine of his Church out of that which the Romanists speake onelie of their owne, espe∣ciallie considering there is not one worde of safetie to be founde in anie of the places cited by him, the authours of them not intending to show anie lesse safetie to be foūde either in the doctrine or practice of the Roman Church concerning priuate Masse & single cōmunion, but onelie at the most, that some more spiri∣tuall profit would redounde to the people then nowe doth, if either their deuotion were so
farre extended as that in euerie Masse some would communicate, or that the Church, in other respects had greater reason to permit the vse of the Chalis to the laitie then not to per∣mit it, alwayes supposing as a certaine trueth that not withstanding in some respects the contrarie to that which is nowe practized might be more profitable yet, that all circum∣stances considered that is the safest for mens consciences which is done according to the present custome of that Church which is knowne euen by our aduersaries to haue visi∣bly succeeded from the Apostles, at the least personallie, & is also knowne euen by Iewes & gentils to be the most vniuersall Church in the Christian world. And let this be sufficient to redargue the proceedings of the knight in this matter, yet not omitting that two of the authours he citeth for Romanists to wit the Apostata Deane & Cassander, are not such, & that in the citation of Bellarmin he vseth one of his accustomed trickes, & whose wordes al∣though he rehearseth them truelie in the mar∣gen, yet he translateth them corruptedlie. For whereas Bellarmin saith that the Masse in which communicants are present, is more per∣fect & legitimate, ex hac parte, that is in as much as it is ordained to the spirituall refectiō of the people, the knight omitteth in his translation the wordes ex hac parte, & by that tricke doth
notablie peruert Bellarmin's meaning, making the reader beleeue he affirmed that absolutelie, which neuerthelesse he did expresselie & pur∣poselie vtter with limitation, with an intention to showe that altho' in one respect priuate masse is lesse perfect, & lesse conformable to the ancient custome of the Church in regarde of the profit of the people, yet that absolutelie in it selfe it is as perfect & lawfull as that in which communicants are present. Furthermore touching the mariage of mi∣nisters, Sir Humfrey sayth it will appeare by the confessions of the Romanists that it is the safer way to liue chastlie in matrimony thē by a single life to hazarde their soules by incontinē∣cie, thus the knight which if he meanes of the ministers of his owne misreformed Church onelie, I will easilie graunt that supposing their slipperie inclination to lecherie, and the smale meanes they vse for mortification of the flesh & conseruation of chastitie, it is a safer way in my opinion for them to marrie then to liue a single life, especillie considering they are no true Preists but onelie equiuocall Clergie men both in Order & function, & that if they had not wiues it is to be doubted the maydes of their parishes would scarcelie liue with out danger among them. But if Sir Humfrey speakes of Roman Preists which haue true vo∣cation, true ordination & sacred function, then
I will say with diuers graue authors that if the Preists of the old testament obserued those dayes continencie in which they sacrificed by their turnes, then ought the Preists of the new testament to obserue chastitie euerie day, be∣cause, they euerie day offer sacrifice.Hier. . tit. os. l. fi c.  ve∣. .  ca. c. And therefore the Roman Church hath most religiouslie ordained the lawe of perpe∣tuall chastitie of Preists, for that altho' perhaps it may seeme more safe for some particular per∣sons to marrie supposing their negligence & frayltie in that nature: & abstracting from a vowe alreadie made, & the lawe of the Church in that particular, yet althings cōsidered, & for as much as euen the most inclined to vice may liue chaste with Gods grace if they will make vse of his gifts, & of such meanes as the Church hath ordained for that end & purpose; it is to be iudged better, safer, & greater honour to God, that the whole state of Preisthood or Sacer∣doce should be tyed with the sacred band of perpetuall chastitie. e non ius otes  plu∣ orati am  sal∣tur cerdo∣ uga∣ i in  pre∣atu ātur. as . l. 2 de  con. . nder. Neither doth all nor anie of the authors which the knight citeth abso∣lutelie confesse the contrarie to be safer then this, but onelie (they being but three in num∣ber) one of them with a perhaps it were not worse, an other with an it were good, & holesome, & the third (who yet is no Ro∣manist) with a may be thought necessarie, but showe their particular dictamens, & being so fewe as they bee, thou' they were the
greatest Oracles in the world, they could not possible cause anie safetie in the consciences of those who shall followe them against the streame of all other diuines, nor can they in any true sense be sayd to be the confession of the Romanists as the knight doth affirme, since that two or three cannot in anie case carie the name of the whole nor iustelie preiudicate the weight of their authority in case they did agree with the misreformed doctrine in this particu∣lar as yet they doe not. And touching Panormitan whome Sir Humfrey calles a great Canonist I will not examen how great he was in that science: yet I doe not see why his authoritie should be acco∣unted great in the Roman Church, suppo∣sing he was onelie a Scismaticall Cardi∣nall of the scismaticall Pope Felix. Second∣lie suppose he were as great a Canonist as the author of the Canons himselfe, yet doth his great authoritie fauore Sir Humfreyes cause neuer a iot in regarde he doth not affirme, as the latter parte of the 32. article of the English Creed doth, that it is lawfull also for Bishops, Preists & Deacons, as for all other Christian men to marrye at their owne discretion: But Panormitan onelie sayde (to vse his owne wordes) I beleeued it were a holsome statute for the good & health of soules) that these who will containe, & merit more maybe lefte to their owne
wills: but those that ar not able to containe, may marrie. Because experience tsacheth that the quite contrarie effect followeth of that lawe of continencie. In which saying altho' I must needs confesse, he erred in presuming to pre∣scribe a new rule to the Church, yet is it plaine he differs frome the faith of Sir Humfrey in this point in diuers respects. First in that he vttered not this as a matter either of faith, or yet of morall certaintie, but onelie deliuered it as his owne priuate opinion. How be it Sir Humfrey hearing the sounde of the worde Credo (as it seemes) he presentlie conceiued it to be as certaine as the Apostles Creed it selfe or at the least desired his reader might so ap∣prehend it. Secondlie Panormitan doth not affirme absolutelie that it is either holsome or yet as much as lawfull for Preists to marrie notobstanding the precept of the Roman Church to the contrarie (as our nouelists doe who also condemne that lawe of single lyfe for iniuste, rte quod erdoti∣ inter∣tum fuit iugium, factum impia annide, . l. Inst. l. . cap. 12.  23. & tirannicall) But he was onely of opinion that it were good for the health of the soules of some particular persons, that the same Church should alter her course, & make such a statute for the time to come. Thirdly Panor∣mitan if his wordes be duelie ponderd, doth not affirme that the Church might doe well to constitute that Preists with the restriction of Sacerdoce or Preisthood, I meane after they haue receiued orders, may marrie, but he
meanes onelie that Preists with ampliation, that is such persons as intend to be Preists may marrye if they fynde themselues not able to liue chaste: wher as the pretented reformers hould it lawfull not onelie for Preists but also euen for such religious persons as haue made a speciall vowe of perpetuall chastitie, to marrie at their pleasure, as the verie author & Ante∣signane of their sect did both in wordes & ex∣ample teach them. By all which particulars it is manifest that Panormitans case is farre diffe∣rent frome the doctrine & practise of the mo∣derne sectaries especiallie of the Church of England; & consequentlie his testimonie can not possible proue anie safetie for Sir Humfrey in this parte of his way, as being quite an other extrauagant way which neither meets with his nor ours. More ouer for conclusion I wish the reader to take notice that I neither fynde in Panormitan those formall wordes which Sir Humfrey cites, nor anie others intyrelie equiualent vnto them, nor yet are they intyrelie & continuatlie rehearsed by the knight but with interruption, as the authors owne wordes which here I truelie quote in the margen will declare.Credo pro bono & salute ani∣marū quod esset salubre statutū vt volentes continere, & magis mereri re∣linquere voluntati eorum: non valētes au∣tem conti∣nere, possint contrahere quia expe, rientia do∣cente con∣trarius prorsus ef∣fectus se∣quitur ex illa lege cō∣tinētiae. &c. Panor. 3. p. c. cū olim de Cler. coniug. And besides this the faithlesse knight in steed of the wordes non valentes puts non volentes, & for the worde Credo (which denotates the weakenesse of the authors dictamen, signifying therby that it
was onelie a particular credulitie of his owne) he translates, it were good, & behouefull, & attrihutes the surmised Licentiousnesse of the Catholike clergie to the lawe of celibate it selfe, whereas the author onelie saith. sequitur ex lege, the contrarie effect followeth of the lawe. And by occasion of this passage, the reader may reflect what a pore shifte Sir Humfrey was forced to vse for excuse of the falacitie of his misreformed ministrie when he cat∣ched at the authoritie of this one Apo∣chryphal Cardinall, who neuerthelesse vpon due examen appeares to haue so much fru∣state his sinister expectation. Now for Aeneas Syluius, the doth lesse fauore Sir Humfreys tenet, nay not at all, as his owne wordes aboue quoted in the margen doe manifest to the reader. He onelie speaketh by a perhaps it were not worse that verie manie Preists had wiues: & yet this he recalled of his owne accorde after his assuption to the cheefe Pontificall seat or Popedome, by a speciall Bull of retractation of that & some other immature positions vttered in his youth. So that the kinght was farre out of his way, when for the safetye of this parte of his new diuised way, he produced these authors, & if he haue no better garde & defense for it thē the testimonie of thē (as in truth he hath not) then ought euerie one to take heed of it, & auoide it as a most vn∣quoth, & perilous path.
And so to conclude this I may not vnfitly say with Erasmus: quae malum est ista tanta sala∣citas in nostris uouis Euangelistis vt sine vxoribus esse non possint? what in the mischeefe, saith Erasmus, a great inclination to lecherie is this in our newe Euangelists that they can not be with out wiues? An I say further that if they persuade themselues they can not possible containe, & therfore must needs be marryed; at the least why doe they reprehend Ro∣man Preists who haue the contrarie per∣suasion, for obledging themselues to a single life? If they vpon supposition of such carnall conceits hould they can not goe safe to Hea∣uen without wiues at their heels, why should those be condemned who hould it safer to goe without them? An oculus tuus nequam est quia ego bonus sum? wherefore doe the ministers cen∣sure the Roman Preists so seuerlie for that which is a virtue in them? But in deed it is to be feared that those who can not possible liue chastelie without a woman, will hardlie con∣tent themselues with one in all cases, but rather some times make bould with their neibours, or at the least fall to that large axiome of le∣cherous Luther, si non velit vxor, veniat ancilla, in which I knowe not what safetie can be found for the soule, except Sir Hum∣frey houldeth that for the safest which is most agreable to the delights of the bodie.
Wherefore if we will discourse rather like men then blatter like beasts, the onelie safetie that can be had in this matter, especiallie for Preists, is to follow that melius facit of S. Paule 1. Chorinth. 7. I meane that statute of a chaste harte which there he mentioneth, and this sta∣tute being once well & firmelie made, the me∣lius est nubere hath no place, but then the spiri∣tuall mariage of the soule with Christ her sponse is made, & then it is to late to vse that violent medicine; an other antidote must be vsed for the cure of that surfetting Vri, to wit mortification of the bodie, which medi∣cine the same Apostle prescribes in an other place saying, castigo corpus meum. And if the reformed ministers would make vse of this, then perhaps they would change their opinion & account the way of single life safer then the way of mariage, & that way which as S. Hie∣rome saith filleth Paradise, Contra Iouin. not that which fil∣leth the world, & finallie that which S. Paule counselleth absolutelie, not that which hee onelie permitteth as a remedie for a supposed imperfection, which permission tho' it be the easier way, & therefore perhaps is more wil∣linglie imbrased by Sir Humfrey in fauor of his deformed Clergie, as a man not ignorant of their imperfections in that nature, yet was the other euer commended as the safer way both by God & his Saints, & generallie imbra∣ced
by the Church an clergie before the daies of Luther. Aboute prayer in an vnknowne language none of the authours the knight citeth, affir∣me that it is the safer way to pray in a vulgar tongue, or yet, that it is absolutelie better, but onelie secundum quid, that is for the edification of the Church as Caietan speaketh, yet not meaning but that is the best & safest all things considered which the Church doth practice: which practice as the same Caietan well kewe (as being a Cardinall of the Roman Church) is to haue the publike seruice in Latin rather then in the mother tongue for such reasons as I haue deliuered in an other place. And tou∣ching the testimonie of S. Thomas whome here the knight produceth in his commentarie vpon the 14. chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians (as I suppose, for he quotes not the place) as affirming it is manifest that he receiues more benefit who prayes & vnder∣standes what he sayth, because the mynde of him who prayes & vnderstandes not, is with∣out frute & refection. To this I anser, that S. Thomas doth not meane by this that it is better that the publike seruice of the Church be in a vulgar language which is that wee here haue in question, & not the priuate prayers of euery particular person, of which S. Thomas onelie speakes, as his owne wordes doe testifie
in that place which I haue exactelie read & duelie pondered. Euer supposing that manie things may be profitable for single persons which yet in cōmon are esteemed much worse yea and in some circumstances absolutelie ill, as by examples which passe in the lawes of tem∣porall Republikes may plainelie appeare. That which S. Thomas did doubtlesselie persuade him selfe to be true whome the world knowes to haue dailie celebrated Masse in Latin not in anie vulgar language. To omit that euen those simple people who praye in the Latin tongue altho' they want that particular instru∣ction of the vnderstanding which the learned receiue in prayer, yet sans doubt they often tymes performe that action with greater de∣uotion & feruor in their wills & affections then the greatest schollers in the world: God al∣mightie by reason of their pious & humble de∣sires supplying as it were in one power that which wantes in an other. And the same I say to the wordes of Lyra & Caietan who speeches to the same purpose which S. Thomas doth & vpon the same place of the Apostle 1. Cor. 14. where altho' Caie∣tan extendes his speeh euen to publike pray∣er of the Church: yet is it manifest that the same Caietan doth neither condemne the contrarie practise of the Roman Church, nor yet houldes it absolutelie better or safer that publike pray∣ers
were (especiallie in these our tymes) not in Latin but in the vulgar language. But he onelie meaneth that it were better in that one respect of edifying the Church if other circum∣stances did also in like paritie concurre, or if there were not more prepondering reasons for the present practise of the Church. And the∣refore Caietan presentlie after the wordes ci∣ted by Sir Humfrey addeth others which if they had not ben omitted by him, they had quite cleared this difficultie, for so he procee∣deth saying. Et ne intelligeres reprehendi a Paulo eiusmodi diuinas laudes (to wit such prayers as are made in an vnknowne tongue) subiun∣git: nam tu quidem bene gratias agis: by which wordes it is plaine that Caietan was not of knight Humfrey opinion in this particular. Lastelie the Rhemes Testament cited by Sir Hūfrey vpon the same passage of S. Paule con∣fesseth the same that S. Thomas sayth of a particular mans priuate deuotion, that in deed it is not so fruetfull for instruction to him when he prayes in a stange longuage, as when he vnderstandes his prayers, yet the authors of the note adde an other clause which if the kinght had proceeded like a freind, he ought not to haue omitted, to wit that the Apostle forbides not such praying neither: confessing that such a mans spirit, harte, & affection prayeth well towardes God tho' his mynde &
vnderstāding be not profited to instructiō, as o∣therwise it might be if he vnderstood the words: neither doth he appointe him to translate his prayer into his vulgar tōgue &c. Thus the Rhe∣mists, Which as the reader may easilie perceiue doth quite contradicte Sir Humfreys purpose, & the doctrine & practise of his Church. Sir Humfrey also falsifyes Gabriel lect. 12. in Can. or at the he least he falsely & igno∣rantlie vnderstāds him, when in his owne 265. page he cytes him, affirming that he diliuereth there seuen reasons why vocall prayer should be vnderstanded by the people, For Biel tea∣cheth not there in what lenguage vocall pryer ought to bee, but onelie proueth that it must not be meerelie mentall but so vttered & pro∣nounced as it may be knowne for such by the people, vt innotescat populo, which wordes doe not signifie (as the kinght falselie English them) may be vnderstood, but may come to the notice or hearing of the people in regarde it is vocall prayer in what language soeuer it bee, Hebrewe, Greke, or Latin. Circa pri∣mum an o∣ratio debeat vocaliter perfici? — Tūc dicitur ad dubium quod oratio publica ne∣cessario est vocalis. O∣portet enim quod talis oratio inno∣tescat popu∣lo pro quo offertur. Biel. in Can. lect. 62. f. 124. So that the reader may perceiue that this author is neither pertinently nor sincerelie produced by our aduersarie. For the greater safatie of his reiecting the wiship of images he produces expresselie three onelie authors, two of which neuerthelesse are no Romanists, one of them being the dimi-Romanist
Erasmus, the other Cassander neither of whose authorities we admit for current. It is true the same Cassāder brings out of Biel some∣thing to the same purpose, who supposing he be truelie alledged, yet it must alwayes be true that one suallowe makes not summer, & so what soeuer he sayth his authoritie alone can not ingender safetie. And since I writ this by taking a viewe of the authors themselues, I fynde that Sir Humfrey hath thryse corrupted Cassander by omission of some of his wordes which he rehearses out of the 979. page of his consultation of images: for all that clause of Cassander: imaginum moderato vsu pacis & tranquilitatis causa: conseruato: Sir Humfrey lets quyte drop out of his pen, which wordes not withstanding are of so much importance to haue ben trulie related that togither with some others in the same page (which he also pretermits) they be the onelie wordes which most declare the authors meaning touching the honor due to images. The wordes are these. Non tamen haec quae diximus eo pertinent vt imagines sanctorum si in ijs modo decorum seruetur non aliquo honore illis conuenienti, & de∣bito affici possint, videlicet si vt signa & monu∣menta sanctorum honorifice habeantur & in gra∣tiam illorum quos significant & referunt, reuerenter conspiciantur & tractentur, modo ab eximo cultu temperetur, & nihil diuinitatis & virtutis illis
tribuatur, sed eo tantum loco habeantur quo litterae & voces quae rerum absentium quas diligimus & veneramur gratam memoriam suggerant. All which long sentence as being much disagreea∣ble to Sir Humfreys Precisian spirit he made shifte to passe ouer in lurchers sylence. And in deed in my iudgement the foresayd wordes taken as they stand in the text, are so plaine for the worship of images in that sense in which the Roman Church houldes it lawfull to honore them, that I can not easilie preceiue in what they differ from the tenor of the decree of the Tridentine Councell in that point. In the other place Sir Humfrey likewise omits the latter parte of Biels sentence as it is cyted by Cassander, & as the wordes are founde in Biel himselfe, the wordes which Sir Hum∣frey scips are these, quia qualitercumque conside∣retur imago est res quaedam insensibilis & crea∣tura cui adoratio latrie minime exhibenda. Which wordes in deed are those by which both Biel & Cassander cheefelie declare what they denie to be lawfull in the due worship of ima∣ges that is adoration of Latria or diuine ho∣nor: And yet both of them graunte an other inferior worship or honor due to them, so that the industrious knight to saue labor falsified these two authors both at once. And altho' Biel doth reprehend & that most iustelie, the blockish error of some ignorant people (of which perhaps some there may be some times in
the vniuersall Church) that beleeue some di∣uine virtue or sanctitie to reside in images, yea & in one more then an other, & the like sotish conceites, yet doth it not followe out of this reprehension of Biel that he denied it absolu∣telie to be lawfull to worship images in due manner, as our captious knight would haue it: Nay Biel is so farre from this that in the verie same place quoted by Sir Humfrey he expres∣selie defēdes adoration of the images of Christ euen with Latria improperlie or per accidens, which is as much as anie Roman diuine graun∣tes to anie image what soeuer. To which we may adde that the same Biel doth in expresse termes put for conclusion of his 59. lection these wordes. Haec de imaginum adoratione ratione re∣presentationis. This of the adoration of images in respect of their representation. By which wordes it is cleare that is author this grosselie abused in that he is cited by our aduersarie a∣gainst honor of images, he being so plaine a defendant of the same that he doubts not to vse the words Latria & adoratio. Erasmus & Cassander are also here produced by our aduersarie against the vse of images pra∣ctised in the Roman Church. But these two altho' I doubte not but both of them in their writings incline much more to Catholike Re∣ligion then they doe to Protestancie: yet abso∣lutelie they are but neutrals who followed
more their owne wandering wits then anie other certaine rule of faith. And so their te∣stimonies are not admitted by vs for Orthodox and authenticall. And therefore Sir Humfrey committes an error as often as he vseth them for Romanists. Against the safetie of inuocation of Saints he produceth S. Augustin saying. Tutius & iucun∣dius loquor ad meum Iesum. But this sentence he cites he knowes not where, and it proues he knowes not what, nor I neither. S. Augu∣stin truelie affirmeth that he speaketh more safelie & delighfully to Iesus thē anie other, & so doe I, but as hee doth not say that he spea∣keth not to his Saints also, no more doe I. Tract. 84. in Ioan. And as Saint Aug. tract. 84. in Io. sayth that wee make commemoration of the Saints at the table that is at the altar, to the end they may pray for vs, so doe I. the knight citeth also for his purpose Chemnisius & Cassander, but I care not for them, their testimonie is neither safe nor sound. Against the saftie of the doctrine of merits he citeth also S. Bernard saying that, dāgerous is the habitatiō of those that trust in their owne merits. But here the knight rides beside the saddle, for S. Bernard speakes not directlie of merits but of cōfidence in merits, which we Romanists graūt to be vnsafe by reason of the vncertaintie of them in this or that particular man. In an other
place the same S. Ber. sayth he duelleth in the woundes of our Sauiour with more saftie: which saying we graunte also to be true in the highest degree, but what is this to the denyall of true merits grounded in the mercie & grace of God? of which the same S. Bernard sayth in an other place, indeuore, or procure to haue me∣rits, but when thou' hast them acknowledge that thou hast them giuen thee. merita habere cura, habitadata noueris. And the trueth is that by reiecting the counsell of holie S. Bernard in this particular, the reformers commit a most pernicious errour in regarde that by houlding all merit of man with God impossible, they come to neglect the exercise of virtue & those good workes in which both merit doth con∣siste, & without which the Kingdome of Heauen is not obtained, which doctrine howe domageable it is to the Saluation of soules let the indifferent reader consider. Sir Hūfrey cytes also frayer walden whome he most falselie affirmeth to agree with the Protestants in the doctrine of merits. For as appeareth by those same wordes which he ci∣teth here, he doth not denie all merit, as they doe, but at the most such a kynde of merit in particularie: that is, that no man simpliciter, simplie meriteth the Kingdome of Heauen, which merit yet he doth not absolutelie denie, but onelie sayth that no man can merit it but
by the grace of God or will of the giuer, which are his owne expresse wordes as they are re∣hearse by our aduersarie, and in a sounde sense doe not differ a iot from the doctrine of other diuines. In fine he doth with the rest of the Ca∣tholike diuines expresselie teach that the good workes of the iust performed by the grace of God are absolutelie meritorious of the King∣dome of Heauē, yet he is opiniō that the words ex condigno & congruo, are not to be vsed; in which he differeth in deed from the opinion of most diuines, but not from the Roman faith which standes not vpon those termes, but one∣lie vpon true merit, as may be seene in the Councell of Trent. ses. 6. Can. penult. p. 48. Which Councell vseth not those tearmes, but onelie the wordes vere mereri, that is to merit truelie. And consequentlie fryer walden agrees with the Councel of Trent but not with Sir Humfrey and his precise brothers who flie the verie name of merit, as deuils flie the Crosse. And to descend, to a more particular discussion of fryer waldos meaning touching the doctrine of merits of which the knight subtillie conten∣des to make him a flat denyer. I say in primis, waldo in the place cyted by Sir Humfrey disputes against Wiclef, who thought such confidence in proper merits that he seemed to exclude the merits of Christ, & his saints. And therefore speaking of his per∣uerse
tenet he sayth thus. Maledicta ergo doctri∣na Wiclef quae potius confidere iubet in merito, & hoc proprio, vt Christi, & Sanctorum videatur excludere, quam in oratione humili pro Christi gra∣tia. That is: Maledicted or cursed be the doctrine of Wiclef which rather commaundes to confide in merit, & that proper, so that it may seeme to ex∣clude the merits of Christ, & his Saints: then in humble prayer for the grace of Christ: Now this Kynde of confidence in merits, as our aduersa∣ries themselues can witnesse if they please, is not anie parte of the Roman doctrine, but ra∣ther we Romanists concurre with fryer waldo in his approued cursse. Yea & we are so remote & auerted from the doctrine of Wiclef in this point, & from teaching such confidence euen in true & approued merits, that we cantelously aduise the members of our Church as the sa∣fer way not to relie vpon them but vpon the mercie of God as in an other place I haue more largelie declared. More hauing most attētiuelie read his seueral treatises vpon that subiect, I plainelie perceiue that religious, & zealous defender of the Ro∣man doctrine against Wiclef, did onelie reiect such merits as either excludes, or at a the least preferres not the grace of God before them, or admits not grace as the foundation of merits. For touching merits founded, & performed by the concourse of Gods grace, fryer waldo ab∣solutelie
grauntes both in this same chapter ci∣ted by our aduersarie, where he mentiones both the merits of Chtist & his saints & par∣ticularlie of Sainct Paule in these wordes. Whence it is that neyther the Apostle did applie anie thing to his owne merits but by premitting or preferring the benefits of God, according to the psalmist saying. Because he would so haue me. As also more clearelie in his tenth Title & 98. chapter where he most professedlie defendes against Wiclef, the verie participation of me∣rits especiallie among religious persons. Which doctrine of participation of merits necessarilie supposes a graunt of merits themselues, as common sense doth easilie apprehend. Not to let passe, that some of the authours owne wordes in that same place, euidentlie conuince the same to be true: For that thus he questiones his aduersarie. cur merita non ijs partimur quos reddimus bene meritos nostris meritis? Why doe not we parte merits with them whome we make well merited by our merits? By which wordes waldensis appeares to be so cleare from denial of merits maintained by the Roman Church, that he rather heapeth merits vpon merits in defense of the same. And in the 8. chapter of his first Title he speakes most expresselie euen of merit of eternall life saying. Sed noueriut vitam aeternam dari nobis pro meritis si cum meri∣tis ipsis numeremus & gratiam sine qua nec ipsa
sunt merita, quia nec Dei dona. But let them knowe (sayth walden) that eternal life is giuen vs for merits, if with merits we number grace, without which neyther are they merits, because they are not the giftes of God. And by this it further appeares most manife∣stly that those wordes of waldensis alledged by Sir Humfrey & with which he makes his flo∣rish, to wit. I repute him the sounder diuine, & more consonant to sacred scriptures who simply denyes such merit: in reallitie ar not for his purpose, in regarde that ther is not in them anie denyal of that merit which the Romā Church defines & appooues: no not the merit of eternal life: but the author of them, onelie reiects from the desert of eternal life tale meritum, that is merit as it is signified by those tearmes de condigno, And, de congruo, vsed among diuines both in his time, & at this pre∣sent: from the vse of which according to his priuate dictamen, it were more confor∣mable both to diuinitie, & the scripture to refraine, to the end (as he after addes) they might by the auoyding of those termes, be founde both to accorde better with the former saints (he meanes the ancient Fathers of the Church) & with the phrase of the Apostle saying: 1 Cor. 3.5. sufficientia nostra ex Deo est: our suffi∣ciencie is of God. As also for that in respect of the grace of God, they might be founde more
disagreable (as in their doctrine so in their manner of speech) from the Pelagians, & wic∣lesists who (as the same walden saith) either conceile or denie the grace of God, & wholely confide in the merits of men: Qui gratiā Dei, vel tacent vel abnegāt, & in meritis hominum omnino cō∣fidunt. Ibid. so you see that all the controuersie which fryer walden hath with our Roman deuines is onelie a boute the vse of those two phrases: meritum de condigno, and, meritum de congruo: as persuading the foresaid diuines that when they dispute of merits, they neuer silence the grace of God, but either expresse grace & not merits: or else preferre grace before meritis: and as he saies in Latin. exprimentes gratiam, silentes de meritis, aut gra∣tiam meritis praeferentes. All which is but que∣stio de nomine: a nominal or verbal disputation, or aboute what manner of speech may seeme most fit to be practised in this point for a voy∣ding offense in the heares: yet walden & those same diuines vniformelie according in the sub∣stance of the doctrine of merits themselues as I haue said once before. And so now let this be sufficient to declare vnto the reader how farre out of square our Crosse aduersarie hath detorted the true sense of this religious diuine, to make him seeme to teache according to his owne newe diuinitie in the matter of merits. I confesse I haue inlarged my selfe much more then the matter requires: if otherwife I had not considered how much it importes in all
occasions to daunte the audaciousnes of a pre∣sumptuous aduersarie, who by making most plausible vse of that is least for his purpose maintaines the smale reputation of his owne newfashioned religion cheefelie by the ruines of other mens honor: not sparing this his owne renowned contriman indeuoring by in∣direct meanes to make him speak against his owne faith & conscience among the rest: of which I could not possiblie be insensible: but was obliged euen according to the rules of natural affection, to labore to cleare him of such a foule & iniurious aspertion. But now I come to a conclusion, where yet the reader if he please may further take notice of some other more triuiall abuse offered to this same famous diuine by the sliperie knight by leauing out the aduerbe igitur in his trans∣lation of the Latin in to English, which in reason he ought not to haue omitted in re∣garde it necessarilie implyes a relation or reference to the authors former discourse in which he argues against merit without mention of grace, & of which he speakes in his subsequent wordes, tale meritum &c. al∣ledged by Sir Humfrey in a cōtrarie sense to his meaning. Besides this, the same Sir Humfrey hath not a little transposed some of waldens wordes in his recital of them in English. Con∣necting to these: or will of the giuer: those, as
all the former sants, (vntill the late schoolemen) & the vniuersal Church hath written. Which neuerthelesse, he ought to haue set immedia∣telie after those other which followe in the authors text: to wit: inuenirentur esse discor∣des: they might be founde disagreable. But because in deed I doe not perceiue it could much importe our aduersarie to proceed in this manner; therefore I charitablie persuade my self it was not done of malice, but rather of ill custome. Lastelie Sir Humfrey produceth Bellarmin for the safety of his way in this same point. But he that should haue read his fift booke of Iu∣stification, would iudge that man fitter for Bedlam or Bridwell then for the schoole of diuinie, that would offer to cite Bellarmin a∣gainst the doctrine of merits. The wordes & meaning of him I haue declared in an other place & so hould it in diuers respects superflu∣ous to repeate them. He cites also S. Austin out of chemnitius as it seemes, as saying (I knowe not where for he quoteth not the place) that he speakes more safelie to Iesus, tutius & iu∣cundius loquor ad meum Iesum. But what is this to the purpose of denying inuocation of Saints. For besides that this comes onelie out of a iu∣glers bugget & so may iustelie be supected for false wares, yet admit S. Austin sayth so, what Romanist is there who doth not say the same
yea & practise the same daylie in their prayers▪ While they acknowledge with all submission & humilitie that all their saftetie & conforte of conscience proceedes from Iesus as the foun∣taine of their Saluation, as the conclusion of all or most Catholike prayers demonstrate: Yet not so but that they may crye also vnto his freindes & seruants as being more neare allyed vnto him both in place, fauour, & merits then we our selues, that they interced & mediate for vs for the obtaining of that which wee our selues are not worthy either to obtaine or craue at his hāds. Which kinde of inuocation of Saints, S. Austin himselfe doth approue in diuers places as tract. 84. in Io. Ser. de verb. Apost. & de cura pro mart. cap. 4. And so these being all the authors which Sir Humfrey hath produced in this section, I will conclude the censure of it in this manner. That whereas he promised in the begining to shewe the grea∣ter saftie of the Protestant faith then of the Roman by the confession of the Romanists themselues, he hath shewed no saftie at all, but onelie trifled in the wordes & meaning of his aduersaries doctrine, & that onely in some fewe negatiue articles of his faith omitting all the rest, & so he hath performed iust nothing which may serue for the demonstration of anie way at all, & much lesse of a safe & perfect way, but onelie hath brought him selfe & his reader
further into the laberinth of his wandering wits. THE XI. PERIOD. IN his 12. section Sir Humfrey tells his rea∣der that the Church of Rome doth seeke to elude the recordes, & reall proofes in the Fathers, & other learned authours, touching the cheefe points in controuersie betwixt vs. This accusation no doubt maketh a foule noise in a pulpit, but let vs see how the knight will be able to iustifie it. For his first witnesse he produceth S. Chry∣sostome Hom 49. operis imperf. where it is sayd that, the Church is knowne onelie by the scriptures. But first the verie title of the treatise showeth this testimonie to be of smale authoritie as being opus imperfectum an vnperfect worke, & so it ought not in reason to be admitted for a sufficient proofe: especiallie considering that Sir Humfrey alledgeth no other witnesse; & yet on the contrarie wee knowe that our Sa∣uiour sayd. In ore duorum, aut trium testium stet omne verbum, in the mouth of two or three wit∣nesses euerie worde may stand. And so suppose it were true that S. Chrysostome sayd iust that which Sir Humfrey would haue him, yet is not one testimony enuffe to conuince an aduersary, thus much I say for as much as concerneth the
point of controuersie it selfe of the all suffi∣ciencie of scripture. But because the knight may say this is not that which he intendeth directlie in this place but onelie to conuince that Bellarmin hath eluded the foresayd testi∣monie, therefore I answere secondlie that Sir Humfrey needed not to haue gone to Bellar∣min's Chronologie for the censure of the fo∣resaid worke, for he might haue founde it more plainelie censured before in his contro∣uersies, as appeareth lib. 4. de verbo Dei non scripto, the 11. chapter. Where the Cardinall hath these wordes. But this testimonie is not of Chrysostome but of the author of the imperfect, who was either an Arian or certainlie his booke was corrupted by the Arians in manie places: Thus Bellarmin. Shewing the corruptions by two seuerall instances taken out of the worke it selfe, where he speaketh against the Homou∣sians that is against the Christians of the Ca∣tholike Church to which he giueth that name because they defended & beleeued the consub∣stantialitie of the eternall sonne with his Fa∣ther, & yet its well knowne that sainct Chry∣sostome neuer eyther writ or spoake against the Homousians as being one of them himselfe & a professed enimie to their aduersaries the Arians. And hence it is plaine that Bellarmin had reason to censure that worke & not to ack∣nowledge
it for S. Chrysostomes, as Sir Hum∣frey would haue it, except he would haue con∣demned that glorious Doctour of the Church for an Arian heretike, as the reformed bro∣thers must of necessarie consequence doe if they will haue him to be the authour of that vnperfect treatise. Neyther did yet Bellarmin taxe it for that sentence which the knight al∣ledgeth out of it as hee craftilie & falselie insinuates, but for other erroneous doctrine which it containeth, which is no more contra∣rie to anie article of the Roman faith, if it be trulie vnderstood: then it is to the faith of the reformers, except perhaps they be nearer in some points of their doctrine to the Arians then the Romanists bee, whoe quite deteste & abhorre the same. Which I leaue to their owne consciences to determin. For altho' the Romanists denie that the sole scripture & pure text of the bible is sufficient to determin all controuersies & doubts in doctrine or māners, yet they doe not denie but that the sole scri∣pture doth sufficientlie declare the most & greatest parte of the doctrine necessarie to sal∣uation, & particularlie they graunt that the true Church may be sufficientlie knowne by onelie scripture truelie expounded, which is the verie same that the authour of the imperfect affirmeth in the foresayd wordes. Neyther is it all one to affirme that the Church is knowne onelie by scriptures & to affirme that the scri∣pture
onelie hath all sufficiencie as Sir Hum∣frey doth falselie suppose when he vseth the first proposition taken out of the author of the Imperfect as a medium to proue the second which is his owne position, because to know the Church onelie is not all the doctrine which the scripture containeth as necessarie to salua∣tion, but onelie a parte of the same, & so it is cleare that how true soeuer it be that the church is knowne by scripture onelie, yet cā it not be thēce inferred that all the doctrine of the Church necessarie to saluation is sufficientlie knowne by onelie scripture except out of the pregnance of his wit & extrauagant skill in logique, the knight can inferre an vniuersall proposition out of a particular, which I know he can no more performe then he can extract by arte two oysters out of one apple. And thus we see that Sir Humfrey hath not proued by the exception of Bellarmin against the foresaid treatise, that either the Roman Church or Ro∣manists haue eluded their recordes, or reall proofes of Fathers touching the question of all sufficiencie of scripture, for that the sentence thence produced proueth no such thing. And consequentlie there was no necessitie that Bellarmin should indeuour to infringe the au∣thoritie of the whole worke for such a testi∣monie drawne out of it as is not contrarie to the Roman faith, neither can it with anie cou∣lour
be imagined that the Cardinall would euer haue layde his censure vpon the same if it had not ben faultie in greater matters. Secondlie Sir Humfrey produceth saint Augustin touching the deniall of honour of Saints, where he sayth that manie are tormen∣ted with the diuell who are worshipped by men on earth. And whereas Bellarmins ans∣were, according to Sir Humfreys relation, is that peraduenture it is none of Augustins that sentence, the honest knight as if Bellarmin were all the Romanists that euer writ or spoake, maketh a generall interrogatorie say∣ing what say the Romanists to this? As if that which one onelie priuate man speaketh in a priuate matter were to be accounted the voyce of all men of his profession. And yet Bellarmin doth not onelie adde more in his ansere yea & much more to the purpose, which not withstanding our braue Sir Syco∣phant very slylie omittes viz. that he could not finde those wordes in S. Augustin, but also ad∣deth three other principall anseres to the same obiection. And so it appeareth that in∣steed of proofe that Bellarmin eludeth the re∣cordes of S. Augustin, the elusorie knight elu∣des both Bellarmin & his reader egregiouslie by deceitfullie omitting that which both iusti∣fied the Cardinalls proceeding, & also decla∣red the true meaning of the place cited in
sainct Augustins name. Thirdly, he taxeth Bellarmin & stapleton for saying that S. Augustin was deceiued, or committed a humane errour in his interpreta∣tion of those wordes super hanc Petram, caused by the diuersitie of the Hebrewe, Grek & Latin tongue which either he was ignorant of or marked not. But I ansere first that what soeuer error S. Augustin might commit in this matter, certaine it is that it was onelie aboute the interpretation of those wordes Math. 16. thou art Peter, and vpon this rocke, will I build my Church For touching Sainct Peters su∣preme authoritie in it selfe (which is that our irreligious aduersarie intendes chee∣felie to diminish in this occasion) it is most apparent that S. Augustin stronglie maintaines it in his second of Baptisme cap. 1. saying. Quis nesciat illum Apostolatus Petri principatum, cuilibet Episcopatui esse praeferendum? That is who can be ignorāt that Principalitie or soue∣raintie of Peters Apostolate is to be preferred before anie Episcopate or Bishoprike? And in his 15. sermon of the saints, he speakes yet more plaine to this purpose, affirming that our sauiour did nominate S. Peter for the foundation of the Church, & ideo digne funda∣mentum hoc Ecclesia colit, supra quod Ecclesia∣stici officij altitudo consurgit. And therefore (saith S. Augustin) the Church deseruedlie
honoreth this foundation vpon which the alti∣tude of the Ecclesiastici structure ariseth. And by this S. Augustins faith of S. Peters souera∣nitie in the gouerment of the Church most clearilie appeares, so that no other peculiar opi∣nion of his cōcerning the sense of those wordes super hanc Petram, could possible preiudicate his owne constant doctrine in the substance of this matter in it selfe, as neither could stapleton or anie other Catholike diuine by their taxation of him. And yet neither did S. Augustin in deed reproue the common opinion of diuines in ex∣pounding that place of S. Mathewe of the person of S. Peter: but expresselie remittes the choyse of the one or the other to the iudgement, or affection of the reader, as is manifest by his owne wordes vpon this same subiect in his retractions concluding his dis∣course aboute the two seuerall opinions in this manner. Lib. 1. re∣tract. c. 21. Harum. autem duarum sententia∣rum quae sit probabilior eligat lector. Of these two opinions let the reader make choise of which is more probable. And so this allegation is nothing to the purpose of Sir Humfreys ma∣litious indeuors in prouing the euident testimo∣nies of ancient Fathers to be eluded by Roma∣nists, as being neither anie euident testimonie in it selfe, as I haue declared, nor yet within the sphere of faith, or including the point of con∣trouersie
in the matter proposed by our aduer∣sarie in this passage, as he falselie supposeth: out of which compasse euerie one may lawfullie a∣bounde in his owne sense: as well the Fathers in the deliuerie of their priuate opinions, as al∣so the moderne diuines in passing their cen∣sures of the same as occasion serues, So it be performed with discretion & modestie, as here it was by learned Stapleton, as his wordes doe shewe. And besides this, altho' we should admitte the foresayd wordes of the Euangelist may di∣uerselie be expounded either of our Sauiour or of sainct Peter, or both: neuerthelesse the Popes supremacie cannot suffer therby anie preiudice, as being sufficientlie established both by other wordes of the same passage, & by other places of scripture, particularlie by that of S. Iohn 21. pasce oues meas &c. Feede my sheepe. Which wordes are so forcible for the proofe of saint Peters supreme authoritie ouer all Christs flocke that they alone with the circumstances of the text, were sufficient to conuicte anie rea∣sonable persons iudgement. Thirdlie concerning the communion of the Cup he reprehendeth Bellarmin for saying in his answere to the wordes of S. Ignatius one cup is distributed to all, that in the latin bookes is not founde distributed to all, but for all. But first I say that why should Bellarmin be produ∣ced
for an eluder of the Fathers recordes for telling the trueth? or for reporting that which he did see with his eyes, & perhaps without spectacles. And if it be founde by eye witnesses to be otherwise in the Latin copies then in the Greeke as truelie it is, as also it is founde that the Greeke copies are not sound in diuers o∣ther particulars in which they are discouered not to agree with the citations of S. Athana∣sius & Theodoret, What sinne did Bellarmin commit in vttering the same? But howsoeuer it bee good Sir Humfrey, doth Bellarmin relie onelie vpon that anser, nay doth he not giue two other more cheefe ansers then that? both which you dissemble. And yet more then this, you haue shamefullie corrupted that one ansere which you cite. For Bellarmin sayth not that S. Ignatius hath the wordes distributed for all, but, one chalis of the whole Church, vnus calix totius Ecclesiae, meaning that there is one com∣mon chalice because it is offered to God for all. Nay besides this, Bellarmin yet further addeth, that the Magdeburgers read those wordes of S. Ignatius as the Romanists doe, of which also craftie Sir Humfrey taketh no notice: so that the reader may see that Bellarmin is here diuerslie abused by the false knight, & yet is he no more guiltie of eluding of the Fathers recordes in this particular then the foresayd Lutherans them selues, that is nothing at all.
Fourthlie he taxeth Sixtus Senensis for saying he suspecteth Origen to haue ben corrupted by the heretikes where he sayth: Thus much be spoken of the typicall & symbolicall bodie. But what if Senensis vtter his opinion in that man∣ner of that place of Origen. For doth not ey∣ther he, or at the least, a number of other di∣uines giue other solid ansers to the same as may be seene in Bellarmin & others. As that it is not certaine that workes is trulie Origens: & that those wordes are not spoaken of the Eucharist, but of the bread of the Cathecumes which we commonlie call holie bread, that Origen tearmes the bodie of Christ Sybolical & Typical because it is present in the Sacra∣ment as a type or signe of the same bodie of Christ as it is vnited to the diuine worde in the mysterie of the Incarnation in a visible māner. For in that place Origen compares the bodie of Christ as it is in the Sacrament with the same as it is in it proper existence. And so in like manner sanders and Baronius for diuers reasons hould the wordes cited by Caluin out of the epistle of Epiphanius to Iohn of Hierusalem touching the cutting of a vayle with an image of Christ, or some other man, which he founde at the entrance of a Church; for suppositious as being added after the whole epistle was ended. And yet notobstanding, they relie not intirelie vpon this answere, but
yeald others also which, supposing the foresayd addition were truelie the wordes of that holie Father, yet those same authors abundantly cleare the difficultie & declare the trueth of his meaning in the controuersie of honour of images. As also doth Valentia aboute the wordes of Theodoret touching transsubstan∣tiation, who sayth that the substance of bread & wine ceased not in the Sacrament. To which both Valentia & other diuines, (not∣obstanding they kewe by that which passed in the Councell of Ephesus, Theodoretus au∣thoritie not to be great, or at the least not to be so great as that hee alone could or ought to preponderate the rest of the Fathers, Vid. Greg. de Val. l. 2. de tran∣sub. c. 7. & Suarez de. Eucha. D. 46. sec. 4. I haue giuen other solide answeres to his wordes besides this which is related by the knight, as that he calleth the accidents of the Eucharist by the name of the substāce of bread & wine attributing to the naturall properties of nature or substance, the name of nature or substance it selfe, as both the scriptures & other Fathers in the like occasions vse to doe, Gelas. ep. & par∣ticularlie Gelasius whome the reformers vse to cite against the trueth of transsubstantiation, he onelie taking the worde substance (which is ambiguous & signifieth both the interior substance itselfe, & the externall signes of the same) for the second, not for the first: all which may be easilie perceiued by him who
shall read the authours them selues with atten∣tion & care. And as for Theodoretus, Iames Gordon in his fourth Controuersie of transsub∣stantiation noteth that if he be trulie translated according to the force of the Greeke wordes, all difficultie touching his true meaning doth presentlie cease. And thus much for Theodo∣retus who is no way eluded by Valentia, but truelie & sincerelie expounded. As for Bellarmin whome when he answereth to the testimonie of S. Cyprian aboute tradi∣tiōs, the knight seemeth to taxe for attributing error vnto him. It is not true that Bellar. sayth that he doth not maruell that S. Cypriā erred in reasoning, as Sir Humfrey affirmeth, but the Cardinall onlie sayth of S. Cyprian, ideo non mirum si more errantium ratiocinaretur: therefore it was no maruell if he should argue after the manner of those that erre, because he writ that passage to which Bellarmin doth ansere in the place ci∣ted by the knight, when he defended his er∣rour aboute rebaptization against S. Augustin. But withall Bellarmin addeth that S. Cyprian reiected not all traditions as the reformers commonlie doe, at the least in faith & manners: but onelie he disalowed that tradition in parti∣cular which S. Augustin alledged against his error, & onelie for that reason because he con∣ceiued it to be cotrarie to scriptures, which yet afterwardes appeared not to be so by the de∣finition
of the Church not to be. So that Bel∣larmin is both here falselie accused to haue ab∣solutelie affirmed S. Cyprian to haue erred in reasoning, & also it is false that his testimonie touching traditiōs in generall is by him eluded, which is that Sir Humfrey ought to proue if he speakes according to his owne purpose in this place. And not much vnlike to this is the same Bellarmin falselie accused by the knight to haue affirmed that S. Chrisostome exceeded the trueth when he sayd. It is better not to be present at the sacrifice then to be present, & not comunicate, for Bellarmin sayd not that sainct Chrysostome exceeded the truth, but onelie that he spoake by excesse, per excessum ita esse locutum, or amplificandi gratia, as he sayth after∣wardes, which is not to exceede the truth but to vse a tropicall speech by which the trueth is as farre extended as may be possible within her boundes but no further. And more ouer Bellarmin addeth so much besides to this an∣sere to Saint Chrysostomes wordes, Vide Bell. l. 2. de Mis∣sa. cap. 10. § Porro Chrysost. as takes all difficultie quite away touching his meaning in the point of Priuate Masse. Neyther is Sir Hūfreys complainte against Bellarmin lesse vniuste, where he sayth, yet not specifiing aboute what matter, that the Cardinall affirmes Prudentius to playe the poet, for why should anie man be reprehended
for attributing to a Poet that which is proper to all those of his profession that is to speake by way of fiction or to vse poeticall licence. The trueth is I can finde no such wordes of Bellarmin as Sir Humfrey citeth, but suppose he speaketh in that manner of Prudentius, yet I hould it to be no greater an extenuation of his authoritie then it were an extenuation of Sir Humfreys honour to say he vseth his weapons dexterouslie or plaieth the Champion coura∣giouslie. But yet worse then this doth Sir Humfrey deale with Bellarmin aboute his ansere to a certaine testimonie of Tertullian. For whereas he onelie sayth that Tertullians authoritie is of no great accounte when he con∣tradicts other Fathers, & when, as S. Hierome speaketh, he was no man of the Church: the knight to saue labor, but not to saue his ho∣nestie, leaueth out that speeche of S. Hierome & putteth the whole censure of Tertullian vpon Bellarmin onelie, notobstanding it ap∣peares plainelie that the greater parte of it is taken out of S. Hierome, & so consequentlie if anie proofe or recorde were eluded in Ter∣tullian, Sir Humfrey might more iustelie haue accused him, then the Cardinall. But it seemes the knight proceeded in this as those that in cases of reuenge either for want of wit, or va∣lour, still strike their next fellowe whether he be in faulte or no.
In conclusion Sir Humfrey had no reason to stand vpon Bellarmin's ansere to those two authours, I meane Prudentius & Tertullian; for that neither of them in the places cited speaketh of anie point of doctrine defined by the Church, but of other matters in which as it was free for them to speake what they pleased, so was it also free for Bellarmin to ansere what he pleased, especiallie supposing that Tertullian speakes but doubfullie in the matter for which he is taxed by the Cardinall, that is in the manner of Christs penetration of his mothers wombe: & if he held he was borne according to the course of nature, he contra∣dicteth the rest of the Fathers, in which case no one Father hath the credit of an absolute testi∣monie amongest the Romanists, neyther can he or anie for him iustelie complaine if he be disesteemed in such a case. Now for the censure which Riuera giueth of Origen to wit that he was full of errours which the Church hath alwayes detested, it is so manifestlie true that no man that will not dogmatize with him can denie the same. And the truth is that the reformers make as little, yea & much lesse account either of him or anie other ancient writers, then the Romanists doe, as the world knoweth, especially when they finde them contrarie to their positions. And not of one, two, or three dissenting from the
rest, but euen of the torrent of their consent of which ouer plaine testimonie is extant in Lu∣ther, Caluin Kemnitius, & Chamier. Vid. Luth. de capt. Babyl. c. 1. Calu. 4. Instit. c. 18 Kem. pag. 798. Cham. de descens. Chr. ad Inf. And yet for all this the knight could produce nothing in particular in which he could accuse the Ro∣manists to haue reiected the recordes of the foresaid authours at the least in matter of faith. As for S. Hierome whome Canus affirmeth to be no rule of faith. I would knowe what reformer will maintaine the contrarie? And if they hould him to be a rule of faith then a dieu their all-sufficiencie of scripture. Besides Ca∣nus yealdes a pregnant reason why S. Hie∣rome was not to be followed in that particular of which he speakes in that place, to wit in the assignation of the Canon of the old testament, because sayth Canus he followed Ioseph the Iewe, but S. Austin followed the Christians in that point of doctrine: which reason of Canus Sir Humfrey ought not to haue omitted if he had dealt sincerelie. As impertinent as this also is the taxation of Bellarmins answere to Iustin, Ireneus, Epipha∣nius & Oecumenius who seeme to haue held that the diuells are not to be tormēted with the paines of hell before the day of Iudgement. For this is so absurde a position that I thinke fewe or none of the misreformed Churches defend it, & so I see not why Bellarmin can iustelie be reprehended for saying that he seeth not how
the foresaid authours can be excused from er∣rour in that particular, for that the Cardinall onelie condemneth them in that which the reformers themselues according to reason & sounde doctrine ought to condemne also, & that in no question of Controuersie betweene vs & them, nor which can iustelie preiudice the foresayd Fathers authoritie in other mat∣ters, especially in which they all agree. Lastelie sayth Sir Humfrey, we produce the vniforme consent of Fathers against the im∣maculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin. To which Salmeron the Iesuit, quoth hee, ansereth that, weake is the place which is drawne from authoritie. But first I aske of Sir Humfrey what he & his consorts haue to doe with the immaculate Conception? For that is no Controuersie of faith betwixt the Roma∣nists & them, it is a question among some Ro∣manists them selues, & lawfull for either side to make the best vse they can of the testimo∣nies of Fathers either by imbrasing them, or expounding thē in that particular point, as they finde them most aduantageous for the defence of their seuerall opiniōs so farre as the Church permits thē, & that without any disparishmēt to their authority in regarde their wordes are not so plaine, but that they may seeme to admit diuers expositions in that particular. And as for Salmerō he neither speaketh of the Fathers in
generall when all or most of them consent in a matter of fayth, nor yet when they plainelie agree in anie other point of doctrine, but onely when they speake doubtfullie or obscurelie, & this I say vpon supposition the place of the foresaid authour is truelie cited, which, in re∣garde I haue taken the knight so often tardie in that Kynde of proceeding, I may vnrashlie suspected. And the truth is that hauing now viewed the place in the booke which is in the 51. Disputation of Salmeron vpon the 5. to the Romās. I finde that he speakes not of the vni∣forme consent of Fathers or Doctors, but one∣lie of a certaine great number of thē to which he opposeth an other as great, as he supposeth, yea & greater: & therefore he addes. Quare si authorum numero decertare velint (meaning the opposers of the immaculate conception of the Virgen) procul dubio absorbebuntur. So that this author is abused iust as I did coniecture before I sa his booke. And altho' I can not much commend Salmeron for anie great inge∣niousnesse in his application of the shepards sentence, yet sure I ame that if he applied it not verie aptelie, you Sir Humfrey applie it much worse & more absurdelie. And thus ha∣uing nowe examined all the particulars of this section & hauing founde nothing which pro∣ueth the authours intent, I will end my period yet noting by the way how vanelie Sir Hum∣frey
concludeth his discourse affirming his rea∣der to haue heard the proofe of the Romish witnesses in the behalfe of the Protestant do∣ctrine made good by the testimonies of the Fathers themselues; which notobstanding is all false & meere delusion, for that I haue made it clearelie appeare that neyther anie Roma∣nist by him cited hath graunted that anie one of the Fathers doth teach anie point of Pro∣testant doctrine, nor yet that they speake in those places here cited of the cheefe points of doctrine in Controuersie: but contrarilie it appeareth that they speake onelie either of other matters which little concerne the Ca∣tholike faith, or at the least they speake in an other sense then the reformers pretend: yea & that which is more remarkable, not with vniforme consent, but rather fewe or at the most two or three in one matter, in which manner of proceeding, what argument soeuer may be deduced from them, it is no more trulie to be iudged & called the testimonie of the Fa∣thers absolutelie, then that may be called abso∣lutely the testimony of the reformers in which neuerthelesse onelie some fewe of them yeald their testimonies, & yet that but in some particulars, & those no principall points of faith. And as for this complaint which Sir Hum∣frey maketh so formallie of the elusion of the
proofes, & recordes of the Fathers, as also tou∣ching that which he in like manner frameth a∣gainst the Roman Church for her prohibition, or censure of bookes, I wonder with what face he can reprehend that which he knoweth to be so much practized in his owne Church, in which there cannot the least pamphlet, or sma∣lest volume come forth which if it doth but seeme to cōtradict anie parte or point of the En∣glish faith, or anie other point of Puritanimse, is not presentlie ceased vpon by a pack of Pur∣suiuants, & put to the tortor of the Consisto∣riall assemblie there to receiue sentence of con∣demnation, by virtue of which it seldome sca∣peth the flames of Vulcan. Of which in parte is witnesse Doctour Mountagues latelie pu∣blished booke, which by reason it sauored a little of some points of Romanisme; by an ex∣presse Apeale euen to Cesar himselfe, could not be saued from the seuere censure of the Puritan sinagoge. And particularlie touching the au∣thoritie of ancient Fathers, if it were a faulte in the Romanists to call in questiō some passages, or sentences of some of their writings where they iustelie suspect them to haue ben corrup∣ted by heretikes: Surelie the sectaries of these tymes are much deeper plunged in this nature thē they are, in regarde that vnder the breight colour of reformation they doe not onelie vse to reprehend particular passages, but reiect
whole bookes, & that not onelie of the most ancient Fathers as appeareth in the Hierarchie of sainct Denis, but also whole bookes of the scriptures themselues, as is manifest in the bookes of the Machabies & others which they vtterlie renounce & condemne for Apo∣chripha, not sparing the booke of wisdome it selfe, such cruell patrons they are of ignorance, and, of want of diuine knowledge. Nay & now of late they are be come so precise in this their spirituall tyranie that in their last editions as I ame informed, they haue quite banished the foresaid bookes of Machabies Tobie, Iu∣dith, wisdome Ecclesiasticus out of their bible. To omit other bookes of lesse moment which they haue eyther mangled or left quite out of their editions, as in the Inquisitors Index may be seene. So that nowe the reader may plai∣nelie perceiue that Sir Humfrey & his pure simmists, are so farre from excuse for their im∣portune complaint of the Romanists in this particular, that we may iustelie compare them to those Phariseis who could sooner see a mote in their fellowes eye then a beame in their owne. And so here I leaue them all to be cen∣sured for hypocrites by Christ himselfe, & passe to the next section.
THE XII. PERIOD. THIS Period shall containe an other ac∣cusation of the knight, in which he char∣geth the Romanists with the crime of razing the recordes of the reformers, & clipping their owne authours tongues, by which, sayth he, they are conuinced of an ill cause, & cōscience. But how falselie the Romanists be accused by Sir Humfrey it plainelie appeares by the exa∣men of witnesses which I will make presentlie: and in the meane time let but the reader reflect vpon that which hath hitherto ben sayd, & he will easilie perceiue that Sir Hūfrey himselfe is conuinced not onelie of a bad cause, & an ill conscience, but also of such grosse proceedings as is not able either to the partes or su credit of a Caualier. But now to particulars. His first charge is layde vpon the inquisitors for blotting out a certaine note made in the margen of the Bible of Robertus Stephanus vpon the 4. chapter of the deuter. That God prohibiteth grauen images to be made. But what razing of recordes is this? Is a newe note made by some one, moderne, vnknowne au∣thour not sutable to the true sense of the text, & in such an edition of the bible as cannot be of anie long standing, to be accounted one of your recordes? And if it be yours how came it
into the Bible what doth it there? hath not the Inquitor as much authoritie to put it out as some obscure brother of yours had to put it in? the true meaning of the scripture neither in the place of that note, nor anie other is, that God did prohibit absolutelie all grauen images (as one of the greatest diuines you haue, doth ingenuouslie confesse) Daniel Chamie∣rus Pan∣strat, l 21. de imag. c. 8. n. 1. but onelie he did forbid them to be made to the end to adore them as Gods, or at the least to adore them with dan∣ger of idolatrie, and yet the foresayd wise an∣notation maketh the scripture to forbid all gra∣uen images absolutelie. Wherefore its nothing but a false recorde ordayned to deceiue the rea∣der by abusing the true sense of Gods worde, & so the Inquisitor when he branded it with a deleatur, he did but execute iustice vpon a fal∣sifier of the Kings letters, which in him neither argueth bad cause nor ill conscience, but sheweth both of them to be in the authour of the counterfet recorde which he foysted in to the sacred bible. To omit that it being no note of anie Roman authour as it manifestlie sheweth it selfe not to be: yet the knight leap'd quite out of the quire when he cited it for a record of his owne, except he supposeth al the writings of the pretended reformed Do∣ctors of what sect soeuer they be, to be recordes for his Church against the Roman doctrine: which is both most ridiculous in itselfe, nor yet
was anie such razing of the reformers recordes euer intended eyther by the Inquisitors, or by anie other censurer of bookes in the Church of Rome. His second charge is aboute a certaine glosse vpon Gratian, which glosse affirmeth (accor∣ding to Sir Humfreyes relation) that the Preist cannot say significatiuelie of the bread, this is my bodie, without telling a lye. This glosse (saith hee) is condemned by the inquisitor to be blot∣ted out. It is true the Inquisitor did so, but what then? did he therefore doe it wit an ill conscience, I denie the consequence. And in your conscience Sir Humfrey is it not an idle glosse indeed? Doe not your ministers them∣selues when they deliuer the communion call it the bodie & blood of Christ? And if the Preist lyeth when he sayth so not of the bread (as the false glosse sayth if so, it saith) but of that which is contained vnder the forme of bread, surelie your ministers tell a farre greater lye when they say significatiuelie of the bare bread, that it is the bodie of Christ, truelie & reallie, as Master Caluin affirmeth. Instit. l. 4. cap. 17. And so I conclude this point, that Sir Humfrey had no reason at all to accuse the Inquisitor of an ill conscience in razing onelie such a recorde as is no lesse repugnant to the doctrine of the refor∣med Churches, then to the Roman faith if anie matter of faith it were, which indeed it is not;
& so by consequence it is also impertinent to the matter here in question. Thirdlie Sir Humfrey chargeth the Inqui∣sitor for blotting out Cassanders whole tract of the Cōmunion in both kynds. But what worse conscience sheweth the Inquisitor in this fact then the Inquisitors of the reformed Churches doe, who are not content with a simple dolea∣tur, but daylie condemne whole Catholike volumes to the vnmercifull Vulcan. And as for the recordes which you take out of Cassan∣der we make no more accounte of them then we doe of those which you take out of Luther or Caluin, & so you may take them & make your selfe merrie. Fourthlie Caietans opinion that the wordes, this is my bodie, doe not sufficientlie proue tran∣substantiation, is no recorde for you, as you falselie suppose, for he doth not denie transsub∣stantiation as you doe, but expresselie defen∣ded it, as his owne wordes declare which I af∣terwardes recitie: nay he doth not affirme ab∣solutelle (as suarez wordes quoted by your selfe in your owne margent expressely declare) that the foresaid wordes doe not sufficientlie proue transsubstantiation as you corruptedlie relate, but onelie sayth at the most that, seclu∣ding the Churches authoritie, they doe not proue it: which, not as contrarie to faith, but as a singular, & extrauagant opinion of that
authour, Pope Pius did (if perhaps he did) piouslie blot it out, not preciselie because it fa∣uoreth the reformers (as in trueth it doth not to anie purpose) but because it sm'at disfauo∣red the truth, which is that transsubstantiation is indeed plainelie enough contayned in those wordes of Christ, this is my bodie. Howbeit I must needs aduertice the reader that I ney∣ther finde those wordes supposed to be Caie∣tans, blotted in anie Index that I haue seene, nor yet can I finde them in anie edition of Ca∣ietan in the place cited by Suarez, that is vpon the 75. q. art. 1. But onelie these. Conuersio non habetur explicite in Euangelio, & these. Quod Euangelium non explicauit expresse, ab Ecclesia accepimus. Nay more then this I finde other wordes in the same place which conuince that Caietan held transsubstantiation to be suffi∣cientlie contained in those wordes this is my bodie, for so he argues. Sacramenta nouae legis efficiunt quod significant, ac per hoc verba Christi hoc est corpus meum quia efficiunt vtramque noui∣tatem scilicet conuersionis & continentiae (vt ex∣presse dicta sacri Concilij authoritas testatur) con∣sequens est vt cadem Christi verba significent vtramque nouitatem. Wherefore supposing Caietan said not that the wordes: this is my bodie: conteine not sufficientlie transsubstan∣tiation, but onelie not expresselie: I cannot conceiue what foundation Suarez might haue
for this his relation, except peraduenture Pius quintus founde that edition alone of Caietan to haue ben corrupted by heretikes, & there∣fore caused it to be corrected in that passage: as indeed an other place of the same Caietan 2. 2. q. 122. is discouered by the authors of the pro∣hibitiue Index to haue ben in that same fashion fraudulentlie depraued, as the same Index ex∣presselie testifies in these wordes quoted in the margen.In Thomae Caietani commenta∣rijs in D. Tho. 2. 2. q. 122 art 4. omnino cor∣rigantur er∣rores qui fraude hae∣reticorum irrepserunt, vt notatur in expurg. Index lib. prohib p. 89. Geneu. impres. The Epistle of Walricus is suppositious, which is paoued to be so because it is superscri∣bed to Pope Nicolas to whom according to the computation of times, the first Pope Nicolas was before Walricus was borne, and the second Nicolas was not borne till after he was dead. Neither is it any way probable that such a holie Bishop as Walricus was, should commend marriage in other Preists, who liued and dyed in vnmarried chastity himselfe, and so the fore∣sayd Epistle being a false record, as containing an improbable yea a morally impossible rela∣tion, it was iustely condemned with a deleatur. To omit that if this Epistle wer authenticall, the reformers would gaine nothing by the bargen for that it teacheth expressely that the Roman Bishop is head of the Church, and that Preists at the least after ordination cannot lawfully marrie. Sixtly it is false that Bertram's whole booke is condemned, as may appeare by
the iudgement of the Vniuersitie of Doway ap∣proued by the Censurers of bookes inserted in the Index of Quiroya published by Ioannes Pap∣pus a reformed deformed diuine with certaine odious prefaces of his owne coyning, & prin∣ted at Argentin 1609. In the 17. page of which Index it is manifest that the whole booke was not commaunded to be blotted out, but onely some fewe things to be corrected, or altered in the reading, or to be expounded benigneously. And as for the doctrine of transsubstantiation, the foresaid Doctours of Doway expressely de∣clare that Bertram often times in the first parte of his disputation teaches Catholike trans∣substantiation plainely enuffe, vsing the words conuertere, mutare, commutare, permutare trans∣ponere creaturam in Christum, in corpus Christi &c. in so much that Illiricus compelled with the plainesse of those wordes, confesseth there are in Bertram semina transsubstantiationis, seeds of transubstantiation. And also the same Dowa∣cene Doctors conclude that those difficult places which are founde in him touching the reall presence, which cheefely are two, to wit that he seemeth to haue ben of opinion that Christs bodie is no more in the Eucharist then the bodie of the people, and that that thing which is celebrated or done in the Church cā∣not be called God; are either to be vnderstood of the externall formes of bread and wine: or
els that those sentences be inserted by heretiks who printed that booke first at Colen. 1532. & after at Basil. 1550. & 1555. so that this is no re∣corde of the reformers, except it be vpon sup∣position of their owne corruptions or false glosses added vnto it; but rather may serue for a pregnant testimonie against them, and con∣sequētly he that should haue blotted it out, had done them no iniurie but a verie great fauor. Seuenthlie I say to the sentence taken out of the booke of baptizme vnder the name of Anselme, that manie passages be blotted out by the Censurers of bookes, by reason they are such as may easilie be taken in an erro∣neous sense, & so scandalize or giue occasion of errour either to the simple, or malicious reader, which neuerthelesse in a sounde sense containe no false doctrine, & so might be lefte vncorrected if it were not for the corruption & malignitie of the tyme. And of this nature be the wordes of the booke of the visitation of the sicke & Baptisme, if they be ritely recited by Sir Hum. Doest thou beleeue that the Lord Ie∣sus Christ dyed for our saluation, & that there is no meanes to be saued by owne merits? Which sen∣tence in a true meaning is no recorde of the re∣formers, & in a false meaning, it is better blot∣ted out thē lefte in. And such diligence argueth no ill conscience, but a motherlie care of the Church towardes here children.
8. We haue sayd sufficient alreadie touching the credit of Cassander, whose doctrine the Ro∣manists hould for false recordes either in parte or totalitie. And he maketh such preposterous glosses vpon the Ecclesiasticall himnes, as the Index noteth in one place, that all his whole scholium is repugnant to the same like a com∣mentarie contrarie to the text. Yet to giue the reader a taste What truelie this man was, who is so farre in Sir Humfreys bookes: I say that altho' we hold not Cassander for a Romanist, as being in the Index of prohibited bookes for diuers singular positions, neuerthelesse the knight cannot iustelie brag of him in regarde it is manifest by his workes which I haue seene & read in parte, that he expresselie defendes the Roman doctrine in most points of Cōtrouersie betwixt vs & the Reformers: as also because in a greater parte euen of the same places which Sir Hum. cites in his fauour, he is not a little abused & either corrupted or detorted by him cōtrarie to his meaning. Howbeit in respect he professeth the parte of a Pacifer & mediator betwixt vs, he could not but leane some thing to their side, yet is it so little that I perceiue by one of his writings that he had smale thankes for his paines from some of the faction, & therefore was most sharpelie handled by them accusing him of dissimulation, imposture, interruption
of the course of the Gospell & the like. An infortunate man who by his great labours & earnest endeuours to content both parties, con∣tended neither: a iuste punishment due vnto such as destitute of true knowledge in diuinitie (which he himselfe in parte confesseth in his generall Preface) presume to treat of those su∣blime subiects sans a guide. The Basilean edition of Polidor virgill prin∣ted in the yeare 1544. compared with other former & the most ancient editions is founde to haue ben corrupted by the sectaries & so no true recordes can be taken out of it for Sir Humfrey & his confraternitie. And such is that passage which the Inquisitours comman∣ded to be blotted out, which is this. All most all ancient Fathers condemned images for feare of idolatrie. This sentence as false & foysted into the foresayd Basilian edition, is iustelie cast out as none of the authours doctrine, or at the least vehementlie suspected for none of his. And touching the doctrine of honour of ima∣ges it selfe, it is cleare that he can aforde no re∣corde at all for the reformed diuinitie, for that he expresselie relateth the vse of images in Churches deduceing it historicallie from the most primatiue tymes. Langius or Langus is of no authoritie among the Romanists & so he yealdes no recordes of credit. And at the best he is but a pedanticall Annotator, & as I take
it a Lutheran, that is neither of Sir Humfreys religion nor of ours. As for Ferus certaine it is that some of his editions haue ben founde to be mightilie cor∣rupted particularlie that of Mogunce. Which the knight citeth & so the recordes drawne out of him are of no authoritie. But suppose Cephas did indeed not signifie the head, yet what great recorde I praye can that be for Sir Humfreys Church? And so whether Cephas signifie the head or the feet, & whether ri∣diculum est be in, or out of the bookes, it auayles him nothing but some smale matter to quarell aboute: yet the truth is that the most authenticall edition of Anwerpe 1585. hath the same wordes which Sir Humfreyes cites out of the Roman print: in such sorte as one may rather much more suspect those wordes, it is ridiculous: to be falselie added in the Mogun∣tin edition then detracted in the others. Finallie whether the wordes of the Coun∣cell of Laodicea be that wee ought not to leaue the Church of God & inuocate Angells, as Sir Humfrey will haue it, & also some Catholike copies haue: or whether in steed of the worde Angells wee reade angles or corners, as some other editions haue, the matter is not great so the decree be reight vnderstood, that is so that the sense bee this: we ought not to leaue the Church of God & inuocate Angells supersti∣tiouslie
as some did in those tymes. For this being the true meaning of the Councell as it appeareth by the subsequent wordes which are those, and make congregations of abominable idolatrie to the Angells, it is more then plaine that no recorde can there be founde for the do∣ctrine of the reformed Churches. But onelie it serues Sir Humfrey to make a plausible flo∣rish to the simple reader, to the end that by working vpon his weaknesse by falselie taxing his aduersaries, hee may make his owne impostures saleable, which otherwise would putrifie & spoile for want of vtterance. Lastelie for proofe of his accusation, Sir Humfrey after all this sturre he hath made, produceth onelie one witnesse, & that a false one: and altho' for the greater credit of his cause, he held it expedient to giue him the de∣cree of a diuinitie reader & professor, & Deane of Louaine, yet hauing examined the matter, I founde by better information then Sir Hum∣frey can haue, that Boxhorne before his re∣uolte had onelie the place a certaine of obscure Deanrie: which function altho' it be a place of some credit, yet it is farre inferiour to the dignitie either of a Deane of a Capitall Church, or of a publike professour of diuinitie in the vniuersitie of Louaine, both in learning, honour, & profit. And yet this man as I re∣ceiued by authenticall relation of the Deane of
S. Gudula Church in Brussels, & others: after some extraordinary familiarity which out of his ouer amorous nature he vsed to a domestike maide seruant of his owne, & out of an vnset∣lednesse of his lubrik mynde, began at first to defend that, it was not necessarie for the Preist to prononce the wordes of consecration orally, but onelie to speake them mentallie, & after∣wardes (as nemo repente fit malus) Boxorno once a pet∣tie-master. by degrees falling into plaine heresie, founde oportunitie to passe into the land of libertie, I meane into Holand, with bag & bagage, I meane with his Sacrilegious spouse & the sacred spoiles of his Church. Where from the place of a fu∣gitiue Pedant, he is preferred to the dignitie of a new Euangelist, & is become a blostering trumpeter in the pulpits of the misreformed congregations. And this is the onely man which Sir Hum∣frey could bring for a witnesse against the pra∣ctice of the Roman Church in her manner of censuring bookes or correcting the same, or approuing them according to the order & de∣cree of the Councell of Trent, which collapsed Deane being so infamous in his life as by this which I haue specified, and more which I could relate, doth appeare, and being also now a pro∣fessed enimy and Apostata from his mother Church, let the reader iudge whether in reason his testimony ought to be admitted against her:
and let him withall be pleased to consider that Sir Humfrey in lue of conuincing his aduersa∣ries of ill conscience, he hath by his owne bad proceeding in this section conuinced his owne to be the worst of all, & so is fallē in to the same pit he prepared for his enimies incidit in foueam quam fecit, by forgeing of false recordes, & hath incurred a farre deeper dungeon of cēsure then hitherto he did, in which he must remaine ei∣ther till he hath payde a double fine, or put in suretie for the amendment of his manners. THE XIII. PERIOD. IN His fourteeneth section Sir Humfrey in∣deuoreth to conuince his aduersaries of the defence of a desperate cause by their blasphe∣mous exceptions, as he calleth them, against the scriptures, by which we see that as his boo∣ke increaseth in number of leaues so he increa∣seth in multiplication of his malicious and false accusations, and these being the cardes he playeth with, let vs examen his gaime. He continueth confidently his allegation of his false Deane of Louaine for a witnesse against the Romanists, whose worde notwithstanding ought not either in reason or according to the course of lawe to be admitted for recorde a∣gainst those from whose religion he hath re∣uolted. And so whereas he accuseth the Romā
Church of poyson in religion & tiranny in the common welth, it is to be taken as proceeding from a poysonous minde, which being once corrupted hateth the truth as much as an ill stomake loathes dainty meates. As for the scriptures, it is false & slaunderous to affirme that the Romanists refuse to be tryed by them so they be taken together with the authoritie of the Church which the same scri∣ptures commende, as Saint Augustin speaketh against his aduersaries, and in a true sense with∣out which as one of the auncient Fathers saith, verbum Dei male intellectum non est verbum Dei that is, the worde of God ill vnderstanded is not the word of God. Quamuis certum de scripturis non profe∣ratur exē∣plum tamē earundem scripturarū à nobis te∣netur veri∣tas cum id facimus quod vni∣uersae placet Ecclesia quam ipsa∣rum scrip∣turarum commēdat authoritas. Aug. lib. 1. cōtra Cres. c. 33. And according to this not that sacred Bible which was in the Apostles till the dayes of Luther without alteration, is as you calumniously affirme, ranked by the In∣quisitors inter libros prohibitos, among the pro∣hibited bookes, but your execrated Bible I meane your execrable translations and annota∣tions, & mutilations of the most holy Bible, are those that are registred in the censure, where whether it haue, as you affirme, I knowe not certainely, but I am sure it deserueth the first place, because as the Philosopher saith corruptio optimi pessima, and so as your Bible-corruption is in the highest degree of badnesse, so ought it in reason to be ranked in the highest station of such false wares as that Catalogue condemnes.
And of the censure of your owne abuses I graunt you may with shame enough to your selues be eye witnesses, but if you meane you are eye witnesses of the censure of the true scriptures it is most false & calumnious that either they, or the authours of them be called in question: and yet more false & slaunderous it is that Christ and his Apostles are arraigned & condemned at the Popes assises (as you o∣diouslie affirme) of obscuritie & insufficiencie in their Gospell. Bibliorum versiones tam vet. quam noui Test. à di∣ctis (dam∣natis) au∣thoribus e∣ditae, generaliter pro∣hibentur. Index ex Purgato∣rius. Re∣gul. 3. For that neither Pope nor Prelate of the Roman Church euer vttered more of the sacred scriptures in that nature thē that which S. Peter himselfe affirmeth, to wit that in the epistles of S. Paule there are manie things hard to be vnderstood, or that which S. Augustin saith in generall of the written worde. That is, that certaine obscure speeches of the scripture bring a most dense or thicke miste vpon them. And that they are deceiued with many, & manifould obscurities & ambiguities that rashly reade them, vnderstanding one thing for an other.Lib. 2. de Doctr. Christ. c. 6. And as for the Gospell of Christ & his Apo∣stles, neither the Pope nor anie other Roma∣nist euer condemned it of anie insufficiencie or defect, but onelie teach with the same scripture itselfe that it doth not containe all things ne∣cessarie so explicitlie that they suffice for the instruction of the whole Church according to all states of people & in all particulars without
traditions, as appeareth by the saying of sainct Paule 2. Thes. 2. Therefore brethren stand & houlde the tra∣ditions which you haue learned whether it be by worde, or by our epistle. Which wordes of the Apostle neither can truelie be verified nor his commaund obeyed, except we graunt that he deliuered more to the Church of the Thessalo∣nians then he left in writing. Neither doe the Pope & Romanists anie more condemne the scriptures of insufficiēcie by denying that they containe clearely all things necessarie, or by affirming that diuine & Apostolicall traditions are also necessarilie required, then the refor∣mers them selues, who besides scripture pro∣fesse at the least in wordes to beleeue the Apo∣stolicall, nycene, & Athanasian Creed: not no more then that man should be thought to condemne the common lawes of insufficiencie who besides them iudgeth it also necessarie to obserue those ancient customes which the lawes themselues commend as by the legisla∣tors & first authours of the same deliuered to the people by worde of mouth. And so to con∣clude, touching the scriptures thus vnderstood, the Romanists are so farre from refusing to be tryed by them that they flye vnto them with sainct Chrysostome in all occasions as to most hight montaines in which they finde a most comodious place to plant their ordinance a∣gainst the enimies of the faith, & particularlie
against the sectaries of this our present age, as is most euident in the late Councell of Trent all the decrees of which renouned Synod are founded vpon those heigh hills of the written worde of God according to the true sense & meaning of the same. And as for Causabon & Agrippa whome the knight citeth, he & they may goe together for their authoritie viz. in lying. Agrippa & Causabon are alreadie re∣gistred in the Predicament of Nouelists, Vide Indi∣cem lib. prohib. & al∣thou' the knight as yet is not preferred to that honour, yet his deserts are such as he may iu∣stelie expect the like aduauncement. You aske vs, Sir Humfrey, whether the worde of God is subiect to alteration or nee∣deth & Index expurgatorious, but to this your wise demaunde I anser, that the worde of God in itselfe is wholelie immutable, so pure that it can need no purifying, yet as it is & ex∣pressed by artificiall caracters for the vse of man, so it is not onelie mutable & corruptible, but also de facto it is & hath ben corrupted, wit∣nesse your owne Bibles in England. And wit∣nesse that renowned King Iames your owne soueraine & best defender of your faith, who was so ashamed of the translations which he founde at his arriuall to the English Crowne, that he presently sought a remedy for the same (tho' he founde it not, as appeareth by his new translation which yet is not as it ought to be)
publikelie declaring in the Conference of Hampton Courte, Anno Do∣mini. 1624. & ingenuouslie confessing that he had seene no true translation, & that the Geneua translation is the worst of all o∣thers. Neither ought the corruptions founde in the reformed Bibles to be called peccadillos or smale faultes as Sir Humfrey would haue them to the end they may be the more easilie win∣ked at: for suppose they were neuer so little in themselues, yet are they to be esteemed great & horrible abuses in regarde of the great re∣uerence which ought to be had towardes those sacred volumes of the worde of God, it being treason in the highest degree to offer to falsifie or alter them anie way whatsoeuer. And let the reader be iudge whether it be but a smale faulte to translate images for idols, as the English bible of the yeare 1562. hath in the text: or as an other of the yeare 1577. hath in the margen vpon the first chapter of the Epistle of S. Iohn, in the last wordes. Or as the same, or other editions vpon the wordes of Iacob. Gen. 37. v. 35. descendam ad filium meum Iugens in infernum, hath translated the worde infernum, hell, into the worde Sepulcher, or graue: notob∣standing both the Hebrewe worde Seol & the Greeke worde adis signifie not the graue but either properlie hell it selfe, or some parte of the earth farre deeper then the graue. And in
this manner Beza hath done vpon those wor∣des of the psalme. non relinques animam meam in inferno, translating for animam Cadauer & for inferno, sepulchro, & so Metamorphizeth Christs soule into his bodie, & hell into his graue. And vpn the 22. of sainct Luke where according to the Greeke text, the sentence is, This is the cup of my blood which cuppe is shed for you: Beza to eneruate the force of the argument for the reall presence, purposelie translateth the wordes thus. This is the cup of my blood which blood is shed for you. Also the English bibles, whereas sainct Peter in the first chapter of his second epistle v. 10. saith, brethren labore the more that by good workes you make sure your vocation & election. Least here, it should appeare that good workes are auayleable or necessarie to saluation, they leaue out in their translations the wordes: by good workes, notobstanding the Latin copies haue them vniuersallie, & some Greeke copies also, as Beza confesseth. And if these be the faults which Sir Hūfrey calleth but peccadillos, surelie he hath a conscience as large as a fryers sleeue: & if these be his smale faults doubtlesse according to due proporrion his greater sinnes are abomination. And this is that Bible which the Romanists say needeth an Index expurga∣torie, not that Sacred Bible which is truelie & sincerelie translated according to that text which hath ben at the least since the tyme of
S. Augustin commonlie vsed in the Church, as appeareth by the Rhemes Testamēt, which because it is founde to haue ben rightlie tran∣slated, is not arraigned by the Pope, but expo∣sed to be read euen by the laitie, at the least by licence & aduise of their Confessors. Further more in regarde of the foresayd cor∣ruptions & manie other which for breuitie I omitted, made by heretikes in the holie scrip∣tures, those moderne authours which Sir Hum∣frey citeth (if they be trulie cited) haue ben in∣duced to vtter some such speeches concerning the same as, if they be not trulie & piouslie in∣terpreted, may giue occasion of offence to the reader: for example when they affirme (as he sayth) the scriptures to be dead caracters, a dead, & killing letter &c. such phrases neuer∣thelesse (as it manifestlie appeareth by the rest of their doctrine & discourse in those places) are not vsed by those authours with an intent in anie sorte to disgrace or diminish the dignitie of the true worde of God, but onelie by those comparatiue speaches, to declare how subiect the scriptures are to be corrupted & detorted to the defence of heresies & errours if they be considered preciselie as they are the externall written letter, & interpreted otherwise then by the authoritie of the visible Church in all ages, the ancient Councells, & Fathers, they haue ben vhderstood. Wherefore those Ro∣manists
which the knight citeth as if they had spoken irreuerentlie & blasphemonlie of the holie scriptures doe no more iniurie vnto them then S. Paule did when 2. Cor. 3. he sayth of them, litera occidit, the letter killeth, Lib. de Sy∣nodis. or then did S. Hilarie when he teacheth that manie he∣resies haue their origin from scriptures ill vn∣derstood, or then Martin Luther who called the Bible liber haereticorum the booke of here∣tikes. None of which speeches as I suppose Sir Humfrey will dare to condemne either of blasphemie or irreuerence, nay if he haue his senses aboute him he will easilie perceiue that those & other such like phrases are not meant actiuelie of the worde of God, but onelie passi∣uelie, that is that throu' the malice of the false interpreter it is so irreuerentlie detorted & abu∣sed as if indeed it were as flexible as a nose of waxe. And according to this we see that none of that which our aduersarie produceth here out of the Romanists is anie argument of irre∣uerence against the trueth, & inuiolabilitie of Gods worde, but a calumnious accusatiō quite contrarie to the sense & meaning of the fore∣said authours, who had not anie intention to taxe the scriptures but the corrupters & false interpreters of them, such as you pseudorefor∣mers are your selues. And now altho' by this which I haue sayd in generall touching this point of blasphemie
against scripture supposed to be perpetrated by the Romanists, the authors by the knight cyted remaine sufficientlie cleared from the imputation which he layes vpon them in that nature: neuerthelesse because by the particular examen of the places cyted I haue discouered that either all or most of their wordes, be ei∣ther corruptedlie rehearsed, or their sense de∣torted, & abused, therefore I will seuerallie re∣peate their passages, & declare in what respects our aduersarie hath deceitfullie traduced them. And to begin with Lindanus, his stromata in deed I could not haue, but I haue read the place cited out of his Panoplia, where I finde that when he names the scripture a dead & killing letter, he onelie alludes to the wordes of S. Paule 2. Cor 3. for the letter killeth, but the spirit giue liues. Sicut illud eiusdē au∣thoris dog∣ma in mor∣tuas, imo ceidentes adeo literas relatum. Panop. lib. 1. c. 44. Neither speaking nor mea∣ning worse of the same scripture then the Apo∣stle himselfe: & affirming at the most, that the bare letter of the worde of God ill in∣terpreted doth kill the soule, but reight expounded according to the tradition of the Church, it doth reuiue & nourish it, & brings it to eternall lyfe: yea & hauing bet∣ter pondered his wordes in the end of the chapter quoted by Sir Humfrey, I perceiue the doth not absolutelie call the scriptures a dead & killing letter, but onelie that the do∣ctrine of that author (meaning the holie Ghost
as I conceiue) is put in to dead & killing letters. As his wordes quoted in Latin in the margen declare. And in this same sense I may iustelie & truelie suppose the same authour speakes in the place quoted out of his other worke if any such saying he hath, in regarde that a graue & learned man as he is knowne to haue ben, is euer iudged to be sutable to himselfe in all times & places. Which learned diuine is yet further cōuinced, neuer to haue spoakē other∣wise then reuerentlie of the scriptures in that in euerie seueral place cited by our aduersarie, he stileth them sacrae litterae. sacred letters. And in like manner I conceiue of Charon, who as being of the same faith & religion he neither did nor dared to speake otherwise then with the same due respect which the Romā Church commaundes the Romanists to vse towardes the holie written worde of God. Canus in his 3. chapter of his second booke is abused by the knight, Nec esse eas volunt ce∣reum quen∣dā nasum in sensum omnem fle∣xibiles, sed potius esse per se expo¦sitas & in promptu cuique sine magistro & docente pa∣tere Canus lib. 3. ca. 7. f. 176 edit. Louan. by his imposing vpon the Romanists that which Canus speakes of the Lutherans saying, that they will not haue the scriptures to be like a nose of waxe subiect to diuers senses but rather plaine for euerie one to vnderstand without a master or teacher: & thus the preposterous kniht doth positiuelie & affirmatiuelie impute that to the Romanists which Canus onely relates to be negatiuely asserted of the scriptures by the Lutherans.
Turrianus agregiously abused in that he is accused to call the scriptures a Delphick sword, the riddles of Sphinx and the like: for he doth not absolutely say they are such, but onely saith that if Christ had left in his Church that rule onely which the pretended reformers receiued from Luther, to wit that scriptures are easie to be interpreted and vnderstanded, and according as they haue hitherto expounded them in their owne sense, then saith Turrian, what els should we haue of them then a Delphick sworde? In which wordes you see he doth not affirme absolutely that the scriptures are such a sworde, but onely that according as the sectories handle them in their false manner of expounding, they may be so compared: and for this cause he puts for his marginall note, how to interpret scriptures ac∣cording to ones owne proper sense is as to haue a Delphick sworde: & so by this & the authors wordes which I quote in the margen in Latin, his meaning is sufficiently declared together with the knights calumnious proceeding against him.Vos enim sicut a Lu∣thero didi∣cistis scrip∣turas san∣ctas faciles ad intelli∣gendum & interpretā∣dum esse putatis, & sic eas ha∣ctenus ve∣stro sensis intellexistis & inter∣pretati estis. At si hanc solam regu∣lam fidei Christus in Ecclesia re∣liquisset, quid aliud quam gla∣dium del∣phicum ha∣berem{us} &c. Quomodo interpretari scripturas ad libidinē proprij sen∣sus sit vt habere Del∣phicū gla∣dium. cōtr. Sad. p. 99. Lessius is ill cited, for in his 11. reason he hath none of those wordes quoted by Sir Humfrey, yet in his table he hath those. Scriptura quâ ra∣tione nasus cereus, regula lesbia &c. nuncupetur. Cyting for this, his owne page 130. of his con∣sult. Where yet he hath not those formall wordes which Sir Humfrey cites, but onely
some others to that sense: yet the truth is he doth not applye either the words or the sense to the Romanists, but to the nouelists saying of them and their interpretation of scri∣ptures by their priuate spirit. Scripturam autem quisque pro suo captu & iudicio intelligit, vnde cum se putant scripturam habere, regulam credendi, loco scripturae habent imaginationem propriam &c. So that here we finde no blasphemie in Lessius, but imposture in Sir Humfrey. It is true, Lessius in his disputation of Anti∣christ hath those formall words cyted by Sir Humfrey, in his page of the same number wher he saith: the scripture is called by Catholikes a nose of Wax & a Lesbious rule &c. but he pre∣sently explicates in what sense, to wit when it is taken for the bare wordes or letter onely se∣cluding the sense of the Church & the inter∣pretation of Fathers as saith he, it is taken by heretikes. So that it is plaine that Lessius doth not say that Catholikes calle the true scripture together with the true sense, a nose of Wax, but onely the naked text & as it is abused by corrupters. Lessius demonstr. 15. p. 131. An non regula illis Lesbia quam omni∣bus suis imaginationibus quantumuis absurdis ac∣commodant & seruire faciunt, qui per Antichristū designari volunt non vnum hominem, sed plurimo∣rum seriem &c. And presently. Apud Catholicos non est regula Lesbia quia est animata vero nimi∣rum sensu qui contrarijs placitis aptari nequit
Among Catholikes, saith Lessius (the scri∣pture) is not a lesbie rule because it is animated with true sense which cannot be applyed to contrarie opinions. By which wordes it is eui∣dent that this author is mightely wronged being he hath the verye negatiue proposition to that is imposed vpon him. In the citation of Pighius Sir Humfrey ought to haue continued his rehearsal from the beginning of his wordes to the end of the period of the authors whole passage, & then it would haue appeared plainelie howe fal∣selie he is accused. For so he discourseth. But because (saith he) no place of scripture is so plaine or open as it can defend itselte from the iniurie of the heretikes who adulterate, depraue, & detort it to their owne sense, for they (as one no lesse truelie then merrilie hath sayd) are euen as a nose of wax which doth easilie suffer it selfe to be fashioned & drawne this way, & that way, & which way thou wilst, & like a certaine leaden rule vsed in the buildings of Lesbos, which is not harde to be accomodated to what you will; there must be a line ioyned vnto it, such a one as is not as flexible as it selfe, but firme & stiffe, I say that pillar, that firmament of Catholike trueth, that is the common sense & sentence of the Church, then wee shall be certaine & sure of the true vnderstanding of the scriptures, if it
be consonant in all things to her which as she giues Canonicall authoritie to the scriptures, so is she truly the Lydius Lapis or touche stone of the true & Orthodox interpretation of the same &c. Pighius l. 3. Hierarc. c. 3. Thus farre, Pighius. Where he puts also for his marginall note. Scriptures ab haere∣ticorum vi & iniuria se prorsus vindicare non posse. That is: the scriptures can not vendicate or free them selues from the violence, & in∣iurie of heretikes. By which note alone, if his wordes in the text were not so plaine as they bee: yet is it clearer then the leight, that the comparisons which Pighius vseth be not ap∣plyed by him to the scriptures absolutelie but onelie as considered according to their bare caracters & letter, & as they are subiect to be corrupted by false interpretations: neither is he who vsed such speeches onelie with relation to the abusers of scripture more guiltie of iniu∣rious proceeding against the scriptures them selues as truelie they are the worde of God: then those are esteemed to be iniurious to the writings of S. Thomas, & Aristotle, who by rea∣son they are expounded in cōtrarie senses occa∣sioned by their obscuritie, affirme their exposi∣tors make them a nose of wax, or compare them to some such other flexible matter, mierly in that respect. And conformable to this also which wee haue said because the Romanists know by ex∣perience how falselie the misreformers vse to
deale in their citations as partelie hath been conuinced in diuers places of this censure, the∣refore & not for anie other cause doe they some tymes if they cite the Fathers, iustelie reiect them as by them corrupted or falselie cited. And so if they cite Berengarius & the walden∣ses they iustelie reiect them as heretikes: If they cite reformers for Romanists they iustely reiect them for none of theirs. If they cite Ca∣tholike authours impertinentlie, corruptedlie, or in a false sense, they iustelie reiected them as abused by them & so remit them to the Cen∣surers purgatorie. If they cite scriptures either falselie translated by addition, or detraction, or falselie interpreted, or falsified, they iustelie re∣iect them as imperfect, & as made by them a couerture for theeues, & an officine or shop of heretikes, And yet notobstanding all this it is manifest both by an expresse decree which the Councell of Trent made in the fourth ses. a∣gainst the profaners of the sacred scriptures, Decret. de edit. & vsu sacrorum l. vers. fin. as also by some ceremonies of the Masse it selfe, that the Romanists giue farre greater reue∣rence euerie way vnto them without compari∣son then the Reformers. And the same I say of the ancient Fathers whō the Romanists as it is well knowne, respect so much that they ac∣counte it plaine temeritie in anie writer to teach anie doctrine contrarie to the common consent of them: Whereas one the contrarie,
there is nothing more ordinarie among the writers of the misreformed Churches thē to re∣iect the authoritie of the ancient Fathers, or at the least to vilifie them & speake contemptu∣ouslie of them as diuers of their workes doe testifie. But for all this Sir Humfrey is still har∣ping vpon that string that the Roman Church houlds the scriptures to be imper∣fect: but I knowe none that makes them so imperfect as the misreformed Churches by cutting of diuers partes of them, and con∣demning them for Apochripha in their consistoriall sessions, & by corrupting the text by false translations & erroneous interpreta∣tions as I haue aboue declared. And touching the Roman Church I haue alreadie tould him that he belyeth her. For neither she here selfe nor anie of her members euer defended that tenet absolutelie that the scriptures are imperfect. But onelie some Romanists affirme the scriptures alone to be no perfect rule of faith, yet they neuer say they are imperfect. For one thing it is to be perfect in them selues, & an other thing to be perfect as they be a rule of faith. The first is absolutelie true & maintained by all Romanists; the second is but true secundum quid, & with restriction, as be∣fore hath ben declared, or as it is but one parte yet the cheefest & the farre more perfect &
noble. Wherefore the Romanists as the rea∣der may perceiue hould both the scriptures & Fathers for perfect & campleit absolutelie speaking, wher as the reformers whatsoeuer they say in wordes, yet indeeds they doe man∣gle & martyrize them most cruellie, as a booke published by a reformed minister, called the censure of the Fathers doth giue ouer plaine testimonie. Censura Patrum. And thus handled by thim I graunt the reformers may chalenge them for theirs, but taking them in their compleit & perfect latitude & puritie, the Romanists my iustelie say all myne, in which action notwithstanding there is no police vsed to deceiue the ignorant, as the reformers vse to doe, but plaine dealing for their true instruction. And to say the Romanists silence scriptures, it is so manifest an vntruth as it needs no other confutation. But by the lye. Neyther doe they otherwise purge either them or anie learned writers, but onelie, or at the least cheefelie from such darnell as you eni∣mies to the Crop of Christ vse to sowe by night in the feild of faith. According to the sentence of the authour of the Impect Com∣mentarie of S. Mathewe hom. 44. speaking of hereticall Preists, whose wordes altho' the knight world faine applie them against the Romanists, yet they can not possible be so trulie & fitlie accommodated to anie as to his
owne ministers & Bishops, whose common & knowne practice is by seueritie of lawes & all fortes of punishment & not by their bookes & writings to musle the Romanists mouthes, be∣cause (to vse the wordes of the foresaid author) they knowe that if the truth be once layd opē, their Church shall be forsaken & they from their Pontificall dignitie shall be brought downe to the basenesse of the people. And now we see by the examen of this whole sectiō howe false Sir Humfreyes cardes haue proued & how plainelie he hath lost the game not∣withstanding all his iudling tricks & counter∣feit shuffling, of which sleights there are such great store in this section that there is no place for anie matter of substance but onelie verball florishes to giue colour & countenance to his fained & calumnious accusations. THE XIV. PERIOD. SIR Humfrey tells vs that in this section following there are contained allegations collected out of Bellarmin for testification of the truth of the reformed doctrine in the cheefe points of controuersie. I haue alreadie declared that the Romanists reiect not either true scriptures, or Fathers; nor yet anie other authours of the Roman Church, but onelie as either corrupted by he∣retikes,
or els onelie where we finde them to haue some singular opinion, or tenet against the vniforme doctrine of the rest in matters of faith manners, or Ecclesiasticall practice or discipline: or els in some particular points not then sufficientlie declared & determined by the Church when they did so vtter their opinions; of which sorte of writers neuerthelesse there neuer were anie such either in number or qua∣litie of doctrine as could either make or marre the antiquitie & vniuersalitie of the Church in that nature. And as for Bellarmin whome Sir Humfrey citeth in this section, we are so farre from ta∣king exceptions at anie thing that he euer writ & published, that we all hould him for a most faithfull & diligent defender not onelie of the principall points of our faith but also of euerie one of them in particular, & of the whole Ro∣man doctrine in so much that I accounte it no lesse then plaine madnesse in that man whoe shall offer to make vse of his testimonie for the contrarie, knowing for certaine that if he be sincerelie alledged & rightlie vnderstāded, no∣thing can be founde in him for the aduerse par∣te. And to the end that this may more plainely appeare I will breeflie examen those particular places which Sir Humfrey produceth, for the contrarie. First therefore he citeth Bellarmin as con∣fessing
the vncertainty of all the Trēt Sacramēts (as the knight termeth thē) because forsooth in his third booke of Iustification the 8. chap. he graunteth that none can be certaine by the certaintie of faith that he receiueth a true Sa∣crament, in regard in depends vpon the inten∣tion of the minister. But this testimonie I haue alreadie shewed to be delusorie, & it is wholie impertinent to the purpose, for that the que∣stion aboute the necessitie of the knowledge of the intention of the minister by faith, is no principall controuersie betwixt vs but rather meerelie incident. Neyther yet can the refor∣mers finde the contrarie position in anie place of scripture by that meanes to make it a point of faith for themselues. Secondlie he induceth Bellarmin lib. 3. de Eucharist cap. 23. touching the reformers de∣nyall of transsubstantiation. To which place I haue also ansered before; & it is not for this purpose, in regarde there is no mention of anie denyall of the trueth of trassubstantiation, or confession of the Reformers tenet in that point: but onelie of an other incident question, viz. whether transsubstantiation can be pro∣ued by expresse wordes of scripture. And at least touching the maine point (to omit the o∣ther as impertinent & disagreable to the title of our aduersaries questiō which is of principal points of controuersie,) it is too cleare that
Bellarmin defended the affirmatiue in terminis, in plaine tearmes. And so this is no such con∣fession as Sir Humfrey seekes for in this place. Besides that all Bellarmins confession is but one pore non est improbabile: Thirdlie he citeth Bellarmins confession against priuate Masse lib. 2. de Missa cap. 9. & 10. But the latter place I haue examined before & founde it corrupted by Sir Humfrey both in wordes & sense neyther are the wordes since∣relie recited by omission of omnino, & sine de∣claratione Ecclesiae, & transposition of the text. And here I further adde that neyther of the places is to this purpose, because they proue no vnlawfulnesse, or absolute imperfection in priuate Masses, but onelie at the most their lesse lawfulnes, their lesse perfection, or their want of frequentation in the primatiue ages: which is no principall point of controuersie betweene the Reformers, & Romanists, nay none at all. And touching Bellarmins confession con∣tained in the first place, viz. That we read not expressely, but gather by coniectures that the ancients did sacrifice without communion of some person, or persons, I say it is imperti∣nent in regarde it inuolues no disproofe of pri∣uate Masses, as our aduersarie counningly in∣deuores to persuade his vnaduised reader. It being sufficient for the instification of the pra∣ctise
of them, that besides the authoritie of the present Church which approues them, not anie worde either of scripture, or ancient Fa∣thers can be produced in which they ar con∣demned for vnlawful, or repugnant to Christs institution, or commaunde. And if more then this were required for matters of practise in this nature: certaine it is the pretensiue refor∣mers of the Church, would neuer be able to iustifie their owne order, and prescription of cōmunicating at Easter, or some twise or thrise more in the yeare: or their newe prohibition of not receiuing their communion euen at the point of death without a competent number: of neyther of which they haue not as much as one pore instance, or example in the prima∣tiue Church. By which it appeares that Bellar∣mins confession is in this passage preposterously alledged by the knight both in respect of the Roman Doctrine against which it concludeth nothing, as alsoe in respect of the inconuenien∣ce which by sequele and illation it induceth to his owne: whoe yet offers the Cardinal some further abuse by omission of the worde facile, in the recytal of his text. Tamen id possumus ex cōiectu∣ris facile colligere. Bellar. supra. Where the reader may yet once more reflect, that altho' Bellarmin in his modestie tearmed the examples of antiquitie which he produ∣ceth for the practise of priuate Masses at the least in some particular cases, no more then
coniectures: yet if some of them be duely pon∣dered & vrged with their circumstances, they may iustely passe for solid reasons: as that S. Chrysostome diuers tymes reprehending the people most sharpely & vehemently for ma∣king the Masses priuate by their not commu∣nicating in them: yet doth he not once either condemne such Masses in them selues, or he him selfe euer ceased to celebrate them dayly euen then when he most preached against the negligence of those whoe were present in them without receiuing the sacrament with the preist. Which doubtlesse is a morally conclu∣ding argument that Masses without commu∣nion of the people were vsed and esteemed lawful euen in those more primatiue & an∣cient ages. To which may not vnaptely be ad∣ded for confirmation of the same discourse by way of aduertisment, that S. Chrysostome ne∣uer affirmed in these occasions of complainte of the people, that Masses in which commu∣nicants ar wanting, be euill or contrarie to Christs ordinance or precept, but the most he said was, that the oblation is frustrate when ther be none to participate: which wordes of his ar soe farre from reprouing the practise, & vse of Masses without comunion of the people, that they necessarily implye that the sa∣crifice was in realitie cebebrated, notobstan∣ding the people did frustrate the intention of
the preist in that by their want of deuotion they receiued not the Communion which he had prepared for them: supposing it is absolu∣tely inpossible to conceiue that the Masse or oblation could be frustrated for wante of par∣takers, except it were in it selfe a Masse or obla∣tion truely & really performed by the sacrifi∣cer. Fourthlie it is true that Bellarmin confesseth that in the primatiue Church, because the Christians were but fewe, they did all sing & ansere in the diuine offices. But he affirmeth not that either it then was, or now is vnlawfull to haue the publike, or priuate prayer in an vnknowne tongue, which is the onelie point in controuersie, the reformers defending touth & naile the affirmatiue, & the Romanists the negatiue. Nay Bellarmin is soe farre from con∣fessing the reformers doctrine in this particu∣lar, that he expresselie affirmeth in the same place that the diuine offices in those primatiue times were celebrated in Greeke which all the people did not vnderstand, & yet cleareth this whole question so farre that if Sir Humfrey had vsed anie sparke of sinceritie in citing Bel∣larmins wordes home & truelie, they would haue taken away all doubt concerning his meaning: Whereas by leauing out deceitfullie the latter parte of his clause, he caused in his reader a preuidicate opiniō of the true sense, tou∣ching
which, and the faithlesse proceeding of our aduersarie about the same, the Cardinals owne wordes intirely recited will tell the truth: for thus he speakes. At obijcies sicut Apostolus &c. But (saith Bellarmin) you will obiect. As the Apostle would that the people might sub∣ioine, Amen: so also he was to ordaine that the diuine offices should be celebrated in the vul∣gar tongue that the people might answer, A∣men. Bellar. l. 2. de verbo Dei. c. 16. I anser by denying the consequence, be∣cause the diuine offices were performed in the Greeke tongue which manie of the people did vnderstand, tho' not all, & this was sufficient; for the Apostles will was not that all should anser. Besides this, because then the Christians were fewe, they all sung together in the Church, & ansered in the diuine offices: but af∣terwardes the multitude increasing, the offices were more diuided, & it was left to the sole cleargie to acomplish the common prayers, & Laudes in the Church. Thus plainely doth the Cardinall declare himselfe for a ptofessed ad∣uersarie of Sir Humfrey & his comperes in this particular euen so farre as to solue their greatest obiection which they vse to frame against the practise of the Roman Church. Firstlie touching the allegation of Bellar∣mins confession of the reformers tenet aboute the Communion in both kyndes, it is most false that Bellarmin confesseth it in the point in con∣trouersie,
Bellarmin. l. 2. de ver∣bo Dei c. 16. I meane it is false that he confesseth either Christ to haue commaunded the com∣munion in both Kyndes, or that the ancient Church practized the same onelie in both kyn∣des, both which points Bellarmin so expresselie declareth that Sir Humfrey could not possible haue found anie colour to haue alledged his confession for the contrarie if he had not man∣gled his wordes as he did in truth most shame∣fullie as may appeare most plainelie to him that will take paines to examen them as they are by him deliuered towardes the end of the chapter cited by the knight, where it is eui∣dent that the Cardinall proceedeth diametrally contrarie to the reformers doctrine in the prin∣cipall point of this question according to his owne expresse wordes quoted in this my margen.Idcirco quaerendū superest v∣trum saltē diuino prae∣cepto positi∣uo eiusmo∣di obliga∣tio (com∣municandi sub vtra{que} specie) in Ecclesia sit nos enim negamus, illi (sectarij) asserunt. Bellar. lib. 4. de Eu∣cha. c. 24. Sixtlie touching the confession of Bellar∣min aboute the duall number of proper Sacra∣ments, we haue alreadie shewed him to be quite opposite to the reformers doctrine, & also haue examined the same place which Sir Humfrey citeth here and founde the sense of the Cardinall to haue ben egregiouslie by him transuerted & corrupted, & so here is no confession of anie principall point of controuer∣sie made by him in fauour of his aduersaries, but a new repetition of an old imposture of the knights owne making.
Lastelie the knight citeth two places, of Bellarmin. The first out of his 3. booke of Iustification the 6. chapter, is touching the reformers faith & good workes which he af∣firmeth Bellarmin to confesse. But what a ri∣diculous allegation is this? For it is true Bel∣larmin confesseth in the place cited that the re∣formers hould faith & repentance are requisite to iustification & that without them no man can be iustified, but this is no principall point of controuersie: nay no question at all betwene the Romanists & the reformers, but onelie a point of doctrine which the reformers doe commonlie teach & the Romanists doe not denie. So that this is impertinentlie alledged out of Bellarmin for faith & good workes since that in the wordes cited out of him there is not one sillable of good workes, but onelie of faith & repentance as the reader sees. But yet that which is most absurde of all is that Sir Hum∣frey haueing here cited Bellarmins confession that the reformers hould both faith & repen∣tance to be required to iustification, yet pre∣sentlie after he citeth the same Bellarmin as concluding with the reformed Churches iusti∣fication by faith onely, so that within the com∣passe of one page the knight out of the pro∣funditie of his great head peace resolueth in fauour of his owne cause out of Bellarmin both that without a liuely faith & an ernest re∣pentance
no man is iustified, & also that accor∣ding to the doctrine of the reformed Churches mans iustification is by faith onelie. Let the reader if, he be able couple these two together, but if he can not let him hould for certaine that Sir Humfrey line was farre out of quare when he vttered such disparates. Now the second place of the two laste is touching iustification by faith onelie. But this hath ben examined before, & founde to containe no confession of iustification by faith onelie (as the knight will haue it, vnaduisedly contradicting himselfe out of an inordinate desire to make Bellarmin seeme to stand for the doctrine of his Church) but onelie that Bellarmin speaketh there of confidence in merits according to the sense a∣boue declared. And thus Sir Humfrey hauing cited all he can, which all neuerthelesse is iuste nothing, he addeth for all this that he wondreth why the Romanists should send out such Anathemas & curses against all or anie of those that denie their doctrine. But I wonder more that he who hath produced nothing either in this chapter or in the rest of his booke out of Ca∣tholike authours which in his sense & mea∣ning doth not rather deserue to be hissed at, then to be admitted for anie proofe of his do∣ctrine, yet should not be ashamed to affirme that the best learned of the Romanists confesse
that manie principall points of their owne re∣ligion & manie articles of their faith, are nei∣ther ancient, safe, nor Catholike. And suerlie I can not conceiue but that both he & who soeuer els should vse so much false dealing as he hath done, in propugning their owne tenets especiallie in matters of religion, deserue the Anathema in the highest degree, that curse being the proper brande of the defenders of erroneous, hereticall, or scysmaticall doctrine. And indeed it seemes Sir Humfrey had not verie great conference in the industrie which he hath vsed in this his worke. For notob∣standing it appeareth manifestlie that he put∣teth the greatest streingth of his proofes through out his whole booke in the multitude of authours especiallie Romanists, whome by way of emendication or begerie he alledgeth as confessers of his faith, yet he here flyeth to the little flock & to the paucitie of beleeuers & to the simplicitie of babes as to speciall cara∣cters of the true Church, & vtterlie disclaming from humane wisdome, power, & nobilitie: a pore refuge after so manie great boasts & bragges of the victorie obteined (as he imagi∣neth, but falselie) by meere authoritie & mul∣tiplicitie of testimonies piled vp both in text, & margin; now to plead paucitie, simplicitie & want of power, & wisdome. And as for your paucitie in number Sir Humfrey I will not
stick to graunt in regard that how great a shewe soeuer you haue made to the contrarie, yet I knowe you to be most pore & beggerlie in that nature, but yet I denie that to be a spe∣ciall & infallible marke of the true Church as you insinuate, no more then the paucitie of Manicheans or Donatists was a marke of the truth of their Churches. And the same I say of the want of might, wisdome, nobilitie, I meane of true, power, wisdome, & nobilitie, for of power, wisdome & nobilitie of the flesh you must needs haue much more then the Ro∣manists, in regarde it is well knowne you both handle & eate farre greater quantitie then they doe, witnesse your little abstinence & the rest which modestie causeth mee to passe in silence: And touching your simplicitie except by sim∣plicitie you meane plaine ignorance, you haue no colour here to bragge of it, for that there was neuer flock in the world, in my opinion, so full of all sortes of duplicitie as your owne. Neither hath anie man greater reight to be a sheepe of that fould then the noble knight Sir Humfrey, who out of the abundance of his double dealing euen in this place, to say no∣thing of that which is paste, hath made choise of as false & fallacious markes of his owne Church as he hath calumniouslie fained mar∣kes for ours to wit counterfeit miracles which neuerthelesse wee disclame from & detest more
then he and all his consortes. And if they will needs medle of these matters, let them reflect vpon their Master Caluin how faine he would haue confirmed his newe Gospell with a for∣ged resuscitation of a pore man who by his instructions, fained death, but the false Prophet fayling of his purpose committed a murder in steed of a miracle. The knight saith further that we beleeue lyes: But I say that he doth not onely beleeue them but makes them, as appeares by this his pamphlet in which, as we see, ther is great store. In Deut. 14. We doe not deny with Lira but that some times in the Church there may be great decep∣tion of the people among the Preists in fained miracles: but these miracles if anie such ther be, are in the Church & in the Preists onely, as Lira discretely insinuate, not approued by the Church, & the Preists or their companions for lucre, as the false knight iniuriously affirmes, most corruptedly omitting in his translation of Lyra's wordes both the worde aliquando in the begining, & also the end of his sentence to wit: Lyra in c. 14. Dan. & talia exstirpanda sunt à bonis prelatis sicut ista extirpata sunt à Daniele. De ciuit. l. 2. c. 8. And we yet further affirme with S. Augustin that he that seeketh to be confirmed by miracles nowe, is to be wondered at most of all himselfe in refusing to beleeue what all the world beleeueth besides himselfe. But in those wordes S. Augustin doth
not deny but that true miracles may be in the Church, nor yet that they were not in his time, Lib. 22. c. 8. for in his bookes de Ciuit. he affirmeth expres∣sely that Christian doctrine, not onely in the begining but also in the progresse, of the Church was confirmed by miracles, as besides other places the very title of that same chapter rehearsed in my margen makes appeare to which these his wordes in the discourse fol∣lowing plainely agree. De miracu∣lis quae vt mundus in Christo cre∣deret facta sunt, & fic∣ri mundo credente nō desinunt. Tit. c. 8 li. 22. For (saith S. Augu∣stin) euen at this present time miracles are operated or done in his name: (in the name of Christ) either by the Sacraments, or by the prayers, & memories of his saints. And the same S. Aug. in the same place further relates one famous miracle in par∣ticular done at the bodie of S. Geruase, & Pro∣tase in Milā where he himselfe remained at that present time. And by this it is euident that S. Aug. in the other place produced by Sir Hum∣frey onely condemneth him whoe for want of miracles should refuse to beleeue, to which we Romanists most willingly agree. And by this it appeareth that S. Augustin is here imperti∣nently alledged by the knight. But the trueth is that because these companions haue no mi∣racles in their owne Church, they striue by all meanes possible to obscure the miracles of the Church of Rome & crye out like Bedlames: ther is no need of miracles. And now to come to a conclusion of this se∣ction,
& the censure of it, I would faine knowe of Sir Humfrey what is all this discourse of mi∣racles to the purpose of testifying his doctrine by the confession of Bellarmin, surely nothing at all. & I persuade my selfe the knight was mightly distracted when he penned it, and so I leaue him till he returnes to his more perfect senses. THE XV. PERIOD. SIR Humfrey playeth the parte of a Char∣latan so farre that he is not content by his prestigious trickes & sleights to laie clame to ancient Fathers & moderne Romanists for confessors of his owne faith, but also out of the groasenes of his education, in this section he presumeth to laie his greasie handes vpon those holie primatiue martyres, & champions of Iesus Christ ingrossing & conueying those sacred wares into his owne stincking store-house, which neuerthelesse all ages, all Chri∣stian people, all nations haue till the dayes of Luther proclamed & testified to pertaine to the renowne & glorie of the Roman Church. And altho' he would seeme to proue that the fore∣said prime martyrs doe not belong to the Church of Rome, yet his cheefe proofe is but prating & an idle application of his owne te∣nets alreadie examined & confuted in their se∣uerall
places, where they haue ben all founde either plainelie false, or at the least equiuo∣call & founded vpon false suppositions vpon which no true argument can be framed: which being so I may iustelie saue labour to descend to particulars, yet one onelie wil I specifie which is so shamefullie impertinent that it is sufficient alone to shame the rest. He sayth therefore that Father Garnet being demaunded whether if he were to consecrate the Sacrament that morning he should suffer death, he durst after consecration affirme vpon his Saluation that the wine in the cup conse∣crated was the verie blood of Christ which flowed from his side, he made ansere it might iustelie be doubted. This is the wise storie which Sir Humfrey telleth vs out of Bishop Andrewes, which altho' wee are not bounde to beleeue as being iustified onelie by our aduersaries, yet suppose it is as true as their Gospell, it maketh not anie thing for this purpose, for that Sir Humfreys taske in this place was not to medle with mar∣tyrs of these later ages, but to demonstrate that those ancient martyrs of former ages did not die for that fayth which the present Ro∣man Church professeth, & so what soeuer he or his Prelate can faigne of Father Garnet is but a fooles boult which flying at randome co∣meth not neare the marke. Father Garnet
sayth hee, durst not pronounce openlie ouer the cup after he had consecrated it, this is the bloud of Christ, ergo neuer anie martyr did take it vpon his death that the consecrated bread is the corporall & reall flesh of Christ. Behould I praye this most subtill Logike of a knight & admire it. Or if you list rather laffe at it as I did when I founde it out, & so I lefte it with∣out anie further confutation, imagining that perhaps Sir Humfrey lōg before he was borne did miraculouslie speake with some of those ancient souldiers of Christ, & so came to knowe that none of them euer gaue their liues for the reall presence. Which in deed is the point in question, & not whether a man can lawfullie pronounce vpon his Saluation whe∣ther this or that hoste in particular after conse∣cration, containeth the bodie of Christ, as the knight captiouslie supposeth But yet shewing vs some more graines of his follie he sayth further, that it is vndoubtedlie true that the ancient martyrs could not dye in that fayth nor for that religion which was alto∣gether vnknowne to their church. O ingenious gētilman! but yet I pray tell me if the fore sayd martyrs dyed not for the Romanists religion because as you faigne, they dyed not for the profession of the reall presence, For what re∣ligion did they dye? Suerlie not for yours, be∣cause if our religiō was vnknowne vnto them,
much more was yours vnknowne to their ages which was not in the world before the daies of Luther, except perhaps your 39. articles were knowne vnto them by extraordinarie re∣uelation before they were coyned. It is true here we haue Sir Humfreys ipse dixit for con∣firmation of his tenet, & so it must needs be doubtlesse, his authority is so excessiuely great. Sir Tho. Ouerb. in his caract. of a Puri∣tā or Pre∣cisian. And so I graunt the hypotheticall to be most true: And me thinkes it is not much vnlike to an other such like position of the Puritans, who vse to say: it is vnpossible for a man to be damned in their religion, & so a facetious Pro∣testant confesses for certaine, as long as heli∣ues in it, but if he dyes in it, ther's the question. Wherefore since all is but trifles that Sir Humfrey bringeth, I wish the reader of his booke to consider with himselfe how smale probabilitie there is to imagin that those glo∣rious champions of Christ who so valerouslie suffered torments & died for him in the Ro∣man Church, & manie of them at Rome it selfe, could possiblie belong to anie other Church in the world, then to that Church which as in that tyme it had the name of Ro∣man Church so doth it still remaine with the same appellation not otherwise then by a con∣tinuall succession of the Popes of Rome, three & thirtie of which (as eloquent Campian tru∣lie obserueth) were put to death for their faith,
which their faith as it is manifest partlie by their owne workes, & partelie by the authen∣ticall histories of their martyrdomes, was the verie same according to the manner I haue be∣fore declared, which nowe is tought in the present Church of Rome. And if this be not so, if those glorious mar∣tyrs were not defenders of that Roman faith which by succession of pastours is deriued & arriued to this our time, I demaund of our ad∣uersaries of what other faith they were, for of the reformed faith they could not possible bee in regarde that none of them either tought in their life, or died for the defence of Iustification by faith onelie, or for the deniall of the reall presence of the bodie & blood of Christ in the Eucharist, nor for denying that there is anie other worde of God but onelie scripture. Nor for affirming that the images of Christ & his Saints are Idols, or that they who honore them adore idols, or stickes & stones, or that the Pope was Antichrist: nor doe wee finde in anie historie either anie of this, nor yet that the foresayd martyrs suffered for these, or anie o∣ther point of the reformers doctrine which is contrarie to the faith of the present Roman Church. Wherefore the sayd reformers must necessarilie confesse that the ancient martyrs died either for ours or for no other Chri∣stian doctrine, & consequentlie that they are
eyther ours or no martyrs at all. And if they were Popes of Rome as you Puri∣tās your selues cānot denie, how could they pos∣sible be yours who beleeue the Pope is Anti∣christ, & are so farre from that kynde of gouer∣nemēt that you doe not willingly admit eyther Pope, Prince, or Prelate, but onelie a consisto∣riall Anarchie without head or feet. And he that shall duelie ponder these particulars, doubtlesse his conscience will tell him howe vniustelie Sir Humfrey indeuoreth to wreist from the Roman Church those rich prises. And let this suffice for the censure of this se∣ction & to shewe that the Romanists by their claime to the martyrs of the primatiue Church pretend nothing but their due. THE XVI. PERIOD. THE 17. section containeth an ansere to an obiection of the Romanists drawne from the opinion of Protestants touching the Saluation of professed Romanists, where Sir Humfrey telleth vs, he is come to the greatest wonder. And I confesse the wonder which the knight proposeth is great, but it being of his owne making, it is not hee that ought to wonder at it but rather in my opiniō he should leaue that to others. And truelie it is most wonderfull to mee to heare that the Romanists
themselues should confesse their owne do∣ctrine to be different from the ancient Church in manie principall points of faith, but this hauing alreadie ben demonstrated to be false & feigned by Sir Humfrey, the greatest won∣der of all wonders is that he should haue the face to make a wonder of his owne so often re∣peated vntruthes. It is true the Romanists constantlie hould that neyther Lutheran nor Caluinist, nor anie other heretike or Scisma∣tike dying in his heresie obstinatelie can be sa∣ued, for so they say with him that could com∣mit no rashe iudgement, he that doth not be∣leeue is alreadie iudged. Qui autem non credit iam iudi∣catus est. Ioan. 3.18. Neuerthelesse wee Romanists doe not denie but that probably some simple people may liue in heresie, & yet not be damned at the least for heresie, & yet be saued by ignorance if with all they be free from other mortall sinnes, eyther because they neuer lost their baptismall grace, or if they lost it, by contrition they recouer it againe; which altho' it be not impossible, yet is it verie full of dangerous difficultie morallie speaking, & almost a Metaphisicall case, & for such I leaue it. Sir Humfrey proceedeth on babling aboute a Citie seated vpon seuen mountaines which he fondelie houldeth for a marke of the false Church & applyeth it to the Roman Church. But if Rome were the seate of the false Church because it is planted vpon seuen mountaines,
then how scaped it from that staine all those fiue hundreth yeares in which the reformers themselues graunt it was the mother Church? Iacobus Rex epist. monit. Neyther hath the Roman Church anie such marke of assuming supreme authoritie ouer Kings & Princes as the knight doth odiouslie affirme, but onelie with due respect & humility vseth that authoritie ouer them which Christ himselfe did conferre vpon her, in such manner as is most conducing to the Saluation of their owne soules & their vassals according to the rules of Christian prudence, & the precept of charitie. Yet not to dominier ouer them, or their subiects in anie sorte, & much lesse to approue or allowe of their oppression either by Massacre, or anie other vnlawfull meanes, as the sectaries & especiallie the Puritans doe vse calumniouslie to obiect, notobstanding that none in the world are more guiltie then them selues in those practices, of which we haue too manie examples in Scotland, France, & other places euen against Kings, & Princes, which doubtlesse caused King Iames of great Britanie to speake so plaine as he did both in his bookes & ordinarie discourses, of that particular.Nihil nisi calumniam & seditio∣nem spirā∣tes Basilic. dor. After this Sir Humfrey descends to diuers particulars & demaūdeth whether he & his fel∣lowes be accursed for maintaining them or no? and whether the Romanists be blessed for such
& such points which they defende against the sectaries? And thus he runneth a long betweene blessing & cursing till he concludes casting the curses vpon the Romanists & the blessings vpon his owne Congregation. But because ther is little or nothing but such false stuffe as I haue alreadie examined & cēsured, & because I haue quite surfeited with so frequēt repetitiō of the same subiect: I onely saye in generall, as he is blessed whoe heareth or obeyeth the Church in all things in regarde that by obeying the Church he obeyeth Christ whoe blesseth them that obey him: So contrarily he that disobeyeth the Church in one onely thing he is accursed according to the wordes of Christ him helfe, if he will not heare the Church let him be vnto to the, like an Ethnike or Publi∣can. Mat. 18. And so Sir Humfrey had no reason to maruell if the Romanists accounte him & his fellowes accursed because they refuse to imbra∣ce & obey anie point of that doctrine which the most vniuersall Church of the worlde pro∣poseth vnto them as doctrine to be receiued, beleeued, or practized by all faithfull Chri∣stians. And as S. Augustin in the 41. of his fiftie homilies saith. Whosoeuer is separated frome the Catholique Church that is to say that Church which spred in ouer the whole worlde (as he specifieth in the precedent wordes) how laudably soeuer he thinkes he
liueth, for that onely sinne that he is diuided from the vnity of Christ he shall not obteine life eternall, but the wrath of God remaineth vpon him. In which wordes as the reader may see according to the sentence of S. Augustin, separation from the obedience of the vniuersall Church is sufficient to bring the curse vpon anie man notobstanding in other respects he liueth neuer so virtuously. And according to this the Romanists may bouldly say they are accursed whoe deny all merit in workes proceeding from the grace of God, Scr. 68. in Cant. & they blessed with Sainct Bernard (whom Caluin himselfe calleth a holye & pious man) that affirme with him that it is a pernicious prouertie to want merits, & yet espe∣cially at the houre of their death for humilitie with the same S. Bernard put all their con∣fidence in the mercy of God; that which the Romanists doe much more then the reformers, notobstanding their defence of meritorious workes. They are accursed whoe otherwise then Christ tought or affirmed, teach & affirme it vnlawfull for the laitye to communicate in one kynde: And they blessed whoe with Christ & his Church take it for a thing indifferent of it selfe to receiue in one or both kyndes, & stand to the ordināce of the most vniuersall Church without contention, according to the diffe∣rence
of times, places, & persons. They are accursed whoe being vnlearned read scriptures & interpret them falsely for the maintenance of their errours, according to that of S. Peter saying: Epist. 2. c. 3. ther are certaine places in S. Paules Epistles which the vnlearned de∣praue to their owne perdition: but blessed are they whoe read them as the Eunuch did, that is with a S. Philipe, I meane with one to shewe them the true sense, & as S. Basil & his brother Nazianzene did, Lib. 11. cap. 9. (whoe according to Rufinus) read the scriptures following the sense of them not according to their owne presumption, but according to the writinges of their predeces∣sours, notwithstanding they were both, verie famous, & renowned in learning. They are accursed whoe either prohibit ma∣riage or meates as ill in them selues as some ancient heretikes did, or absteine not frome them both at such times & in such cases as God & his Church ordaineth them to ab∣steine: And they are blessed whoe according to the order of the Church directed by the spi∣rit of God remaine with S. Paule vnmaried, & refaine from eating flesh at such times as the same Church appointeth. Those are accursed for contemning of Christ in his Church, whoe contrary to her appoint∣mēt, doe schismatically administer the publike seruice & Sacraments in the vulgar tongue,
erroneously defending the same to be com∣maunded by the scriptures: & blessed are those whoe for reuerence to the holy scriptures & conseruation of the dignity of the diuine of∣fices, & other iust reasons, hould it fitting to administer publike seruice & Sacraments in a language most common to all nations, to wit in the Latin tongue. They are accursed whoe loue Christ & his Saints so little as they accounte it idolatrie, & contrary to the scriptures to honore their images, notobstāding ther is no place of scrip∣ture truly interpreted to be founde against them: & those are blessed according to the same scriptures whoe to shewe their exteror∣dinarie affection to Christ, duely reuerence both the images of him & his blessed seruants. They are accursed that refuse either to a∣dore Christs bodie whersoeuer he affirmeth it to bee, or account it idolatrie or superstition to honore the Saints who he him selfe saith he honoreth with a crowne of glorie: & blessed are they that performe his pleasure in both by adoring his pretious bodie & blood in the sacra∣ment, & by honoring his Saints in Heauen where he doth honour them as his seruants & freinds.Si quis mihi mini∣strauerit honorifica∣bit eum Pa∣ter meus &c. They are accursed who contrary to scrip∣ture reiect such ancient traditions as the most vniuersall Church approueth: & blessed are
those who with due obedience obserue the same. Accursed are they who reiect charitie frome the formall cause of iustification, Maior au∣tem horum est charitas. 1. Cor. 13. which not∣obstanding according to the Apostle, is grea∣ter then either hope or faith: & blessed are they who admit it in iustification as well as faith & preferre it before faith with the same Apo∣stle. Accursed are they that by denying with the Iewes the bookes of the Machabies to be Ca∣nonicall scriptures, denie Purgatory & prayer for the soules departed: & blessed are they who with the Church & S. Augustin hould the foresayd bookes for canonicall scripture, & say with him it is an vndoubted thing that prayer doth profit the dead.Non dubiū est oration prodesse de∣functis. Aug. de cura pro mort. c. 1. And in this māner, if need were I could passe throu' all the rest of the points of controuerted doctrine, & easily showe the curse to fall vpon the misreformed brothers for their obstinacie & disobedience to God & his Church. Sir Humfrey would faine seeme to beare a charitable minde towardes the Romanists in regarde he saith, he dares not pronounce dam∣nation vpon their persons, and yet he proclai∣meth confidently & opēly to the whole world that their doctrine is damnable, to which it is necessarily consequent that all such as die ob∣stinately in it are directly damned: & so if Sir
Hūfrey proceeds cōsequenter to this his tenet, he must necessity iudge the same of at the least in generall of those which dye in the fore∣said obstinate manner & with out inuincible ignorance end their liues in it. But if this be that which he calls greater charitie them Ro∣manists haue, & all the fauour he doth vs, we thanke him not for it, & such charitie he may better reserue to himselfe & his brothers who in my opiniō haue no more thē they can spare. And if this be all the difference which can be foūde betwixt the proceeding of the Romanists & the reformers in this particular, then I say that notwithstanding Sir Humfrey much la∣boureth to make his reader beleeue that he & his reformed brothers are more charitable thē the Romanists in iudging of the state of the soules of such as departe in each religion: ne∣uerthelesse it is manifest he quite faileth of his intent: supposing that the Romanists doe not vse to iudge but rather suspend their iudgment of particular persons, except they haue some speciall reasons prudently & morally to per∣suade themselues that this or that partie died in actuall obstinacie & defence of his erroneous faith, otherwise their censure is onely condi∣tionall or a generall & abstractiue manner. It is trrue he graunteth that some of his do∣ctours affirme that a Papist may be saued, but he deliuereth his owne glosse vpon it saying it
is ment onelie by inuincible ignorance, & so by his owne commētarie he corrupted the whole text. And if this be the best construction his charitie can afford wee will thanke him for it as much is it deserueth. Neuerthelesse it is no matter what either Sir Hūfrey or his fellowes say in this point, wee esteeme not so much of there iudgements as to frame out of them, anie rule for the safe way of saluation: for this rule, wee had long before their Church was built wee had it frome the way maker him selfe. And I tell you by the way Sir Humfrey that if any of your Church be saued in the manner I haue declared in the begining of this Period, they are absolutely said to be saued in our Church not in yours, thoguh exteriorlie they liue & dye in yours. And so to conclud, if you will not permit the Romanists to drawe an argument from the confession of some of your authours, but will needs affirme with your greatest do∣ctour & Arch Puritan whitaker, that vpon his worde ther is not one Papist to be founde in Heauen, I for my parte vpon condition you brag not of a victorie as you vse to doe, I will not contend with you, but as in a matter nei∣ther of faith, nor yet of anie great consequence supposing your owne peruerse glosses, I leaue you to your owne sense, as also I doe those Ro∣manists whoe vsed that argument against some of their aduersaries.
THE XVII. PERIOD. SIr Humfrey hath played the Iacke so long that in this his last section he playeth Iacke on both sides, telling vs in the title that he in∣tendeth to showe that the Protestant religion is safer by the confession of both parties, that is, both of Romanists & Reformers. But I knowe not to what end he made this section except is was onely to make the num∣ber of his sections euē, for I finde nothing in it but a new repetitiō of old matters so oftē alredy inculcated that my eares are wearie to heare them. And if Sir Humfrey was disposed to playe in the number, he ought rather to haue made choise of the od nūber thē of the euen as being in the Poets opiniō more pleasing to God, Deus numero inpare gaudet. But let this passe, for how soeuer hee doth, I for my parte desire not to stand vpon numbers but vpon substance. If he had brought either newe matter, or at the least, some new proofe of the old, it might per∣haps haue ben worth the labour to examen it, but I finde onely old matter & newe equiuo∣cations, sleights, & falsities, & these onely I will breefely discusse. But the whole drift of the knight in this his last sectiō is, as he saith him selfe, to make good the title of his booke, which is that therfore
hee & his fellowes are in the safer way be∣cause quotteth he, the Romanists agree with vs in the principall points of doctrine: & because that is the safer way wherin differing partes ioyne both in one, & this I hould to be the sub∣stance of his whole discourse if anie ther were to be founde in it. First therefore he telleth vs great newes to wit that there is a Heauen & a hell, in the be∣leefe of which, sayth hee, wee both agree, & thence he concludeth that this is the safer way because both sides ioine in it. But this, if you marke it, is meere Sophistrie, for in stead of a whole way both in this particular and in the rest of the points of controuersie he passeth throu' in this section, he sheweth but a peece of a way. The whole way which he ought to shewe in this one point is the reformers beleefe of heauen & hell & their denyall of Purgatory & limbus, Now Sir Humfrey putteth in tru∣ly the first parte of his way to wit, the reformers beleefe of heauen & hell, (how true this is I knowe not) but he leaueth out deceitfullie the second parte of the way viz. the Reformers beleefe in the denyall of Purgatorie & Limbus, & so as I sayd before in stead of the whole way he sheweth but a peece, which peece altho' it be supposed to be neuer so safe, yet it will not serue the turne to bring a man to his iourneys end, nor yealdeth him anie more certaintie or
saftie in his way then he that should tell one who is vpō his iourney to yorke, that his safest way is to goe from London to Islinton, & there should leaue him to shifte for himselfe for his directions in the rest of the way, in which case certaine it is the traueller should be little or no∣thing obledged to him who shewes him that parte of the way onelie which all the world knoweth. And the trueth is that Sir Humfrey argueth in this whole matter as if he should say of himselfe & his fellow reformers, we & the Turkes agree in the creed of one God & differ in the beleefe of Christ the Messias, therefore it is the safer way to beleeue onelie in one God in which wee all agree, then to be∣leeue in God & Christ too, in which wee stand single. Euen so concludeth the knight of the faith of Purgatorie, Limbus, & the rest of the points in controuersy which he particularizeth in the discourse of this section, arguing no otherwise then in this absurde manner. Ney∣ther is it, ô Sir Humfrey, our standing single by our selues, or double with you that eyther maketh or marreth either the faith of Purga∣torie, or anie other article of the Roman do∣ctrine as you falselie & fallaciouslie suppose in your argument: But scriptures, generall Coun∣cells, Fathers & the authoritie of the most vni∣uersall Church are the pilars vpon which the house of our faith is built.
And as for your ioyning with vs in anie one article, or els in the generall assertion of some of your authours that wee may be saued in our Church, how soeuer it may seeme to some to be a confirmation of our faith, yet it is not anie parte of the foundation of our faith, but onelie a kynde of morall argument or motiue that we are in the safer way because euen some of our aduersaries themselues hould we may be saued in it. But yet as this alone, if other∣wise we did faile in the true grounds of our faith themselues, can not be a sufficient proofe that we are in the safer way then you, so ought it not to be a sufficient proofe that you are in the safer way because we agree with you in some parte of your doctrine. Especiallie con∣sidering you faile in the cheefe grounds of your faith as hath ben shewed partelie in my this cēsure, & partelie by other Catholike diuines in their seuerall workes. And if anie argument for the greater safetie of your way could be drawne from our agreement with you in some points of faith, so in like manner might we de∣duce a proofe of the greater saftie of our way from the certaintie of those points of faith in which you agree with vs, all which is but nu∣gatorie, friuolous, & absurd in regarde that as, a parte ad totum, from a parte to the whole no lawfull deduction can be made, so neyther can it be inferred that because one parte of the ob∣iect
of a mans faith is true, therefore the whole obiect of is faith is true by reason that notob∣standing one parte of the obiect be true, yet there may be in the whole obiect or matter trueth & falsitie mixed together, of which we haue instāces both in diuine & humane matters. And more then this, Sir Humfrey must giue vs licence to tell him that he was to forward in the proofe of his tenet. For before he went aboute to proue his way to be safer then ours, he ought first to haue conuinced his owne way to be a true & perfect way, & not to haue gi∣uen his reader a parte for the whole by a false Senecdoche, or contrarie to the Grammer ru∣les to obtrude vpon him a comparatiue with∣out a positiue, that is a safer way were no way is to be found at all, or at the least no safe & in∣tyre way. And yet more ouer it is to be obser∣ued that besides those positiue points of do∣ctrine in which he sayth that both partes agree, there be also diuers negatiues which they quite distinguish one from an other, which negatiues neuerthelesse are parte of the reformers faith as well as their positiue doctrine, & so in this parte of their Creed they stand single as well as we, & consequentlie if standing single, as he auerreth or at the least supposeth, doth hin∣der the safetie of our way, the same effect it must of necessitie haue in theirs, & according to this ground of Sir Humfreys it is manifest
that the reformers can neuer haue the safer way till we ioyne with them in euerie point thereof by that meanes to hinder their single standing, which yet we assure our selues will neuer come to passe, except God almightie re∣duce them to vs from whome they once de∣parted, as we greatlie desire & daylie praye. And according to this wee may breeflie an∣sere to all the rest of the instances which the knight produceth. And so we Romanists con∣fesse we stand with the reformers in the affir∣mation of heauen & hell, but we stand not with them in the deniall of Purgatorie & lim∣bus. We stand with them in the affirma∣tion of the merits and satisfactions of Iesus Christ: But we stand not with them in the negation of the merits & satisfactions of those that liue in the grace of God, & by the virtue of the same & the cooperation of their owne free will, performe good workes of charitie, mercie, iustice, & the like, houlding for cer∣taine with S. Augustin that he who created vs without vs, will not saue vs without vs: yet further assuring our selues that God doth not operate with bests & men both in one manner. We stand with them in the defence of Bap∣tisme & Eucharist so farre as they Orthodoxlie maintainte them, but we stand not with them in the impugnation of the other fiue Sacra∣ments.
We stand with them in that they af∣firme that the images of Christ & his Saints are ornaments & memorialls of the absent: but we stand not with them in their denyall of due honour to be exhibited vnto them for the great loue & reuerence we beare to Christ & his Saints. We stand with them in the defence of the diuine worship of God: but we stand not with them in the denyall of intercessiue inuo∣cation & honour of his Saints. We stand with them in that Christ is the prime mediator be∣twixt God & man: but we stand not with thē in their denyall of the secondarie mediators, or intercessors which are his seruants & frends. We stand with them in that Christ is head Monarch of the whole Church triumphant & militant: but we stand not with them in their denyall of the visible & Vicarious head the Pope or cheefe pastour of the visible Church in earth subordinate & subiet to Christ in the gouernement of the same. We will not refuse to stand with them in that they graunt that S. Peter had a Primacie of Order: but we stand not with then in that they denie his Primacie of power & Iurisdiction. We stand with them in that they teach there are 22. bookes of Ca∣nonicall scripture: but we stand not with them in the refusall of the booke of Tobie, Iudith, two first bookes of Machabees, the booke of
wisdome, Esdras & Baruch the Prophet. We stand with thē in that they affirme the scripture is the rule of faith: But we stand not with them in their denyall of diuine traditiōs, not properly added to the scriptures but commended by them & included in them in a general manner. We stand with them in that they say there are twelue articles of the Creed: But we stand not with them in their denyall of the rest of the doctrine defined in generall Councells: as nei∣ther doe we ioyne with them in the defence of all the 39. Articles of the English faith or Creed. And so now by these particulars the iudi∣cious reader may euidentlie perceiue that by reason the Romanists agree with the knight onelie in some parte or partiall of his doctrine, he could not possible proue by their confes∣sions the greater safetie of his way, as both in the title of this his last section, & also in the title of his whole booke he did propose. Nay he is so farre from the proofe of this, that he hath most apparentlie fayled in the proofe of the verie argument of his whole worke which to the end it may more plainelie appeare I will reduce to this Sylogisme. That faith is the safe way leading all Chri∣stians to the true, ancient & Catholike faith, which is proued by the confessions & testimo∣nies
of the best learned Romanists to haue ben visible in all ages especiallie before the dayes of Luther. But the faith now professed in the Church of England, is proued by the confes∣sions & testimonies of the best learned Roma∣nists to haue ben visible in all ages especiallie before the dayes of Luther. Therefore the faith now professed in the Church of England is the safe way leading all Christians to the true, ancient, & Catholike faith. Now there being contained in the minor of this Sylogisme the whole argument, purpose, & drift of Sir Humfreys whole booke, & yet neuerthelesse it hauing ben by mee in this my censure demonstrated not to haue ben proued and made good by anie argument by him produced, all he produceth to that purpose being voyde of force as by the discussion of the particulars of euerie section the reader may ea∣silie vnderstand, it followeth by a necessarie sequele that his way can not be safe, but is to be auoyded with most great care & circum∣spection as a false & erroneous path, by all those that tender the safetie of their soules & eternall Saluation. And thus hauing now resolued the man into his principles or prime matter I meane into the dust & ashes which he casteth in his reader eyes: & hauing passed throu' all the passages of
his imaginarie safe way, I haue founde it & shewed it to be no way at all, but an intricate diuerticle or obscure path leading pore distres∣sed trauellers quite out of the true royall street with an impossibilite euer to come to the end of their iourney, that is to the true ancient Catholike faith, which faith altho' the knight both in the title of his booke & in diuers other places of it, hath seriouslie promised to shew it to be the same which is now professed in En∣gland, euen by the confession of the Romanists yet haue I made it manifest that no true Ro∣manist that is no authour which is acknow∣ledged by the Roman Church for a member of the same, did either in generall or in parti∣cular euer confesse the foresaid faith of En∣gland to be the ancient Catholike faith, or that did euer, absolutelie & in the same sense in which the reformed Churches doe, defende anie one article of the pretensiue reformed do∣ctrine in matter of faith or generallie defined manners. In regard of which & because my cheefe intent was when I first resolued to vn∣dertake this busines out of a tender compassion to free the readers from the great & generall delusion which I vnderstood this pamphlet of Sir Humfreys had caused, or might hereafter cause in the myndes of manie, & especiallie the more vnlearned sorte of people, altho' in
verie truth in itselfe it containeth nothing worth the labour of a scholler, I doe now ad∣uertice them as they esteeme the saftie of their soules, to beware of it as of a shop of most de∣ceitelie & poysonous drugges of which they cā not safety taste without an antidote, I meane the illiterate or vnexperienced persons in this kynde of studie, can not securelie reade the the booke except with all they view the ad∣uerse parte, & so by detection of the authours fraudes, & couning deceipts they behould the truth discouered, which otherwise as being most subtillie inuolued & mixed by him with abundance of plausible vntruthes, equiuo∣cations, false suppositions & Sophismes, can hardlie be founde out euen by those of greater learning & capacitie then ordinarilie the laytie vse to be. And as for Sir Humfrey him selfe, altho' I haue smale hope of his reclamation in regard of the great arrogācy which I perceiue in him, as being mightily blinded with the vanity of his owne conceite, If truly the worke is this. yet will I not omit to crie a loude vnto him with the sacred psalmist, vtinam saperet & intelligeret, ac nouissima pro∣uideret, would to God he would seriously con∣sider that there will come a time when his booke shall passe a farre more strict examen & sentence of condemnation then here it hath
passed, or can possible passe in this mortall life. And yet if perhaps he findes in the answere of it, any more sharpe or vnpleasing speaches then he would willingly heare, I earnestly intreate him to account them not as spoken against his person, but precisely as he is infected with the spirituall plague of schisme & heresie, and as whose conuersion to the most vniuersally florishing Church an faith (notobstanding whatsoeuer wordes haue passed in heate of disputation) I earnestely desire & praye for. And with this desire & affection I commend him to the infinit goodnesse & mercy of all∣mightie God.
THE ROMANISTS AGREE WITH S. AV∣gustin in the diuision of the Commaundements. In his 71. question vpon the booke of Exodus and in his 119. epistle to Ianuarius he diuideth them in this manner. 1. THou shalt haue no other Gods but me. 2 Thou shalt not take the name of God in vaine. 3. Thou shalt sanctifie the sabboth. 4. Honor thy Father & thy mother. 5. Thou shalt not kill. 6. Thou shalt not commit adulterie. 7. Thou shalt not steale. 8. Thou shalt not beare false witnesse against thy neighbour. 9. Thou shalt not desire thy neighbours wife. 10. Thou shalt not desire any of thy neigh∣bours goods.
The Romanists in their briefe Catechismes for children commonly rehearse them thus. 1. THou shalt haue no other Gods but me. 2. Thou shalt not take the, name of God in vaine. 3. Remember to sanctifie the Sabbaoth day. 4. Honore thy ffather & thy mother. 5. Thou shalt not kill. 6. Thou shalt not commit adulterie. 7. Thou shalt not steale. 8. Thou shalt not beare false witnesse against thy neighbour. 9. Thou shalt not desire thy neighbours wife. 10. shalt not desire thy neighbours goods. The misreformers diuision of the Com∣maundements is this. THou shalt haue no other Gods but me. Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauen image &c. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vaine &c. Remember that thou keepe holy the Sab∣bath day &c. Honor thy father & thy mother &c. Thou shalt doe no murther.
Thou shalt not commit adultery. thou shalt not steale. Thou shalt not beare false witnesse. Against thy neighbour. Thou shalt shalt not couet thy neighbours house; thou shalt nor couet thy neghbours wife, nor his seruant, nor his made, nor his oxe, nor his asse, nor any thing that is his. In this diuision they dissent both frome S. Augustin & the scriptures as appeareth by their Catechismes publissed euer since the change of Religion in England. From S. Augustin, in that they put for the second Commaundement: thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauen image: where as hee on the contrary in his epistle to Ianuarius, expres∣sely putteth not for the second but for the first Commaundement these wordes. Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any idol. They dissent alsoe from the scripture both in that those wordes which they put for the second Commaundement, the scripture setteth them downe in the very same tenor & con∣tinuation of style with those which according to both parties is the first Commaundement, to wit: Thou shalt haue no other Gods but me, ad∣ding alsoe one & the same punishment after that which the Reformers will needs haue to be an other Commaundement, which yet if they were distinct commandemēts, they should
rather haue had distinct punishments assigned them seuerally. As also secondly because in the text of Exo∣dus out of which the reformers rehearse their Commaundements, the words are not, as they corruptedly translate & relate them. Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauen image, but: thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauen thing. Which is yet more plainely ex∣plicated in the fourth of the Deut. to be vnder∣stood not so that there ought not any grauen si∣militude to be made, but that ther ought not anie to be made of those things which God prohibited, especially supposing that the Deute∣ronomie as the word it selfe doth signifie, is an exacte explication of the lawe Exodus, & that that which in the first Commaundement is forbiden in the Exodus, in the 26. of the Leuiti∣cus the same is declared to be idolum, & sculp∣tile, that is an idol & a grauen thing. And thus wee see the reformers stand single in this matter, & that the Romanists in their diuision of the ten Commandements proceed vpon a most sound & approued foundation, it being both conformable to the doctrine of S. Augustin who they more willingly followe then anie other, & especially to the true sense of the scriptures them selues expounded ac∣eording to the orthodoxe faith and tradition of all succeeding ages.
A POSTCRIPT OF ADVERTISSEMENTS FOR THE READER. I Request the reader of my Censure so take notice of some particulars which oc∣curred since the finishing of it. And imprimis touching the homilie and epistles alledged by Sir Humfrey in the 9. se∣ction of his safe way against the reall pre∣sence and transsubstantion, I ansered in the 8. Period of my Censure what I conceiued at that present, to wit, that ther was not anie doctrine publikly or cōmonly read or pre∣ched in England contrarie so the reall pre∣sence, or transsubstantiation, or in anie pu∣blik manner deliuered to the people either by Alfric or anie other Bishop or Bishops in anie synod or publik assembly in those dayes. since which tyme of the dispatch of that worke some delaye hauing ben made in the cōmitting it to the presse, & hauing had greater opportunitie & leasure to view the histories of our countrie which trea∣te of the affayres of those ages in which Alfric liued, which was in some parte of the 10. and leuenth Centuries, by more exact examinatiō & search in to the matter
I finde my selfe assured of the trueth of that which I then deliuered. And now for grea∣ter satisfaction of the reader and more cle∣are conuincement of the same, I adde that touching Alfrics person, and state of life, he was first a monke by profession in the monasterie of Abington, and as Males∣burie relates, lib. 1. de gest. Pont. Aug. pag. 203. Abbat of the same: then Bi∣shop of wilton, and after Archbishop of Canterburie. Ther is diuersitie of opinions whether Siricius alias sigericus, or Alfric did immediately succeed S. dunstan in that seat, but that importeth little; cer∣taine it he was a Roman Catholique, Vid. Har∣psf. saec. 10. cap. 7. for that an ancient Chronicle writ by a mon∣ke of the same monasterie of Abington (wher of as I alledged our of Malesburie, Alfric was Abat) conuinceth testifying that he went to Rome for his Episcopall pall, as the custome was, which iourney Al∣fric would neiuer haue made, nor euer haue obtained his request, if he had not ben of the same faith in euerie point which at that tyme the Pope him selfe profes∣sed. That which also is most plainely demonstrated by an ample testimonie which the church of Canterburie gaue of the same Arcbishop Alfric, and at their request sent to the monkes of his order
and monasterie Abington for a perpe∣tuall memorie of his faith and manners: which for greater sattsfaction of the rea∣der, I will here rehearse at it as recorded by the foresaid religious man. To the children of the holy church of Can∣terburie the clergie, and the same church after their deuoute prayers. It is knowne vnto you all how long since it is that by the successes of diuers and various euents the mother church of En∣gland hath ben depriued of her pastor and destitute of her rector, which doth pertaine not onely to our losse but alsoe to the detriment of you and all this Iland, since it is appa∣rent that the sollicitude and care of the who∣le countrie is committed to the Metroplican. For which cause we haue elected Alfric by name monke of the holy church of Abington most sufficiently knowne vnto vs, noble in brith and maners, indued with Apostolicall and Ecclesiasticall discipline, and in faith a Catho∣lique, by nature prudente, docible, patient, tempe∣rate, chaste, sober, humble, affable, mercifull, lear∣ned, instructed in the lawe of God, cautelous in the senses of the scripture, exercised in Ecclesiasticall decrees or determinations. And according to the path of scripture, orthodox traditions, and Canons, and constitutions of the Prelates of the Apostolicall seat, vnderstanding, teaching, Praesulum Sedis Apo∣stolica. and obseruing the Ecclesiasticall rules in a sound
sense, and embracing that faithfull worde which is according to doctrine: and reprehending with modestie those whoe resist it; and hauing power to resiste and redargue them: hospitable, modest, well ruling his house, not a neophit; hauing a good opi∣nion or testimonie, ministering in euerie degree or order according to Ecclesiasticall tradition. Prepa∣red for all good workes, and to giue satisfaction to euerie one that shall demaunde it, of the hope which is in him. &c. Thus proceedeth the testi∣monie of the electors of Alfric. And to this I ioyne that S. Dunstan his im∣mediate predecessor (excepting Ethelgar or at the most according to the opiniō of some writers. excepting Ethelgar and Siricius whoe both liued but fiue yeares or ther a∣boutes) as our histories reporte at the ty∣me of his death spake much of the reall pre∣sence of Christ in the Eucharist in a sermon he made the same day he dyed. Svy S. Dunstan. And in like manner of Elphegus Alfrics successor it is reported by our English historians, he was such a mortifyed man by reason of his great abstinence, and fasting that when according to the custome of the Romā church he ele∣uated the sacred hoaste in masse, the refle∣cted ayre appeared as it were in a glasse throu' the iunctures of his fingers. Now tou∣ching the twoe immediate predecessors of Alfric which I mentioned before to wit Ethel∣gar
& Sricius neither anie historiographer nor yet anie of our aduersaries themselues doe note them to haue diuulged or admit∣ted in their tyme anie other doctrine con∣cerning the Eucharist then that which was then professed in the Roman church. By which it is manifest that both immediately before and immediately after Alfrics dayes, the same doctrine of the reall presēce which at this tyme the Romā church maintaines was cōmonly tought & practised in England and no other: soe that morally speaking it is not apprehensible that in the tyme of Al∣frics being Bishop of Canterburie which according to the computation of tymes was but ten yeares or littlemore, Godwins Catalogue. the con∣trarie doctrine and the denyall of the reall presence and transsubstantiation could haue bin publikly professed and publi∣shed by diuers Bishops in their synods as Sir Humfrey Line affirmes. Besydes this Lanfranc whoe in the next age succeeded Alfric in the seat of canterbu∣rie, habetur in vlt. edit. Bibl. Patr. tom. 11. in his booke against Berengarie of the sacrament of the Eucharist: som'at after the midest he speakes thus against his ad∣uersarie. Propulsatis iam quantum satis vi∣sum est calumnijs &c. hauing sufficiētly repelled the calumniations which with cantumely of Bishop Humbert & the Ro∣man
Church thou hast temerariously vt∣tered; it remaines that we expounde the faith of the holye church & the opinion of this sect, & that hauing expounded them we approue one & reproue the other by a fewe authorities & breefe reasons. For neither epistolar breuitie doth permit, nor anie rea∣son requires that we insert prolix testimo∣nies of either scriptures or arguments of dis∣putation. For such as ar faithfull people but seduced, doe not pertinatiously insist in defence of their deprauation: but rather ha∣uing heard & vnderstanded reasons, desire humbly to returne to the way of truth, fewe things will suffice. But those whoe ar ad∣dicted to contentions, & determined to per∣siste in their infidelitie, would not be satisfy∣ed althou manie reasons should be proposed vnto them. Diuinitus. Wherfore we beleeue that the terrestriall substances which in the table of our lord ar diuinely sanctifyed by preistlie ministration, ar infallibly incomprehensibly, & admira∣bly by operation of supernaturall power conuerted in to the essence of our lordes bodie, the species or formes of the things thē selues remaining with some other qualities least the receiuers should abhorre crude & cruent things: Cruda & cruenta. & to the end that the credents or beleeuers might receiue more ample re∣wardes
of their faith, the bodie of Christ it selfe existing neuerthelesse in heauen at the reight hand of his Father, Illeso. immortall vn∣uiolated, intyre, incontaminated, vnhurt, soe that it may truely be affirmed that we receiue the bodie of Christ which he assu∣med of the Virgin, and yet not the same. The same truly in respect of the propor∣ties of true nature and virtue: but not the same if you respect the species or formes of bread and wine; and the rest before com∣prehended. This faith from ancient tymes did hould and now holdeth that Church which diffu∣sed throù the whole world is named Catho∣lique: whence it is that, as it is said before, our lord said in the Euangill. Receiue and eate, this is my bodie. And this is the chalis of my bloud &c. In this cleare manner spea∣keth Lanfranc of the reall presence in this place. And page 346. of the same booke: he saith thus speaking of Ecclesiasticall histo∣ries. Which Scriptures saith he) altho' they doe not obtaine that most excellent tower of authoritie which those doe which we cal Propheticall and Euangelicall scriptures: yet they ar sufficiēt to proue that this faith which now we haue, all faithfull people which haue gone before vs, haue had the sa∣me from priuatiue tymes. A primis temporibus And page 347. the
same Lanfranc directing his speech to Be∣rengarie addeth thus. more ower if that be true which thou beleeues and maintaines of the bodie of Christ, vbique gentium. it is false which the church beleeues of the same matter in eue∣rie natiō. For all those whoe reioyce to be called, and to bee Christians, doe glorie in that they receiue in this sacrament the true flesh and bloud of Christs bodie receiued from the virgin. Inquire of all such as haue knouledge of the latin tongue, and of our writings. Inquire of the Grecians, Armeniās, or of Christian people of anie nation what soeuer, & they will with one mouth testifye that they haue this faith. Furthermore if the faith of the vniuersall church be false, either ther neuer was Catholique church, or she hath perished. nothing is more efficati∣ous for the perishing of soules then a per∣nicious error. But no Catholique will graunt that the church either was not, or that she hath perished. In this plaine sorte testifyes Lanfranc of the faith of the vni∣uersall church in which it were madnes to imagine he did not include his owne I meane the church of England. And suppo∣sing he liued & writ this the verie next age following the age in which Alfric dyed to wit in some parte of the leuēth centurie, it is more then monsterous impudencie in our
aduersaries to affirme that in the dayes of Alfric the denyall of the reall presence and transsubstantiation was commonely prea∣ched and beleeued in the Realme of En∣gland. Further more. Pascasius Rathbertus writ a booke intituled of the bodie and bloud of our lord against the doctrine of Bertram, as is cōmōly supposed althoù I finde him not named by Pascasius: & he hath alsoe an Epi∣stle of the same subiect to one Frudegard, with an exposition of those wordes of the Euangelist. Math. 26. Caenantibus autem illis &c. In all which writings Pascasius most plainely defendeth both the reall presence and trans∣substantiation, most frequently repeating and inculcating that the same bodie and bloud which Christ receiued of the Virgin Marie, and the same in which he was cruci∣fyed, is really and truely present in the Eu∣charist and offered in sacrifice. I need not relate his wordes for euerie particular, be∣cause I knowe our aduersaries can not de∣nye but that this Author is plainely for the Romanists and flat against them in those points of doctrine: onely I will rehearse so∣me generall wordes of his in which he decla∣res the faith of the vniuersall church in and before his tymes: for after testimonies of di∣uers āciēt fathers alledged to this purpose in
the conclusion of the foresaid wordes of S. Mathewe thus he saith. Ecce habes amantissi∣me &c. Behould most louing brother, thou haste in the end of this little booke the sentences of the Catholique Fathers com∣pendiously noted, by which thou maist learne that I haue not seene such things in rashnes of speech when I was a child, but that I haue proposed them by diuine authoritie, and by the authoritie of the ho∣lye Fathers to such as demaunded them. But now it being cleare that Since that ty∣me the faith of all men is not one and the same, then cease I praye to beleeue with such as they bee, if as yet they can not vn∣derstand that nothing is impossible to God, and lett them learne to assent vnto the diui∣ne wurdes in all things, & to doubt nothing of those: For till this present no man is read to haue erred in them except those whoe erred aboute Christ himselfe: not∣obstanding manie doubted or haue ben ignorant of the Sacraments of soe great a Mysterie: And afterwardes the same au∣thor in the same treatise saith thus. Qua ex∣pleta voce, &c. Which wordes being prono∣unced (meaning the wordes of consecra∣tion) we all with one consonant voyce say. Amen. And soe the whole Church in all na∣tions
and languages doth pray and confes∣se, that it is that thing which she prayeth for, wherby let him whoe will rather con∣tradict this then beleeue it regarde what he doth against our lord him self, against the whole Church of Christ. Therfore it is a nefarious and detestable villanie to pray with all and not to beleeue that which truth it self doth testifye, and that which vniuersally all in euerie place doe teach. Whence it is that since he him selfe affirmes it is his bodie and his bloud, doubt ought not to be made in anie thing, altho' we see not with carnall yes that which we beleeue. We haue seene alsoe what Pope Gregorie houldeth of this, what S. Cyrill with all his fellow Bishops assem∣bled in Ephesus, what Greece with them, what Egipt, and what S. Hierome him self whoe published the liues of the holye Fa∣thers in latin. And therfore not obstanding some erre in this by ignorance neuerthe∣besse as yet ther is none that openly con∣tradictes that which the whole world doth beleeue & confesse. Thus Pascasius a learned and venerable, and virtuous Abbat testi∣fyeth the faith of the vniuersall Church in his dayes touching the reall presence, of Christ in the Eucharist. Whoe altho'
he was not English nor liued iuste in the tyme of Alfric, yet he liued within the com∣passe of the same age in which Alfric was Bishop of wilton and Archbishop of Canter∣burie that is the yeare 900. yea it may be Pascasius was yet aliue whē Alfric was Abbat and consequently when he is supposed by our aduersaries to haue writ those epistles which they produce in his name concer∣ning this matter. Soe that by this testimo∣nie of Pascasius a forcible argument is made that the contrarie doctrine of the reall pre∣sence cauld not possible haue ben soe pu∣blick and common in anie parte of the Christian world in soe shorte a space of tyme as passed, (if anie passed) betwixt Pascasius and the writing of the homilie and Epistles attributed to Alfric if he did- euer write them. And how beit is may appeare by the wri∣tings of Pascasius that ther were some in, or aboute his tyme whoe argued & writ in an vnacustomed and new manner touching the doctrine of the presence of Christs bo∣die and bloud in the Sacrament as particu∣larly Ioannes, Scotus, Bertrame and Frude∣garde, yet as much as I can perceiue by read∣ing Pascasius, Fulbertus, Stephanus Eduēsis, & others whoe writ of this matter, the bro∣achers of this question did neuer absolutely
auerre and maintaine anie assertion directly repugnant to the true, and reall existence of Christs bodie and bloud in the Eucharist, but onely made a schoole question of it arguing the matter pro and contra: and that not determinately of the reall presence, but whether the same bodie, & bloud of Christ which was borne of the Virgin Marie & was crucifyed vpon the Crosse, was contained vnder the formes of bread and wine in the Sacrament, & not rather some other kynd of Christs bodie and bloud, yet truely his and truely present in the Eucharist, thou in a figuratiue and tropicall manner. And that neither the named authors nor anie other in or aboute Pascasius tyme did plainely or of set purpose impugne the reall presence, it plainely appeares by his wordes aboue cited affirming that not obst∣anding some erred by ignorance, yet that none did openly contradict that which the whole world did beleeue and confesse. That which is yet further confirmed, for we read not that either Scotus, Frudegard, or Bertrame were euer condemned by the Church in their persons in anie Councell, or otherwise, which is an euidēt signe they were not obstinate in defence of their opinions, but onely deliuered their doubts by way of proposition, as at the least in Frudegard
in particular, doth manifestly appeare by the responsion of Pascasius to his Epistle, saying thus. Quaeris enim de re ex qua multi dubitant. You inquire of a thing of which manie doubt. And for conclusion of his owne Epistle Pascasius saith to Frude∣gard. Tu autem velim, relegas libellum no∣strum de hoc opere. For I would haue you read my booke of this matter which you say you haue read in tymes past. And if you reprehend, or doubt of anie thing in it: let it not be tedious vnto you to reuiewe it. And finally towardes the end of his exposi∣tion of the wordes of the institution of the Eucharist, he speaketh to Frude∣gard in this manner. Quapropter charis∣sime. Wherfore most dearely beloued doe not doubt of this Mysterie which Christ the truth it self hath of him self bestowed vpon vs. For altho' he sits in heauen at the reight hand of his Father, yet doth he not disdaine to be Sacrifyced dayly by the preist in the Sacrament as a true hoaste. Now that the same Frudegardus doubt was onely whether the bodie of Christ contained in the Sacrament was the same bodie which he assumed of the Virgin Marie, is plaine by Pascasius anser saying thus almost in the beginning of his Epistle. Ergo cum ait. Wherfore when he saith
this is my bodie, or my flesh, or this is my bloud. I think he intimated no other flesh then his ow∣ne propter bodie which was borne of the Virgin Marie and hanged en the Crosse. Nor anie other bloud then that which was spilt vpon the Crosse, and which then was in his bodie. No man therfore which is soundly wise doth beleeue that Iesus had anie other flesh or bloud then that which was borne of the Virgin Marie and suffered vpon the Crosse. And for conclusion of his foresaid exposition he saith thus to the same Frudegard. Ad vltimum quaeso te. La∣stely I praye fallow not the fooleries of the tripar∣tite or triple bodie of Christ. Doe not mingle salt, nor hunnie in it, as some would, doe not adde nor substracte anie thing, but beleeue and vnderstand it all as Christ instituted, &c. As for Scotus and Bertrame althou' their bookes haue hen reproued, yet it doth not fallow that their authors did directly and absolutely impugne the reall presence, or transsubstantiation, but they onely deli∣uered their myndes in a doubtfull, ob∣scure, and ill sounding manner, for which cause and for auoyding of danger they were iustely prohibited, the onely the Councell of vercelles: the other by the purgatorie Index. Howbe it I find nothing in Bertram which with a pious interpretation might
not passe among the learned sorte of peo∣ple. And thus much may suffice for proofe that in Pascasius tyme ther had ben no plai∣ne denyall of the reall presence or transsub∣stantiation in the Christian world, but one∣ly some incident doubts made by some par∣ticular persons, and that in a discussiue manner, not as obstinate maintainers of such Doctrine. And now by this same and the rest which I haue aboue produced out of the same Pas∣casius & Lanfrāc and others, the false Arch∣bishop and Primate of Ireland is conuin∣ced of an apparent falsitie, for that in the 79. page of his anser to a Iesuits chalenge, he had the face to affirme that til the dayes of Lanfranc this question of the reall pre∣sence continued still in debate: and that it was as free for anie man to followe the Do∣ctrine of Bertram (he calles him Ratran∣nus) or Ioannes Scotus, as that of Pasca∣sius. This audatious affirmation of vsher I say is clearly condemned of falsitie by the same Pascasius whome he citeth, and whoe as I haue alledged, testifyes that the do∣ctrine of the reall presence in his tyme was not as yet contradicted by anie (except tho∣se whoe denye Christ) but beleeued and professed by the whole world, althou some, saith
he did erre in the same by ignorance. And this onely by way of diuertion, breefly to signifye to the reader how common a pra∣ctise it is euen among the most famous of our aduersaries to maintaine their doctrine by lyes and false dealing of which I per∣ceiue by a breefe vewe I tooke of some parte of his worke an industrious reader may discouer no smale stoare in the great primate doctor Vsher, as well as his fellowes. But now to returne to my direct pur∣pose, I yet more efficatiously confirme that which I haue said of Alfric by the chro∣nologie of our English historians. In his cata. wulstan dunst. For first according to the computation of Bishop Godwin ther passed onely some six yeares betwixt the decease of wlstā in the Archibi∣shoprie of yorke, & the promotiō of S. Dū∣stan to the seat of Canterburie in which space, as likewise in the tyme of wulstan himself it is quite incredible that ther was anie doctrine cōtrarie to the reall ptesence cōmōly toucght in England, since S. Dun∣stan at the day and houre of his death expressely professed the same as out of our owne histories I haue alreadie showed by the relation of Harpesfeld.Vid. Osbor¦ne in vita dunst. Besides this it is certaine ther were but onely twoe wulstans Archbishops of yorke as appeareth by Godwins Catalogue: the
one as he reporteth deceased the yeare 955. which was at the least fortie yeares before Alfric possessed the seat of Canterburie ac∣cording to the account of the same catalo∣gue. The other wulstan as the same Goduin recounteth began not his seat at yorke till the yeares 1003. which was more then 50. yeares after the death of the first wulstan. now this conographie being thus establi∣shed euen by one of our aduersaries: Safe way. sect. 9. §. 2. I ar∣gue in this manner against knight Humbrey affirming that the homilie and Epistles which he alledgeth were translated by Al∣fric, and appointed to be read to the people in his dayes, my argument is this. If this supposed homilie, and Epistles were euer translated, written, or published by Alfric, ei∣ther it was when he was. Abbat, or Archbishop. But neither of these is true. Therfore it is not true that the homilie and Epi∣stles were euer translated or published by Alfric. The Minor which onely hath need of prose I conuince by the testimonie of my aduersarie, whoe affirmes the translation and publication of the freifaid writings to haue ben a boute the yare 996. Sir Humf. page 92. and directed to wulstan Archbishop or yorke and wulf∣stius Bishop of sherborne by Alfric Abbat, I meane the Epistles. And yet at this tyme
neither was Alfric Abbat but Archbishop of Canterburie, neither was either of the two wulstans Archbishop of yorke at that tyme. the one being dead 40. yeares be∣fore, and the other not inuested in that dig∣nitie vntill the yeare 1003. as Godwin doth witnesse. soe that by this argument it ma∣nifestly appeares that the knights relation touching this matter of the publishing of the homilie and Epistles alledged by him- against the reall presence and transsub∣stantiation is contradictious & voyde of truth. More ouer I finde in our English histo∣ries that aboute the yeare 950. which was some fortie and od yeares before Alfric was preferred to be Archbishop of Canter∣burie, Vid. Harps in the tyme of Odo Archbishop of the same seat, ther were some conuented before him whoe were in an erroreous opi∣nion aboute the presence of Christs bodie in the Eucharist, but the maintainers of it (how soeuer Fox doth fable) neither were manie, nor did it long continue, but was miraculously at an instant exstinguished. For the pious & zealous pastor Odo much lamenting the illusion of those miserable people, prayed God with teares in masse, that his diuine maiestie would be pleased by his infinit power manifestely to shewe
some thing by which both the truth of the reall presence might appeare, and the con∣trarie error might be confounded, when so∣dainely at his seruants petition God al∣mightie turned the consecrated bread in to visible flesh, and the wine in to visible bloud. Which wonderous spectacle being seene, the incredulous persons presently complained of their owne perfidie and mis∣beleefe, and all the rest of their dayes con∣serued their faith intire and sounde: now this hauing happened aboute the same tyme at which that wulstan was Archbishop of yorke whoe hauing ben in that place some yeares: deceased the yeare 955. as Godwin relateth, it clearely appeares incredible that Alfric then Abbat should direct anie doctrine repugnant to the reall presence to wolstan Archbishop of yorke, and to vlsine, vlsius, or wulfstius Bishop of sher∣bourne, as our aduersaries affirme, since that Odo Archbishop of Canterburie and Pri∣mate of England, at the verie same tyme, as of out of histories I haue rehearsed, did by the power of God operate soe strange a miracle in confirmation of the same, and confutation of the contrarie error. More then this, Vlsin or vlsius whome the knight calles wulfstius (of which name neuerthelesse I finde none in Malesburies
Catalogue of the Bishops of Sherbourne) could not possible haue anie Epistle dire∣cted unto him by Alfric while he was Abbat of Malesburie or Abington, as Sir Humfrey and the rest of these tryfelers alledge, for that while Vlsine, or wulfstius was Bishop of Sherbourne which was but onely fiue yea¦res, as our histories doe testifye, Hrapsfeld. saec. 10. c. 9. being Abbat onely of westminister in the dayes of S. Dunstan and by his procurement, whose death happened the yeare .988. as Stowe re∣lates: Alfric was no more Abbat but Bis∣hop of wilton, and consequently he could not as Abbat write to Vlsine, Vlsius, or wulf∣stius Bishop of Sherbourne, but if he had writ anie such letters as our aduersaries at∣tribute vnto him, to that Bishop, he should haue styled him selfe not Abbat, but Bis∣hop as in deed he was all the tyme yea and some yeares before the foresaid wulfstius was by king Ethelred preferred to the Epi∣scopall seat of Sherbourne. But that which doth strik this quite dead, is that (ther hauing ben but onely twoe wolstans Archbishops of yorke) the first wolstan dyed before euer Alfric was Abbat, to wit the yeare of our Lord 955. wher as Ingulphus in Edgar relates Alfric to haue ben created Abbat onely aboute the yeare 970. at the soonest, soe that he
could not possible write anie Epistles to the first wolstan while he was Abbat as our no∣uellists pretend, bebause this wolstan was departed out of this life before Alfrics tyme of being Abbat. And as for the se∣cond wolstan it is well knowne and testi∣fyed by Godwin that he was not Archbi∣shop of yorke before the yeare 1003. At which tyme Alfric was not Abbat but Archbishop of Canterburie as our ad∣uersaries them selues refuse not to graun∣te. And soe this computation and collation of tymes vtterly destroyes the machination of our abuersaries in attrituting the fore∣said writings to Abbat Alfric. And touching Vlsius or Vlsinus I adde to this that Alfric was consecrated Byshop of wilton in the yeare 985. or ther aboutes so∣me fourteeme yeares after the coronation of Ethelred. lib. 1. de. Pont Aug. pag. 203. And he sate 11. yeares in that place as Malerburie relates. But now Vlsine as it appeares by a breef of Iohn the 15. Po∣pe of this name touching the peace he composed betwixt king Ethelred and Ri∣chard marques of Normandie, was Byshop of Sherbourne aboute the yeare 991. of which yeare the Popes letter carieth date, in which althou the Pope doth not call him Vlsine, but Edelsine, yet both by the tyme
and place of his seat, as alsoe for that ther is noe other in the Catalogue of the Bishops of Sherbourne yeare the after in which I finde related by Ingulpsus, Alfrics was Abbat of malesburie which resembleth that name; it is conuinced that this is the same man which the kinght calleth wulfstius, and to whome he affirmes one of Abbat Alfrics E∣pistles to haue ben directed. which neuer∣shelesse is concluded to be false in regard that at that tyme of the date of the Popes Epistole to wit the yeare 991. Alfric was not Abbat but Bishop, this hauing happe∣ned but fiue yeres before that Alfric then Bishop of wilton, was assumpted to the Arcgbishoprie of Canterburie which was the yeare 996. as all agreeably testi∣fye. Now if our aduersaries should say that this Vlsius, Vlsine, or Edelsine is not that Bis∣hop of Sherbourne to whome they meane that Alfric writ his Epistle, but an other long before him called wulfstius. To this I replye, first that I finde not this name of wulfstius in anie author or Ca∣talogue of the Bishops of Sherbourne, and soe I suspect it is a tricke of knight Hūfrey whoe as it seemes first inuēted the name, Westminst. an 940. sup∣posing I finde it not in anie other either freī∣de or for the name of anie Bishop of that seat. Secondly.
It is true histories make mention of one Vlsius Bishop of that seat and successor to Alfred, but neither the name agrees to knight Humfreyes feigned wulfstius, nei∣their was he then in the world when Alfric was Abbat, but according to the catalogue annexed to Ingulphus, deceased the yeare 966. For whose successor the same catalo∣gue putteth Alfwoldus. wheres yet it appea∣res by the testimonie of Ingulphus that Alfric was not Abbat till either in, or after the yeare 970. by which it is cleare he could not write to this vlsius or wulfstius as Abbat, in respect he was dead some yeares before Alfric was preferred to that place by ap∣pointement of king Edgar. and soe this euasion is intercepted by the way and ap∣peares to be frustrate and false. Further more according to Bishop Vshers chronologie affirming that Alfric writ his homilie aboute 605. yeares a goe Alfric should haue writ the same the yeare 1026. or ther aboutes, deriuing the accoūte frō the tyme of Vshers publicatiō of his booke; for soe by putting fiue or six yeares which I sup∣pose hath passed since the tyme of Vshers writing, to the 605. yeares which he assig∣neth for the tyme in which Alfric writ, & ioining to all this 1026 or 7. the whole nū∣ber amountes iust to 1632. which is the
yeare we now liue in. But this implyes im∣possibilitie in regarde it is receiued by both parties that Alfric dyed the yeare 1006. that is some 20. yeares before 1026. which Vsher assignes for the yeare of Alfric's wri∣ting the homilie by which it appeares that Primate Vsher is a most prime yea and a most vnmyndefull lyer in attributing this writing to Abbat Alfric. And concer∣ning the writing of Alfrics twoe supposed E∣pistles, if Vsher meanes they were writ and directed to wulfsine and wulstane at this sa∣me tyme, he is likewise manifestly conuin∣ced of falsitie, for that at the tyme assigned by him, ther was no vlsius, vlsine or wulfsine (as he nameth him) Bishop of sher∣bourne in the world to whome Alfric could haue directed anie writings, the last of that name being dead the age before as I haue shewed, as alsoe the first wulstan Arcbishop of yorke. True it is the second wulstan of yorke was then a liue to wit vnto the yeare 1023. but then Alfric being dead Archbishop of Canterburie (as I haue showed by God∣wins Catalogue) almost 20. yeares before, the supposed direction of Epistles vnto him is euen in that respect concluded for repugnant and impossible with a plaine dissent of the author from him self as affir∣ming the publication of these writings to
haue happened in the dayes of Alfric, & yet onely aboute 605. yeares agoe. More ouer these relators agrees in their Chronographie like dogges and cattes, the partes of which hange togither as theeues hang vpon the gallowes neuer a one ioyn∣ing to an other. For as I haue said, Vsher affirmes Alfric Abbat's Saxon homilie to haue ben writen by him aboute 605. yeares which according to true computation con∣sidering the tyme in which Vsher writ this, comes to fall about the yeare 1020. In the 2. §. of the 9. sect of his safe way. But Sir Humfrey speaking of the same homilie, saith it was publikely appointed to be read to the people on Easter day aboute the yeare 996. at which tyme Alfric was not Abbat but Arcbishop of Canterburie, as euen our aduersaries them selues doe relate: and soe these twoe brothers in Christ pro∣ceed not like brothers but repugne plaine∣ly one to an other in their accountes: the knight affirming the foresaid homilie to haue ben published & read some 24. yeares before Vsher alledgeth, it to haue ben writ∣ten. Besydes this, Alfric dyed Arcbishop of Canterburie the yeare 1006. Godwin in Alfric p. 65. according to Godwins Catalogue. How then could he possible write his homilie aboute 605. yeares agoe as Vsher tells vs? that is the yeare of our lord 1020. as I haue declared: except Al∣fric
did miraculously rise againe to broache the new English faith of the Eucharist, which our aduersaries will needs defende for ancient thou' it cost them as deare as the forgeing of a false historie. More ouer the publisher of the same wri∣tings I meane the homilie and Epistles printed at London 1623. vnder the name of Alfric, telles vs, he writ them 700. yeares agoe in king Edga'rs tyme which falles ium∣pe with the yeare of Christ 923. if we coun∣te from the tyme of the foresaid publicatiō of them. And yet as both Malesburie, Stowe, & the rest of our historians testifye, Edgar was not created king vntill the yeare of our Souiour 959. soe that here is an apparent blurre in this wise Conographer's compu∣tation inuolueing both an impossibilitie in it self, and a contradiction to the rest of his companions in this busines, whoe as I haue declared attribute them to Alfric in the tyme of Ethelred aboute some 600. yeares since, others some yeares befo∣re. Lastely Fox in his Acts and monuments althou' he doth not dissent from his follo∣wes (excepting the fore said late publisser) in his assignation of the tyme in which the homilie imputed to Alfric, is by them af∣firmed to haue ben proposed for the instru∣ction
of the people in England, viz. abou∣te the yeare 996: neuerthelesse in two se∣uerall respects he proceedes most deceite∣fully and quite contrarie to common ho∣nestie, and reason. First for that he feigneth and prefixeth a title against the reall pre∣sence and transsubstantiation to the said homilie; secondly because in his rehearsall of the tenor of the same, he leueth our the relation of two most manifest and palpa∣ple miracles for the proofe of both those points of the Catholique faith in it alled∣ged by the author, which craftie and vul∣pine trickes of Fox (with which and manie others of like nature he farceth his huge volumes) as it appeares seemed soe shame∣full that his successor the late diuulger of the same homilie was ashamed to imitate him: yea and not obstanding he was bo∣unde vnder paine of losse of the labor of his translation and publication of that worke which otherwile he well considered would haue ben in vaine, to taxe the said miracles of fiction (as he did in a mar∣ginall note) yet was he not soe impudent nor frontlesse as to raze thē quite out of the copie. inexcusable deceipt in Fox. And how be it I cā not denye but ther is a great difference belweene these twoe a∣ctions, yet must they giue me licence to tell
them that neither of them both is cleare of ill proceeding, the one being guiltie of plaine imposture, the other of plaine teme∣ritie. For supposing they would venture to make vse of the homilie for the aduantage of their denyall of the reall presence and transsubstantiation, for all that, they ought to haue taken it as they founde it for better or for worse, & not goe a boute to pick out what they finde for their purpose, and cast a may the rest, like such vnreasonable cate∣rers as will needes buye flesh without bones. And in deed those twoe, bones that is those twoe most patēt & cleare miracles by which both the reall presēce of the bodie & bloud of Christ in the Eucharist ar manifestly de∣monstrated against the new doctrine of these our tymes, were too harde for old Fa∣ther Foxs teeth to chewe, or for his sto∣make to disgeast, therfore doubtlesse he left them out both in his saxon and English transsumpte. But these sycophants as they deale with the scriptures them selues, soe they deale with ancient authorities & te∣stimonies. lib. de bono person. c. 11. Suo quidem priuilegione dicam sacri∣legio vtquod volunt accipiant, quod nolunt reijci∣ant. as S. Augustin said of the Manichies. Againe concerning the Epistles attribu∣ted to Alfric ther is yet more discorde a∣mong our aduersaries. For the publisher of
them and the homilie aboue mentioned in his preface vnto them affirmes ther were certaines lines rare zout of a booke extant in the librarie of worceter which lines, saith he, which contained the cheefe point of cōtrouersie (that is as he supposeth against the reall presence and transsubstantiation) were taken out of twoe Epistles of Alfric written by him as well in the Saxon tongue as in the latin. But Doctor Iames and Sir Humfrey tell vs that the foresaid passage was razed in a latin Epistle ma∣nuscript of Bennitts Colledge in Cam∣brige yet there to be seene. And wheras the author of the publication saith that the li∣nes razed ar to be restored by twoe other Epistles of the same Alfric in latin extant in the librarie of Exceter, contrarily D. Ia∣mes tolleth vs they ar to be restored not by anie latin copies, but by certaine Saxon copies of the same Epistles which he affir∣meth to haue ben in the publike librarie of Oxon when he writ his booke which was the yeare 1611. Besydes this the same Ia∣mes out of Fox saith the Epistle which he affirmes to haue ben thus mangled and torne was to wulfstan Archbishop of yorke and hath for title, de consuetudine Monacho∣rum: wheras yet the foresaid publisher of Alfrics new founde writings, intileth that
Epistle of Alfric de consuetudine monachorum of the order or manner of monkes, Egne∣shemensibus fratribus, to the fryres or bro∣thers of Egnesham. Which iarres I confesse I am soe vnable to compose that I can not but vehemently suspect these mens repor∣tes to be false and counterfet. Especially considering that Iames affirmes the latin Epistle soe razed as they reporte, to haue ben directed by Alfric to that wulstan whoe was Archbishop of yorke aboute the yeare 954. wher as yet the author of the pam∣phlet in which these writings ar contained, in his prefate to the same, saith that this Al∣fric to whome he attributes them was equall to Alfric Archbishop of Canterburie which he alsoe affirmes to haue ben in that seat six yeares before that wulstan to whome Al∣fric's Epistle was writen, was Archbishop of yoke: soe that the one reportes this Epistle to haue ben wriren to the first wulstan and the other to the second not obstanding all histories and Cathologues of Bishops (among which is Godwins) doe testifye soe long a space of tyme to haue passed betweixt their standings, as it is from the yeare 955. and 1003. soe that these twoe re∣lators drawe back warde and fore ward like twoe ill match asses. More ouer the foresaid publisher will
needs haue Alfric the supposed author the homilie and epistles to haue ben a distinct man from that Alfric whoe was Archbi∣shop of Canterburie wheras neuershelesse Iohn Leland whoe professedly writ of the writers of England relating the seuerall workes of Alfric the Archbishop of Canterburie maketh noe mention of anie other writers of that name but of him one∣ly, neither doth he put anie epistle among his writings but onely one intituled, de con∣suetudine Monachorum, of the māner or cu∣stome of monkes, which subiect how farre it disagreth frō the presence of Christs bo∣die in the Eucharist, and transsubstantia∣tion, I leaue to the iudgement of the reader to consider. In fine to conclude my whole discourse touching this matter I say first, that if it were true as our aduersaries pretend that in the foresaid writings ther weere anie thing contained contrarie to the reall presence and transsubstantiation, yet haue I cōuin∣ced by insoluable reasons that neither Al∣fric could be the author of them, neither could anie such doctrine haue ben publike∣ly maintained in the Church of England in or aboute his dayes. But what soeuer do∣ctrine was then published and tought in our countrie was canformable in all points with
the doctrine and faith then professed in the Church of Rome with which the English Church and her Pastors had corresponden∣ce and subordination as I haue manifestly declared. Secondly Althou I am not able to iudge determinately whoe might be author of those writings because I haue noe mea∣nes to come to the view of them otherwise then in that patched and mangled manner in which they are published by our aduer∣saries: neuerthelesse I persuade my selfe they were writ by some Romane catholique author, soe that taken in their innocencie and prime puritie and piously interpreted they containe no vnsounde or erroneous doctrine, but rather expresse testimonie and proofes of diuers points controuersed be∣twixt the nouellists of these our tymes and catholike Romanists. As appeareth in the mention they make of masse, miracles, the signe of the Crosse, and other particulars which I haue noted in my censure. Thirdly. the iudicious reader may easily persuade him self that supposing these wri∣tings according to the relation of our ad∣uersaries, haue remained in publike places and libraries for the space of aboue 600. yeares, if they had cōtained anie doctrine re∣pugnāt to that faith of the Eucharist which I haue historically demonstrated aboue to
haue ben professed in our countrie of En∣gland euer since, and before, that tyme: its more then morally euident they would haue receiued long a fore this tyme repre∣hension, or censure according to their desert. Finally. Supposing it were true that the foresaid writings did in deed containe do∣ctrine contrarie to the reall presence, and transsubstantiation as they ar beleeued and defended by the professors of the Roman Religion wheras yet they doe not soe, but onely exclude the carnal, palpaple or Ca∣pharnaitical presence of Christ in the Eucharist, and instruct the people in the inuisible presence of his bodie, and bloude in the Sacrament in an obuius and easie māner: yet in reasō ought not anie iu∣dicious Catholique to alter his faith of the same for anie argument which can be dra∣wne or deduced from such testimonie as is voyde of other credit then is to be giuen to aduersaries in fauor of their owne cause which is iust none at all, especially they being no other then these whoe not onely in this particular, but alsoe in other matters of controuersie haue vsed much partialitie, & deceipt as in an other place I haue demonstrated out of their seuerall
workes. And in particular the publisher of the same pamphlet in which the homilie & Epistles of which I heare treate, are contai∣ned, besides diuers vntruthes which he vt∣tereth as well touching the author and ty∣me of his writing, as alsoe his titles and marginall notes, and likewise in that he couningly and couseningly publisheth in the same volume a treatise of the ould, and new testament in the name of Alfric as if it included a different canon of scripture to that which is now vsed in the Roman Church, and agreeable to their now En∣glish Bible: which is yet most apparently false for that (as I remēber) it putteth in the number and order of the Canonicall boo∣kes Ecclesiasticus, Sapience, Tobie, Iudith and the Machabeis, which yet our aduersa∣ries reiect for Apocryphal: As alsoe in that more ouer the same Pampheter addeth a testimonie to shewe that in tymes past the lords prayer, the creed and the ten com∣maundements were extant and vsed in the vulgar tongue; a worke most imperti∣nently performed by him, and as it seemes onely or cheefely to enlarge the bulke and price of his pamphlet: it being certaine that the Romanists neuer neither held that mat∣ter vnlawfull, or at this present prohibit the
vse of the vulgar language for the ten com∣maundements and priuate prayer of the common people but rather the contrarie as both their Catechismes and their daylie practise most plainely witnesse. By all which particulars and the rest of this my aduertissement it is euidently ap∣parent that the glorious which the no∣uellists of our countrie make by their publication of the homilie epistles and o- writings in the name of Alfric, be no other then certaine prestigious impostures to persuade the simple sorte of people by the∣se false florishes, that their denyall of the reall presence of the bodie and bloud of Christ in the Eucharist, and transsubstantia∣tion is not quite voyde of antiquitie, but hath ben preached and professed in our countrie before the dayes of luther. And now let this suffice to repulse this fictitious and deceitefull calumniation of our ad∣uersaries touching these putatiue wrings of Alfric by the publication of which and the like counterfeit wares they pick simple peoples purses whoe take all for as true as gaspell that is put in print by anie of their owne brothers. The second aduertissement I giue to the reader is that wheras the kinght page 205. of his fafe wais cites Agobard for a denyer of
honor of image in his booke of that sub∣iect: Agobardus Episc. Lugdun. li. de pict. & imag. I haue dilgently perused the same, and finde that in deed this author speaketh mo∣re harshely of this matter then anie other catholique writer of these dayes how be it this was the age in which images had their greatest enimies. Neuerthelesse it is most certaine this author onely confutes the ex∣hibition of diuine honor and the like, vnto images, as is sacrifice, or confidence in them or prayer vnto them: reprehending the er∣ror of some particular persons whoe super∣stitiousely adored them, for soe he discour∣seth a boute the end of his booke saying. But none of the ancient Catholiques did euer thinke them to be worshiped or adored: yet now the error by increase is become soe perspicuous that it is neare, or like to the heresie of the Antropomorphits to adore figments and to put hope in them, and that by reason of this error faith being remoued from the harte, all our confidence be placed in vi∣sible things. And a little after. Soe alsoe if we see penned or fethered Angels painted, the Apostles preaching, martyres suffering torments, we must not expect anie helpe from the pictures which we behould, because they can neither doe good nor ill: rightly therfore (these are the wordes cited by the kinght) to euacuate such superstition it was defined by orthodox Fathers that pictures should not be made in churches least that which
si worshiped and adored be painted in the walles which wordes being not his owne but al∣ledged out of a fragment of the Prouinci∣all councell of Eliberis in Spaine and ha∣uing ioyned them imediately to his owne in which he onely treates of diuine honor as not due to images, it is cleare and euident he intendes to proue nothing else by their au∣thoritie then that which he there proposeth. To omit that this passage of the Eliberitan coūcell was deliuered in a sense much diffe∣rent from this in which Agobardus con∣strueth it, as I haue conuinced in others pla∣ces, and occasions. And that this author intendes to teache nothing else, but onely that images must not be honored with worship due to God, the seuerall testimonies which he largely produceth out of S. Augustin, S. Hierome, & other ancient writers doe manifestly de∣monstrate, not one of which can be taken (if they be truely vnderstanded) in anie other sense, as clearely may appeare to the diligent reader of their wordes, which ex∣pressely exclude onely honor of Sacrifice, prayers directed vnto the images them sel∣ues, or religion proper to God onely, in the worship of saincts, and their pictures: and alsoe Agobardus him self vppō occasiō of the places which he citeth doth auerre,
plainely declaring that he graunteth some sorte of honor to images wher thus he ex∣horteth. Let vs behould the picture as a picture desti∣tute of life, sense, and reason: let the eye be fed with this vision, but let the mynde reuerence God whoe both giues to his saints a crowne of victorie, and to vs the assistance of their intercession. And the like he affirmes of honor of saincts a little aboue in this same page. Wher althou' he iustely reserueth the supreame worship of Sacrifice to God a lone, yet he expressely grauntes an other inferior honor to Saints and Angels saying. Adoretur, colatur, venere∣tur a fidelibus Deus, &c. Let God be adored, wor∣shiped, or serued, and reuerenced by faithfull people, let Sacrifice be offered to him a lone, either in the mysterie of his bodie and bloud, or in the Sacrifice of a contrite and humble harte, let Angels or holye men be loued, honored, with charitie, not with seruitude, let not Christs bodie be offered vn∣to them. And according to this sense Ago∣bardus speakes throu' his whole booke, particularly in his second leafe wher he re∣prehendeth certaine idolaters whoe imagi∣ned a certaine sanctitie to reside in images saying. In which nature these alsoe whoe call images holye, are founde not onely Sacrilegious for that they giue diuine worship to the workes of their handes, but alsoe foolish in attributing san∣ctitie
to images which haue no life or soule. By all which wordes it is cleare that Agobarde onely condemnes the exhibition of such honor to saincts, or images as is due to God a lone. Which doctrine is soe farre from being anie way contrarie to the honor of images practised in the Roman Church that it doth rather exactely agree with the ho∣nor of the Councell of Trent in this parti∣cular, which in the 25. Session defines that, due honor is to be giuen to images not because it should be beleeued that ther is anie diuinitie or vir∣tue in them for which they ar to be worshiped, or that anie thing should be craued of them, or that confidence or hope should be put in thē, as in tymes past the Gentiles did, whoe placed their hope in Idols, but because the honor which is exhibited vnto them is referred to the prototypes or persons which they represent. soe that by the images which we salute or kisse, and before which we vncouer our head, and prostrate our selues, we adore and reuerence Christ, and the saints whose representa∣tions or similetudes they beare. True it is, I haue noted in reading his booke that Agobard purposely refuseth to vse these wordes adorare, colere, adore, or ser∣ue: yet I plainely gather by his whole dis∣course, he doth not soe to signifye ther by that images ar not to be vsed with anie ho∣nor at all, as I haue alreadie declared by his
owne text: but onely declineth the vse of those wordes in regarde he takes them in a strict sense, as they signifie religion or ho∣nor proper to God him self, and not due to anie creature: and perhaps alsoe becau∣se at that tyme as it may seeme by his nice∣nes, and some others of that age, the worde adoration was offensiue euen to some whoe otherwise were both Catholique, and lear∣ned men: to say nothing of the common people some of whome peraduentute out of ignorance, and weakenes of iudgement, euen at this day make danger to vse it, and scruple to heare it: yet neither the one nor the other omitting to honore images ac∣cording to the approbation, and practise of the Church. Wheras yet if it be taken in the sense in which the Roman Church, ac∣cording to the definition of the 7. Synod and custome of diuines, accepteth it, that is for a kynde of inferior honor distinct from proper latrie and religion, and as (euen ac∣cording to the vse of scriptures) it signifyes worship common alsoe to creatures, then doth it include no manner of scandall or offense at all. Cumque introisset in conspe∣ctu Regis. & adoras∣set eum pro nus in ter∣ram &c. 3. Reg. 1. 24. And now in that rigorous meaning Ago∣bard takes the worde adoratiō when alled∣geing the same wordes of the Eliberitan Councell which Sir Humfrey here resear∣seth,
he intendeth onely to proue that ima∣ges ar not to be adored or serued: in which passage he proueth nothing against the Ro∣man Catholique honor of images, but one∣ly disputeth either against some reliquies of the Antropomorphitan heresie: or against some other superstitious, and idolatrous adorers of Saints & images of those dayes, from both which kyndes of errors as Ago∣bardus him self was, soe alsoe the Roman Church with her cheefe Pastors and rulers (to which he then was a subordinate mem∣ber, and prelate as other of his workes doe witnesse) were free and innocent as likewi∣se now they be in this our present age not obstanding the frequent calumniations of our moderne sectaries to the contra∣rie. Finally I adde to this that in the verie conclusion, and last period of his booke, Agobard expressely teacheth that genufle∣ction is to be made to the name of Iesus, which yet our Puritan aduersaries out of their singular puritie, or rather pure sin∣gularitie, reiect as idolatrous, not obstan∣ding by Gods commaundement, not onely men but deuils alsoe ar enioyned, and compelled to bowe their knees at the soun∣de of that soueraine name. And surely he who holdes this for lawfull, as Agobardus
doth, must for the same reasons hold it li∣kewise lawfull to honor the images of Ie∣sus, supposing that the name of Iesus being to be honored onely for the representation it hath of him, much more lawfully may his image be soe honored in regarde it doth more permanently and ferfectly represent him then doth his name which consists in carracters, and a transitorie sounde of let∣ters. Besides this, Agobardus as the verie first wordes of his booke doe declare, doth not directly and professedly treate in it of the honor and vse of images as it is practi∣sed in the church, but of the sense of the first commaundement, in which he includes the prohibition of the adoration of images deliuered by God in the old Testament as a parte of the same, onely intending to proue in his whole worke that by virtue of this precept, diuine honor is not to be tendered to anie creature but to God alone, & not to either idoles or images. And Therfore in his laste page the same Agobardus expressely speaketh of honor proper to God him self, applying to his purpose the wordes of Isaias honorem meum alteri non dabo. by all which it is most cleare∣ly apparent that what soeuer Agobarde see∣mes to vtter against the adoration of ima∣ges, is onely spoken against such as attribu∣ting
ouer much honor vnto them worship thē in an idolatrous, or superstitious fashion contrarie to the tradition of Fathers and practise of the Catholique Church as his wordes quoted in my margen sufficiently declare.haec est sin∣cera religio hic mos Ca¦tholicus haec antiqua pa∣trum tradi¦tio &c. Agobardus fol. vlt. post authorita∣tes Patr. citatus And soe I leaue him as no enimie to the Catholique cause, nor anie fauorer of the disalawers of the same in this parti∣cular point, how be it the ambiguitie of his speech may giue occasion of error to igno∣rant, or ill affected readers. To this I ioyne my responsion to the o∣ther wordes cyted by our aduersarie in the same place & out of the same booke of A∣gobardus as I suppose, for he ioynes them to the rest of those which ther he had. to wit these which followe. Ther is nos example in all the scriptures, or Fathers for adoration of images. They ought to be taken for an ornament to please the sight, not to instruct the people. To which I answer in primis, touching the for∣mer parte of the sentence, Agobardus hath no such expresse wordes as those; he onely saying thus: the ancients alsoe had the images of saint painted, or graued: but for rem∣brance not to worship them: which wor∣des ar soma't different from those other re∣hearsed by sir Hum. neuerthelesse because they seeme to include a denyal of honor of images, I responde secondly. Agobard ta∣kes
the wordes colere & adorare which ther he vseth, in the same sēse in which he vseth them in the rest of his booke; that is for diuine honor as I haue aboue declared by seueral passages of the same. According to which acception his wordes ar verie true, nor anie way repugnant to the doctrine of the Roman Church either in those dayes, or at this present tyme, which as in all for∣mer ages, soe in this in which we liue doth zealously detest, and abhorre as plainely idolatrous all diuine adoration of creatu∣res, tho' neuer so eminent either in nature, or grace. Thirdly to the latter parte of the same sentence, I say confidently, I am sure ther ar no such wordes in Agobardes boo∣ke euen as it is published and printed at Pa∣ris by Papyrius Masson him selfe, out of whose Bibliotheke be it good, or bad, sir Humfrey produceth it: soe that I doe not vnderstand this iugling for other then plai∣ne forgerie, or falsification. Fourthly, those laste wordes. They (images) ought to be taken for an ornament to please the sight, not to instruct the people: ar iu∣ste contrarie to the doctrine of S. Gregorie teaching expressely that pictures ar the bookes of the illiterate, and simple people. Which doctrine of S. Gregorie, Agobarde was neither soe ignorant as not to knowe
it, nor yet soe impudent as to denye it. Fiftly, those same wordes manifestly di∣sagree to the rest of Agobardes owne do∣ctrine, as his wordes by me related suffici∣ently declare, partucularly those: Habue∣runt namque & antequi magiues sanctorum ad recordandum &c. Lastely, Sir Humfrey must knowe that Papyrius Masson is registred by the authors of our expurgatore Index, and consequently, he is no current Romanist, and much lesse is he anie of our best learned men as neither was Agobardus which ar yet those whome he professeth in the title of his booke to alledge against vs. And soe by this, Agobarde is absolutely cleared from all imputation of iconoma∣chie or error against images, and the obie∣ction of our aduersarie conuinced to be voyde of force. Furthermore touching that which the knight alledgeth out of Hincmar cōcer∣ning the decree of the coūcell of Frācfort a boute images, he deliuered it onely as a re∣lator, & being young in yeares & vnexpe∣rienced he mistooke the definitiō of the fo∣resaid synod for the schismaticall determi∣nation of a priuate Cōuenticle, which ha∣uing ben in the same place & at the same ty∣me, or presētly after the dissolution of the councell, he might easily take the one for
the other. In which historicall passage, as some authors opinate, by the credit he gaue to the supposed Carolin bookes, he both er∣red himselfe, & gaue occasiō of error to o∣thers whoe relying vpō his reporte haue put the same in their generall histories publi∣shed since his tyme: yet this being onely a priuate error of fact and that vncertaine it was without anie preiudice to the faith and practise of Catholique Church Besides it appeares euidently by an e∣pistle of 55. chapters which the same Hinc∣mare Archbishop of Rhemes writ to his ad∣uersarie Hincmare Bishop of laon, he was a verie pious & Cotholi{que} prelate & an acko∣wledger of the Popes supremacie ouer the rest of the Christiā Churches Greek & Latin, for soe he speakes in Hic fift chapter of that worke. qui in illius (Sedis Apostolicae) primata beatus Petrus cunctorū oucra portat, cuius princi∣patus authoritate mediator Dei & hominum ho∣mo Christus Iesus sedem Romanam super omnes sedos sublimauit, Alexandrinam decorauit, Alex∣andrinam confirmauit &c. wherfore it is improbable that Hnicmare who speaketh soe honorably of the Romā Church, should at the same tyme haue vttered anie do∣ctrine soe contrarie to the then receiued practise of the same, as is contained in those wordes viz. Images ar to be taken for an
ornament to please the sight not to instruct the people. To this I adde for confirmation of my anser, it is not credible to imagine that ther hauing passed diuers letters betwixt Pope Adrian (in whose tyme due honor of images was defined against the opposers of it) and other Popes of those tymes, and this Hincmare, for composing the contro∣uersie betweene him and Bishop Hincmare of Laon, as alsoe aboute other matters; it is not credible I say those Popes should not once haue reprehended and condemned him for this position, if truely he had ben a maintainer of it Besides the Ecclesiasticall histories doe testifye that aboute the same tyme, this same Hincmar at the persuasion of Pope Nicolas confuted the criminations of the Grecians against the Roman Church, of whome he would neuer haue made choi∣se for such a busines, if he had ben either knowne or suspected to haue defended anie doctrine repugnant to the vse and honor of images established in the 7. Synod and then commonly practised in the Christian world. And thus we see that nothing produced by our aduersarie out of this author repu∣gneth to the doctrine of that moderate ho∣nor of images which hath ben vniuersally
professed in the Roman Church both in the tyme of Agobarde and in this present age. My third aduertissement is that the knight in the 289. page of his safe way iniu∣riously accuseth Charon for a blasphemer of scriptures alledgeing him to affirme they ar imperfect, obscure, doubtfull, ambigu∣ous, perplexed. And yet I finde that this author in his thrid booke de tribus veritati∣bus (which is the same our aduersarie cites althou' not in the same language) page 97. 98. and the rest imediately following in his french edition (for I could not haue him in latin) expressely cleares him selfe and Roman church of that foule and odious calumniation feigned by Plessis in their dis∣grace. Charons wordes ar these. Venons an particularitez qu'ils nous font dire, encore qu'ils les proposent mal, & autrement que nous ne le disons, pour nous rendre odieux: premierement que nous le disons l'escriture este imperfecte: an contraire nous la croyons, confessons & preschons, perfecte, pleine, entiere, tres-suffisante come estant oeuure de Dieu, du quel ne sorte rien qui ne soit tel. Parquoy tout ce que Du Plessis dict, scauoir est qu'elle est perfecte, suffisante, a salut que IESV son autheur est la perfection, c'st en vain. car cela a este enseigne par nous deuan luy: & ne fut iamais dict par les Catholiques chose au contraire. quant
a l'obscurité, doubte, ambiguite, nous n'en parlons pas de tout si cruement, mais nous disons bien franc hement deux choses, & l'auons asses dict & monstré cy dessus, que l'scriture est fort difficile a entendre: qu'elle est prisé & employee de touts in∣differemment bons & mauuais en caution & de∣fense de toutes opinions, & a la ruine de plusieurs. Thes ar Charons expresse wordes which I english in this māner. Let vs come to particu∣lars, wich they make vs speake althou' they propose thē wrong, and otherwise thē we vtter thē to make vs odious: first that we saye the scriptures ar im∣perfect: on the contrarie wee beleeue, confesse, and preache them to be perfect, compleat and entire, sufficient, as being the worke of God, from who∣me nothing proceeds which is not such, for which cause al that which Plessis saith viz. that the scri∣pture is peafect, sufficient to saluation, that Iesus the author of it, is perfection it selfe, is in vaine. For that hath ben taught by vs before him: nei∣ther was anie thing to the contrarie euer spoken by the Catholiques. For as much as concernes, obs∣curitie, doubtfulnes, ambiguitie, we doe not spae∣ke altogither soe crudely or rawly, yet we say freely twoe things of which we haue sufficiently said, and demonstrated them before, that the scripture is verie hard or difficult to vnderstand: that it is taken and applyed by euerie one indifferently good and bad in caution and defence of all apinions, and to the ruine of manie.
This is that I finde in this author to this purpose, which how repugnant it is to our aduersaries purpose the reader can not be ignorant except he be affectedly ignorant as the knight seemes to be euen in this par∣ticular, onely this excuse I conceiue he may haue, if it be as I persuade my selfe, to wit that trusting to that pitt of corruption Plessis, he deliuered this passage to vs by retaile as he receiued it from him which if he did I shall not besorie, for that I desire not to charge my opposites more then I must of necessitie: neither is ther anie need of amplification in that nature, where the matter is soe copious, and aboundante. Touching Christophorus de cap. fontiū alledged by Sir Humfrey in the 108. page of his safe way for a denyer of transsubstan∣tiation althou' I haue said something alrea∣die in the place cited it selfe: yet hauing since had a seight of that authors worke a∣gainst the sacramentaries, I haue further discouered he is falsely and with manifest iniurie to his person produced by our ad∣uersarie, supposing he is soe farre from vt∣tering anie doctrine against either the reall presence or transsubstantiation, that he professedly defendeth them both in his fore∣said treatise, in which particularly touching transsubstantiation I finde these plaine wor∣des;
in the 58. chapter of his fourth Action- Transsubstantiationis articulum verbi Dei autho∣ritate probaturi, illud in primis tanquam basim ac fundumentum immobile ponimus, haec Christi verba (hoc est corpus meum) in literali sensu esse verissima, proinde supernacaneum ne dicam im∣pium esse haec ita deprauare, detorquere, mutare, vt & corpus in corporis figuram, & verbum est in significat, conuertatur, quasi haec sententia a∣lioquin vera esse, sibique nisi ad hunc modum mu∣tata constare non possit, dicimus igitur singulae dominicae sententiae verba in sua naturali signi∣ficatione sumenda esse. Hoc ita cōstituto vt verbo∣rum Christi veritas constet, primum necessariò consequens esse dico vt panis essentia conuertatur & mutetur. We being (saith Christophorus) to proue the article of transsubstantiation by au∣thoritie of the diuine worde, Jn primis we put it were for an immoueable foundation or graunde worke that thefe wordes of Christ (this is my bodie are most true in a literall sense for which cause it is I will not say im∣pious, but at the least superfluous soe to de∣torte, depraue, and change them, that the worde bodie be changed into a figure of his bodie, and the verbe is into signifye as if this sentence could not other wayes be true and hang togither, vnlesse it be altered in this manner. Wherfore we say that euerie worde of our lordes sentence is to be taken in their
naturall signification. This being thus establi∣shed, to the end that the trueth of Christs wordes may stand firme, J say first that it is necessarily consequent that the essence of bread be conuerted and changed &c. Thus clearely speaketh the Archbishop, which if per∣haps it be not sufficient to conuince our ad∣uersarie that this author was noe denyer of transsubstantiation, let him but take a bree∣fe view of his booke, and he will be sure to finde both that point and the reall presence most exactely and copiously proued by such a multitude of testimonies both of scriptures and ancient Fathers, as I knowe he will not be able to look vpon them without confusion. It is true I must confesse this author, in his first Action of this worke, hath broached an extrauagant opinion touching the wordes of consecration, for which cause principally as I suppose the expurgatorie Index prohibiteth his booke till it be cor∣rected. for in his 264. and 265. pages he endeuoreth to proue that preists doe not consecrate by virtue of those wordes hoc est corpus meum: but by virtue of those, hoc face∣te in meam commemerationem. In confirmati∣on of which his opinion althou' he discour∣seth in an vnaccustomed manner among deuines both ancient and moderne, yet ha∣uing
diligently conferred one of is passages with an other and duely pondered the who∣le sense and meaning of them, I perceiue his intention was onely to dispute against and disproue those whoe hould that by the virtue and operation of these wordes (hoc est corpus meum) onely materially and lite∣rally accepted & pronounced the consecra∣tion is performed, he him selfe earnestly contending that those wordes haue their virtute & force from the precept Christ (hoc facite in meam commemorationem. And therfo∣re in his page 263. where he stateth his que∣stion he hath these wordes fellowing. per∣multi sunt qui horum verborum (hoc est corpus meum) materialiter pronunciatorum operatione ac virtute consecrationem fieri putant, Vnde nonnullos equidem vidi qui cum ad consecratio∣nem peruentum esset, miris modis halitum suum cum dictis iam verbis, super panem & vinum conijcerent, non secus ac si & in quantum nuda tantumiuodo verba sunt, nihil aliud in ipsis considerando, consecrationem fieri arbitrantur. Ego vero consecrationem horum verborum ope∣ratione (hoc facite in meam commemorationem) fieri existimo. Christus enim &c. There be verie manie (saith this author) who think that consecration is made by virtue and opera∣tion of these wordes (this my bodie) ma∣terially pronounced. Whence it is that I
haue seene some whoe comeing to conse∣crate doe in a strange manner cast their breath with the foresaid wordes vpon the breade and wine as if in as much onely as they be naked wordes, not considering anie thing else in them, they did hould con∣secration to be performed by them. But I think that consecration is made by virtue and operation of these wordes, doe this in rembrance of mee. For Ghrist &c. By which wordes it clearely appeareth that Christo∣phorus did not absolutely denye that preists doe consecrate by these wordes, this is my bodie; but he onely affirmeth that they haue not their consecratiue virtue or force included in their owne materiall sounde, but receiue it from the precept of Christ contained in those other wordes of his Doe this in remembrance of mee. That which I yet further conuince by o- other wordes of the same author in this sa∣me Action wher thus he discourseth in con∣firmation of his position. Nemo proinde ex∣istimet haec verba hoc est corpus meum tech∣nice & materialiter prolata consecrationem efficere, sed ipsius Sacerdotis orationem (in qua & haec ipsa recitantur) mandati huius, hoc facite, virtute atque operatione irrogatam ac spirituali virtute roboratam. Let noe man therfore think (saith hee) that these
wordes (this is my bodie) artificially and materially pronounced doe make the consecration, but the prayers of the preist (in which these same wordes alsoe are reci∣ted) proceeding from the virtute and ope∣ration of this precept doe this, and strenthe∣ned by virtue of the same. Thus Christo∣phorus. By which it is manifest he had noe intention to denye these wordes, this is my bodie to be them by which preists doe consecrate since he expressely affirmes that they are included and rehearsed among those prayers, benedictions and gratiarum actions by which according to his te∣net, they dayly consecrate: But he onely in his owne priuate opinion houldes, that as well those wordes (this is my bodie) as the rest of the prayers which the preists vse, haue their virtue and efficient force of consecration not from their owne mate∣riall sounde, but from the precept of Christ, doe this in remembrance of mee. Which altho' as it hypothetically or totally soun∣des, it is an extrauagant and singular placet or dictamen of his, yet is it not repugnant to the Catholique Roman faith, either in the point of the reall presence, or transsub∣stantiation, as may plainely appeare to anie iudicious reader: But onely hath so∣me affinitie with the tenet of the moderne
Grecians in this particular; whoe not ob∣standing constantly defende both the one, and the other, as I haue shewed in an other place by the doctrine of their late Pa∣triarch in his responsion to the luthe∣rans. And now I hence inferre as a thing more directly for my purpose that the wordes which Sir Humfrey produceth against transsubstantiation out of a certaine trea∣tise intuled de Correctione Theologiae Scholasticae, are not truely the wordes of this author; But that Treatise is falsely as∣cribed vnto him and forged in his name how soeuer our aduersaries make great estimation and vse of it: That which I clea∣rely demonstrate because it containeth doctrine repugnant to that which he him selfe teacheth in his owne vndoubded wor∣ke against the Sacramentaries. For wheras according to the citation of the knight in his 108. page of his safe way, in his Treatise inscribed de correct. Theol. Schol. Christo∣phorus hath these wordes: Therfore it most certaine that Christ did not consecrate by those wordes (this is my bodie) neither ar they anie parte of consecratiō. And yet in his Treatise against the Sacramentaries he directly affirmeth the contrarie saying thus Christus enim horum verborum (hoc est corpus
meum) vi & operatione consecrationem confe∣cit: panis natura in verum ipsius corpus sese mu∣tante &c. Which is in English. Christ did consecrate by virtue and operation of the wordes (this is my bodie) the nature of the bread being changed or changeing it selfe in to his bodie &c. Now it is plane that these wordes plainely contradict the other rehearsed by our aduersarie, the∣se directly and expressely affirming that Christ did consecrate by these wordes (this is my bodie) the other directely and expres∣sely denying the same. In soe much ei∣ther we must of necessitie grante that the Archbishop plainely contradicted him selfe, which is not to be admitted especially in a graue & learned diuine as he was: or else that the Treatise in which is soe expressely contained a denyall of that same which the same author affirmeth in his owne knowne & acknowledged worke, is not truely his, but falsifyed and falsely published in his name. and consequently what soeuer our aduer∣sarie produceth out of it proueth nothing, but is to be registred in the list of such other cōterfeit wares as he selleth to his reader for currēt in the rest of his worke. And touching his Treatise against the sacramētaries & so∣me other of his workes althou' they cōtai∣ne some extrauagant positions and therfore
were iustely condemned to be expurged by the authors of the Index, yet because par∣ticularly in his booke against the de∣nyers of the reall presence, the author ex∣prssely submitteth his doctrine to the censu∣re of the Roman Church purposely place∣ing in the frontispice of his booke, omnia sanctae Eccesiae Catholicae ac sanctae sedi Apostolicae Romanae iudicio submissa sancto, therfore his au∣thoritie can not anie way preiudice the Ro∣man faith. And now let this suffice to shewe the falsitie of this citation: onely the rea∣der must further suppose that if I had seene the Treatise it selfe I could haue cleared the matter more exactely: But our ad∣uersaries take an order for that keeping closse all such obscure workes and reser∣uing them for their owne pallates as great nouelties and most daintie dishes. Some fewe more authors remaine vnex∣amined by reason I could not haue them: as Cardinal Carapha. Ioānes Marius, & twoe or three others. But I assure the reader the allegations drawne out of them by my ad∣uersarie containe no matter of importance which is not sufficiently cleared without a∣nie further searche of the places as they stand in the bookes. Onely this inconue∣nience ther is in this matter viz. That if I had obtained a sight of the authors thē sel∣ues,
I should probably haue discouered so∣me more of the alledgers ill proceding. In respect of which, and my other more triuial defectiuenes. I will vse the same excuse which S. Augustin hath for a certaine worke of his, concluding thus. Si quid ab eis dici solet quod forte disputando non attigi, tale esse arbitratus sum, cui mea responsio necessaria non fuisset, siue quod tam leue esset, vt a quolibet re∣dargui facillime posset.
AN APPENDIX TO THE VVHETSTONE, OR A COMPENDIOVS ANSER TO THE BY-WAY, CHEEFLY consisting in a breife discouery of the au∣thors indirect, partiall, & false dealing with a detection of some parti∣cular examples of falsi∣fication. BY THE SAME AVTHOR. Sicut nouacula acuta fecisti dolum. Psal. 51. CATVAPOLI, Apud viduam MARCI WYONIS. Anno M.DC.XXXII.
THE INTRODVCTION TO THE APPENDIX. BY that tyme I had in a manner finished my censure of knight Humfreyes nicnamed false way, I receaued sodaine newes of another way, eyther of the same author or of his frend for him, which like a second parte of the Pickro came ruflling out with a greater noyse then the first: & the rea∣son is as I suppose as well for that it carrieth a more extrauagant title to wit via deuia, as also in regard it is some what larger both inleaues, & as I thinke in lyes. Why the author should call his firste booke via tnta or the safe way, & this via deuia or the by way rather then the contrarie, in my conceit few will be able to imagine anie other reason then his owne knightlie pleasure: &
for my part I must needes confesse that his ti∣tles seuerallie applied to the contents are to me meere riddles, as not conteyning eyther expli∣citlie or implicitlie that which they make showe of, but rather standing onelie for cy∣phers or markes of the authors affected follie promising much but performing nothing, as I haue made appeere in part by myne ansere to his first worke, & partlie also shall be showed by Gods assistance in this against which I now write; of which altho' I doe not intend to make anie fotmall confutation in euerie parti∣cular point of doctrine as I did before, more then once repenting my selfe that I spent so much time vpon such idle matter: yet will I make a breife suruey of euery distinct section principallie noting & notifieing to the reader such faultes as I shall finde the author guiltie of, whome I also aduertise that notobstanding the knight with these his two bookes as it were with the deliuerie of two prodigious twinnes, would seeme to haue brought forth some great & strange noueltie to the world: yet in veritie there is nothing of moment allea∣ged by him eyther in this or in his former trea∣tie, eyther out of scriptures, Councells, or Fa∣thers, which hath not binne long since exami∣ned & confuted by a greater & farre more learned number of Catholike diuines then all the pretensiue reformed Churches can affoord
as apposers of the Roman doctrine. And al∣tho' I doe ingenuouslie confesse that Sir Hum∣frey hath vsed no smale art & industrie in the application of his predecessours labours to his owne intent & purpose; neuerthelesse he hath performed the same in such a cousening & de∣ceitfull manner, that the reader may assure himselfe t'is almost one & the same labour to discouer his lyes, equiuocations, false suppositions, impertinent & corrupted allega∣tions, & other his insincere dealing, & to con∣fute his doctrine, it being little more then a masse or compound of those & the like cor∣rupted & vitious ingredients, nor contayning anie graue or solid discussion of anie one que∣stion in terminis or professedlie, but onelie or cheiflie consisting in a certaine abstractiue way by compacting patches & shreads of furtiue & stollen diuinitie deliuered in a plausible & per∣suasiue manner: of which altho' I doe not denie but the author hath receiued great parte at the second hand from his antecessors, espe∣ciallie from his great Patron Daniel Chamier who in the art of cheating doth in my opinion eyther exceed or at the least equalize anie that euer writ before him; in regard of which al∣tho' the knight might seeme in some sort excu∣sable at the least by ignorance: yet hath he or his chaplins inuented & added so much in that nature of his owne coyning, that I doe not see
what coulourable excuse can possiblie be al∣leaged for iustification of his bad proceedings. And when reading of Bellarmines bookes of controuersies I found so manie vntruthes, falsi∣fications, & corruptions, by him discouered out of Luther, Caluin, Beza, Brentius, Kemnitius, & other sectaries who had writ before him, I imagined that, at least, for, verie shame their successors as being such great professors of re∣formation would haue reformed themselues in that kinde; but now of late since I came to read the workes of Daniel Chamier & Sir Hum∣frey Lind, I professe I haue quite lost my hope of their reclamation, especiallie reflecting that as they are all men of one profession, & haue all of them an ill cause to maintaine, so are they all fallen into a fatall necessitie of abusing their readers with trickes & sleights: the reason of which is plaine, in regard that falsehood as being of a contrarie nature to truth it cannot possibly be defended & patronized by the same truth, but must of necessitie be defended by it selfe. And as for Sir Humfrey he is so deepelie plundged in that muddie ditch, that he & his honour are like to lye there for euer, his ill custome being now almost turned into nature, & as proper to him as blacke is to an Ethio∣pian, or white to a swanne. And to proceed to particulars, he is so voyde of shame that he doubtes not to abuse Bellar∣mine
in the very frōtispice of his booke, where for posye or sentence of the same, he putteth certaine words of his taken out of his first booke de verbo Dei cap. 2. intending by this indirect meanes to perswade his readers that the contents of his whole worke haue that famous Cardinall for their patron & approuer, which in my iudgmēt is a point of the greatest cousenage & impudency that euer was heard of among Christian writers; since that neither that which Bellarmines words import containe the whole, or yet the cheife drife of Sir Hum∣freys booke, neither are they vttered by him in that sense in which he doth apply them, to wit that the scriptures are the sole rule of faith, & that there is no other rule but onely them: wher as Bellarmin onely affirmeth that the scriptures are a most certaine & a most safe rule in case they be rightly interpreted & according to the ancient tradition of the Church, Vid. li. 1. de verb. Dei c. 2. & l. 3. de verb. Dei c 1. & seq. Scriptura regulacre∣dendi cer∣tissima tutissim{que} est supra. Lib 4. de verbo Dei cap. 12. & that they are not to be neglected by imbracing the priuate spirit, which is fallible & vncerteine, & to be relyed vppon by none but such as ne∣glect the certaintie or safe way of saluation, in which sense & meaning how the wordes of Bellarmine can possibly be applied to Sir Humfreys Deuia or by way, let the indifferent reader iudge, especially considering that he could not be inuincibly ignorant that the lear∣ned Cardinall in another place plainly decla∣reth
himselfe touching the totallity & par∣tiallity of the rule of faith, where yet nothing is to be found in that sense which the knight fraudulently framed to his owne purpose. And now from hence I passe to the Epistle dedicatory, on which I had scarce cast myne eyes, when presently I discouered two or three slanderous lyes vttered by the author: the firste is, that the pretended Catholike Church as he phraseth her, is made the whole rule of faith by the Romanists: the second, that the Romane Catholikes are tought to eate their God & kill their King: the third that the Pope at this day alloweth of the Iewes Talmud & inhibiteth the bookes of Prote∣stants. And those vntruthes I haue noted onely, not for that I could not haue marked out others, but because they seemed the most ob∣uious grosse & palpable. I omit also to specify diuers places of Bellarmine cited by Sir Hum∣frey both heere & in many other partes of his worke, which well examined can serue him for no other purpose thē to coulore his cousinage. And as for the rest of his preface, I can assure the reader, it is little more then an idle & te∣dious repetition of the same matters which he handled in his firste booke: and whosoeuer will take the paines to read both his pamph∣lets will find so frequent rehersall of the same things that his eares will tingle to heere them: nay some whole chapters of this booke there
bee, which excepting the title haue little other matter then the same which is found in the other, as will appeere in particular to him who shall conferre the two last sections of it with the tenth & eleuenth sections of the safe way; In so much that I thinke I may not vnfitly say of the workes of Sir Humfrey that which a certaine pleasant wit sayd once of the writings of Luther, Tolle contradictiones, calumnias, men∣dacia, dicteria, ac schommata scurillia in Catholicos Romanos, inanes digressiones, ambages, atque inu∣tiles verborum multiplicationes, & duo eius vo∣lumina in vnum haud magnum libellulum redigi posse non dubito: that is, take way Sir Humfreys contradictions, calumniations, & lyes, take away his scoffes, & ieastes against the Romane Catholikes, his idle & vaine digressions, & multiplication of wordes, or repetition of mat∣ter, with his friuolous circumlocutions, & I doe not doubt but both his volumes may be easily reduced to the bulke of one small pāph∣let. And thus much concerning the Preface & the booke in generall, from whence I passe to particulars. THE DISCVSSION OF THE SEVERAL sections in their order. Sec. 1. In his first section, I thinke I may trulie say Sir Humfrey telleth but one vntruth, but it is so lardge a lye that it reaches from end to
end, I meane but one totall lye, for partiall lyes there are diuers. This totall vntruth is in that he affirmeth in his second page, that the diffe∣rence betwixt vs & them, is such as was betwixt S. Augustine & the Donatists, which is ma∣nifestly conuinced to be false euen by those same words which he himself cites out of that holy doctor, Aug. de vnit. Eccl. cap. 2. who directly sayth that the que∣stion betweene him & them was vbi sit Eccle∣sia? where the Church is? And yet the question is not betwixt the Romanists & the Reformers where the true Church is, but which is the true Church? that is, whether the Romane church & all the rest of the particular Churches in the world adhering to & obeying that Church as the cheife & mother Church be that true Catholike Church mentioned in the Creed & commended in the scriptures, or the reformed Church or Churches wheresoeuer they be: which the reader may plainly per∣ceaue to be a farre different question, from that of which S. Augustine speaketh in the place cited by the kinght. Secondly the whole dis∣course of this section runneth vpon a false sup∣position to witt that the Romanists refuse to proue the truth of their Church by scriptures onelie, as S. Augustine did, saith the kinght, a∣gainst the donatists; but this is not true, for the Romanists are so farre for reprouing that cour∣se in this point, that they scarce vse any other
proofes then those same scriptures which the same S. Augustin ordinarily vseth for that pur∣pose, as may be seene in the workes of both ancient & moderne diuines. Thirdly neuertheles when the Romanists say they proue the truth of their Church by scriptures onely, they doe not therfore meane so that they exclude the interpretation of them according to the ancient tradition of the same Catholike Church; for so neither S. Augustine eyther against the Donatists or any other he∣reticks in the like case, alleaged the scriptures, but as the same Saint Augustine saith thou' partly in different wordes & to another pur∣pose, De vnit. Eccles. c. 19. vt non nisi verum sensum & Catholicum teneamus, not so but that we doe followe the true & Catholike sense of the same scriptures. And in fewe wordes that which the Romanists meane is, that they doe not vse the scriptures for proofe of their Church in the sense of the pretensiue reformed Churches, but ouerly in that sense which anciently hath binne imbra∣ced by the most vniuersally floryshing Church in all or most ages according to the diuersity of tymes. And thus we see cleerlie that Sir Humfrey in diuerse respects hath grosselie & ignorantlie mistaken the state of the question both be∣twixt S. Augustine & the Donatists, & also betwixt himselfe & the Romanists. And con∣sequentlie
those authorities which he produ∣deth eyther out of S. Augustine or other an∣cient Fathers are impertinent & of no force against the faith of the Romane Church: but on the contrarie by his false dealing he hath fallen into that by path which in his erroneous imagination he hath prepared for his aduersa∣ries; in which neuerthelesse he himselfe if he proceed in this manner is like to walke euen to the end of his iorney, I meane throu' all the sections of his booke. Sec. 2. In his second section he pretends to ansere to the pretences, as he termeth them, taken by the Romanists from the obscuritie of scripture, & from the inconueniences which he saith his aduersaries alleage for the restraint of the lay peoples reading them, yet he is so farre from performing his taske in this behalfe that he doth not so much as relate completelie those reasons which moue the Romā Church to ordayne the said restraint, but onelie cat∣ching at one or two of the lesse important cau∣ses alleaged by Bellarmin to that purpose, & giuing a verie sleight & superficiall ansere vnto them, he spends a great part of his time in for∣ging a new cause which he falselie conceiueth to haue binne the onelie or cheife motiue which the Roman Church had to prohibite the reading of the Bible; to wit for feare, as he sayth, their Trent doctrine & new articles
should be discouered, And also in breathing out an odious relation of the speaches of some par∣ticular Romanists touching the inconuenien∣ces which that libertie which the Nouellists haue giuen to the common people in reading the scriptures, hath caused in the Christian world in these our present times, as that to per∣mitt euerie ignorant man or woman without distinction or order to read them is to cast pearles before hogges, & the like, which be∣cause thy are both impertinent in this place, as also for that I haue in parte ansered them in my censure, I omit to reherse them: Period. 13. & alibi. that which in like manner I doe for the same reason in the rest of the authors which the knight citeth in this section, onelie aduertising the reader that besides that they make not to the purpose, di∣uers of them are by him corruptedlie alleaged & mangled either in wordes or sense, or rather both in words & sense, By way page. as particularlie may appeere in the citation of Sanders whome our aduersarie affirmes to say that it is little better then heresie to translate the scriptures, Haeresi esse si quis dicat esse necessariū. vis m. Haer. 191. & yet Sanders onelie sayth that it is an heresie if one doe affirme it is necessarie for scriptures to be translated into vulgar tongues, as the same words which Sir Humfrey cites doe testifie. He also abuseth Acosta whome he cites lib. 2. de Christo reuel. cap. 2. & yet Acosta spea∣kes note a word of reading scriptures in vul∣gar
language, & much lesse affirmes that much profit may redound to the lay people by rea∣ding them in these our daies, especiallie in that manner as the knight falselie alleageth, who if he will proue his intent must needes speake in that sense when he imposeth vpon that au∣thor the approbation of reading the scriptures in the vulgar tongue. In this fashion he also couseneth his reader in his citation of S. Hierome, affirming that in his epistle to Paulinus he sayth that the booke of Genesis is most plaine for euerie mans vn∣derstanding; whereas S. Hierome rehearsing seuerallie all the parts of scripture with an in∣tent to shewe breiflie what they containe, & what meanes is required to the true vnderstan∣ding of them, & particularlie signifying to Paulinus that he would haue him vnderstand that he cannot vndertake the worke or inter∣prise of reading scriptures without a master; putteth the booke of Genesis firste in order as it lyeth in the Bible, sayeing thus, videlicet manifesta est Genesis, meaning not that the con∣tents of the booke are manifest & easie to be vnderstood as Sir Humfrey doth most falselie affirme him to say, hut onelie affirming that in the whole number of the bookes of scripture the Genesis is manifestlie knowne to be one & the firste of the same number: for which reason he doth in like manner consequentlie
adde of the two bookes following, saying pre∣sentlie after, patet Exodus, in promptu est leuiticus &c. By which particulars the true sense of S. Hierome doth so plainelie appeere to make nothing for our aduersaries purpose, that we may iustlie wonder how he could haue the face to peruert & detort it in so shamelesse a fashion. And by such trickes & fraudes as this, & now & then dropping a lye or two by the way, as that the Romish Preistes agree like Pilate & Herod both to the condemnation of Christe & his word: & that it is a crime worthie the Inquisition for the people to haue a Bible, & the like; still dissembling the true state of the question, which is not whether the laytie can lawfullie read the scriptures absolutelie, but whether they can read them commonlie & without licence, & that in vulgar tongues; it being euer supposed, that in Latine Greeke or Hebrew anie one that can, may reade them: by those fraudes I say & such like insincere dealing the knight patches vp this peece of his by way for his priuate spirit to walke in, where I leaue him to his melancholie contemplations & passe forward to the next matter. Sec. 3. The third section is about the interpretation of scripture, in which question Sir Humfrey affirmes that according to the iudgment of the ancient Fathers the Bible is the sole Iudge of
controuersies, Quod si nō poteris assi∣duitate le∣ctionis in∣uenire quod dicitur ac∣cede ad sa∣pientiorem, vade ad Doctorem. Chrysost. hom. 3. de Laz. & interpreter of it selfe. For this his affirmation he cites diuers places out of S. Augustine, Ambrose, & Chrysostome, but in this he sheweth verie small iudgment in the reading & vnderstanding of the ancient Doctors: For it is cleere to anie cleere wit that these holie Fathers onelie speake by way of instruction, & to such onelie as for their owne priuate profit, comfort, &, vnderstanding read & interpret scriptures as they read them to themselues, & not as publike Iudges or deci∣ders of doubs in faith or manners: And in this sense onelie & not otherwise the foresaid Fa∣thers proceede (excepting the place of S. Au∣gustin cited out of his confessiōs which yet is to a differēt purpose from this we here treate as in an other place I will declare) perhaps to the end they might more easlie persuade such as in their time were slowe & ought to haue binne more diligent by reason of their profession qualitie & capacitie, to retire & cohibit them∣selues from the accustomed vanities of those dayes, & applie themselues to that holie & wholesome exercise. And yet more then this except Sir Humfrey will adde to the Fathers sentences the worde sole, as his Father Luther did to the text of S. Paul: nay & the word con∣trouersie also, he will neuer iustifie by their au∣thoritie his vast proposition, viz: that scripture is the sole Iudge & interpreter of itselfe.
Optatus speake of one particular case for which the scriptures were plaine & cleere, not in generall, nor yet doth either he or Pope Clement speake of sole scriptures, but of scrip∣tures interpreted according to the traditionarie & current sense of the successiue Catholike Church or cheefe pastors for the time present, Euangelio non crederē nisi Ecclesiae Catholicae me commo∣ueret au∣thoritas. tom. 7. contr. ep. fund. Quisquis falli metuit huius obs∣curitatē quaestionis, Ecclesiam de illa con∣sulat &c. Lib. 1. cōt. Cresc. cap. 33. not of particular Doctors of priuate spirits, in which distinction consisteth the mayne diffe∣rence betwixt the Romanists & the Refor∣mers in this points, which if you Sir Humfrey had duelie pondered, & considered how much authoritie the ancient Fathers & particularlie sainct Augustine commonlie attributes to the Church in expounding scripture & deter∣mining controuersies, I persuade my selfe you would neuer haue had the face eyther to denie that euer the ancient Fathers made ansere to the Heretikes of their tymes that they must heere the Church or that their Church was that Catholike Church which is the sole iudge of Controuersies, & the viue or liue interpreter of scriptures, & which they ought to heere in all doubtfull cases & obscure, or difficult que∣stions: nor yet could you haue so inconstan∣tlie hallucinated as to affirme in one place that the text of scripture is the sole Iudge & ex∣pounder of itselfe indefinitlie & without lii∣tation, & yet on the contrarie in another place that you doe not denie the authoritie of the Fathers iointlie agreing in the exposition of
them in matters of faith, & yet further that the same Fathers referred the meaning of the scrip∣tures to the author of them; as if the holie Ghost were bound to appeere visiblie to deli∣uer the true sense of them as often as anie con∣trouersie of faith occurreth: All which & the like disparates the vertiginous knight vttereth within the compasse of this one section, also further accusing the Romanists that they make themselues Iudges & plaintiffes in their owne cause, wheras indeed the Romanists neyther make themselues, but the euer visible continueing Church Iudge of their cause, nor doe they hould thēselues for plaintiffes but for defendants & faithfull possessors of that do∣ctrine which as it were by inheritance they re∣ceiued from their auncestors. And here I re∣quest the reader to reflect how disconformably the knight discourseth to his owne receiued Principle touching the interpretation, & sense of scriptures of which he & his brothers make euerie priuate person, man or woman, Iudge & vmpier, & yet condemnes for vnreasonable that the Roman Church should vse the like authoritie, euen when it is publikelie assem∣bled in a generall Councell. So that these & all those a foresaid particulars deliuered by our aduersarie touching this point are but onelie his owne fancyes of which he makes vse for want of better materialls to patch vp this part
of his by path, in which as you see he conti∣nueth his peripateticall exercise euen to the next section. Sec. 4. In which, it being the fourth in Order he prosecuteth the same matter, telling his reader that the Romanists tho' they pretend other∣wise, yet they make themselues sole Iudges & interpreters of scripture, thus the knight fa∣bleth, of whom I tknowe I may iustlie say with the Poet mutato nomine de te fabula narratur. And in reallitie of whome I pray can this be so trulie verified as of those who notobstan∣ding that vnder a false colour that euen in cases of doubt & controuersie they ingenuouslie professe that scriptures must be interpreted by themselues onelie, Vid. Chā. Panstrat. I. de inten. scrip. yet neuerthelesse doe most pertinaciouslie maintaine that the exposition of them belongs to euerie member of their Church in particular, & that the spirit of in∣terpretation is as common to one as to another; for what is this but to make themselues sole Iudges & interpreters of the scripture, & not the scripture itselfe as they deceitfullie pretend? Let the indifferent reader be Iudge of this. It is true the Councell of Trent doth decree that none expound the scriptures contrarie to the vniforme consent of Fathers, yea & Pius Quintus doth also declare in his Bull of the profession of faith that such as are preferred to dignities & places of care of soules take an
oath of the same; but as they take the oath so doe they performe also the obligation of it. And I demand of Sir Humfrey who hath such a great talent in reprehending, whether he thinkes not in his conscience that those who vnder the strict bōd of oath are obliged to anie matter, are not more like to performe it then those who haue no such obligation whereby to restraine their actions? surelie there is a great difference in the circumstances, & consequen∣tlie a great reason to iudge that those Roma∣nists who haue such an oath obliging them to followe the consent of Fathers in their inter∣pretations of scripture, will be farre more care∣full to performe the same then the reformed Doctours who haue no such bridle to refraine the inclination to noueltie of their itching witts, Now wheras Sir Humfrey after his ordinary cauilling manner doth say, that if the Romane Church can make good the vniforme consent of Fathers for their twelue new articles of faith he will listen to their interpretation & preferre it before any priuate or later exposition, this I say is a meere sophisme in regard that the Ro∣man Church doth not teach as he ignorantly mistakes, that he who interpreteth scriptures must haue positiuely the vniforme consent of Fathers for his expositions, but onely that he must not wittingly expound any place of scrip∣ture
in matters of moment especially in faith & manners contrary to the whole torrent of the same Fathers; the which because the kinght did not rightly vnderstand as it seemes when he read the Concell & the Bull of Pius, he abuseth Caietane, Canus, Andradius, Bellar∣mine, Baronius, & other moderne Romanists as if they had contradicted the foresaid decree, wheras yet one of them to wit Caietan writ be∣fore it was established, the rest being knowne for notorius defenders of it: & so running vp∣pon false grownes, the wandering knight pas∣seth forward citing among Romanists some of his consorts, & building his By-way (to omitt others of lesse moment, & diuerse scurrilous scoffes touching the application of scriptures by the Romanists notobstanding its well knowne he & his companions are much more guilty in that kinde) with two notorious vn∣truthes affirming that all the pristes & Iesuites are sworne not to receaue & interpret scrip∣tures but according to the vniforme consent of Fathers, & that it is an article of the Roman faith so to doe: all which needes no further examen in regard that to any iuditious reader these two particulars onely will be sufficient to acquaint him which the rest of the authors iugling trickes which he vseth in this part of his by-way, which being voyde of substantiall matter it suteth best to him that made it, but
agreeth nothing to the Catholike Romā faith. ect. 5. In the fifth section he handleth his Canon of scriptures, which he promiseth to proue by pregnant testimonies of all ages, that it is the same which learned Doctors & professors inti∣rely preserued in the besome of the Roman Church in all ages. I haue treated of this in parte in my former Censure, to which I adde returning that Sir Humfrey saith of Campion vppon himself, which is that if this Nouellist had binne as reall in his proofes as he is prodigall in his pro∣misses, he had gome beyond all the reformed proselites sinces the daies of Luther, for neuer man made greater florishes with proorer proofes, all that he bringeth being founded vp∣pon the same equiuocation which he vsed in his safe way consisting of this proposition, the Fathers of euery age haue acknowledged the 22. bookes of scripture which the reformed Churches hold for Canonicall to be the true Canon & no other. For it is true the Fathers of all ages receiued from Christe & his Apostles those same bookes, acknowledging them for Canonicall, but it is false, that the same fathers in all ages held no other for Canonicall, of which truth particular instance may be made in S. Augustine who (as Caluin confesseth being a faithfull witnesse of antiquity) Lib. 18: de Ciuit. cap. 6. Calu. li. 4. nst. c. 14. Sac. testi∣fieth touching the bookes of the Machabees,
that althou' the Iewes receiue them not for Canonicall, yet the Church doth receaue them. And according to this it being true that few or none of the great multitude of writers which the kinght produceth in euery seuerall age doe po∣sitiuely affirme that those 22. bookes of scripture onely which the reformers vse were by the vni∣uersall Christian Catholike Church held to be the complete or intire Christian Canon of the ould testament, or that those particular bookes now in controuersie betwixt vs & them were expresly reiected euē by the Iewes themselues, as not Canonicall, or not of infallible credit, & not rather held by them for sacred & diuine althou not registred in their Canon (which is the cheife part of Sir Humfreyes proposition) it followeth cleerly that he quite faileth in his proofe, & that for all his braggs, he onely steppeth out of his pretended safeway into the same by path he hath euer walked in since he firste began to write, neuer omitting his occu∣stomed sleightes in the allegation of authors & concluding his section with that laregelye so often repeated by him in this & other places, as affirming that by his aduersaries owne con∣fessions the true & orthodox Church did reiect those Apocriphall bookes which his Church reiecteth, & the Trent Councell alloweth at this day for Canonicall: out of which thraso∣nicall
audacity of this boysterous Caualier, the reader may easily take a scantling of the rest, & so come to know the fox by his tatterd tayle. ec. 6. In his sixt sex section he pretendeth to solue the Romanists arguments deduced frō autho∣ritie of Fathers & Councells for those bookes which the reformers hold for Apocriphall. Touching which point, althou' it cannot be denyed but that doubt was made in former times among the fathers whether the foresayd bookes were Canonicall or not, in which there was diuersitie of opinions especially before the Councell of Carthage: neuerthelesse it is cer∣taine that neither the whole Church in any Councell, nor yet anie of the Doctors or fa∣thers did positiuely at any time euer agree to exclude them out of the Christian Canon, but as some of the fathers made doubt of the same so others made none at all, among whome S. Augustine was so confident in that matter that in his 2. booke of Christian doctrine, & that not obiter but professedly treating of it; he set∣teth downe the very same number & names of the very same bookes which the Roman Church defendeth for Canonicall at this pre∣sent day: & yet notobstanding this our ad∣uersarie is so presumptuous & voyde of shame that he doubtes not to affirme that Sainct Augustine did not allow the bookes of Iu∣dith, . 132. wisdome, Ecclesiasticus, & the Machabees
for Conanicall. In iustification of which his impudent assertion it is wondrous to consider how the crafty Sicophant doth excercise his witts in framing euasions wherby to elude the plaine testimony of that renowned orthodox Doctor, & the decree of the Councell of Car∣thage in that particular, to which, the same S. Augustine subscribed euē in this same point of the Canonicall scriptures reiected by the pretē∣siue reformed Churches. Howbeit all that Sir Humfrey could inuent for the infringeing of these two sound & irrefragable authorities consists either wholely or cheeflie in equiuoca∣tions & insincere dealing in the citing & con∣strueing of the authors he alleageth, yea & in vttering of diuers plaine vntruthes, as where he saith of the third Councell of Carthage, that it is not of that authority as the Romanists themselues pretend, adding presently after for reasō of his first lye another as great or greater against Bellarmine, affirming that the Car∣dinall whē the Protestants produce this Coun∣cell against the head of their Church, answe∣reth that this prouinciall Councell ought not to binde the Byshops of Rome nor the Byshops of other Prouinces, & citing him for this sayeing in his 2. booke de Rom. Pont. cap. 31. where neuerthelesse there are no such wordes to be found, And finallie to omitt other of lesse noyse, he affirmes that S. Augustine
declares by pregnant & seuerall reasons that the Machabees are Apocriphall, & yet he de∣nyeth not euen in this very place but that the same S. Augustine both put them in the Canon of the scriptures in his second booke de doct. Christ: nor yet that he affirmed in his 18. booke de Ciuit. Dei cap. 36. that the, Church hath them for Canonicall thou' the Iewes hould them not for such. By which it appeeres, that Sir Humfrey tou∣ching this point of controuersie, is not in the way of S. Augustine & of the determination of the Church of Rome in his times, but is with shame enuffe fallen againe into his owne by way, where he & his progenitors haue euer wandred since the daies of Luther. Sect. 7. In the seuenth section he reprehendeth the proofe of Catholike doctrine by traditions, & makes such a trade of dealing vntruelie, that one would thinke sure he liues by lyeing. And now I verilie persuade my selfe it is most true which a certaine ingenious Protestant sayd of the Puritans, that they will rather affoord ten lyes then one oath. In his verie firste wordes he affirmes that to admit traditions & other constitutions of the Church is the firste article of the Roman Creed to which all Bishops & Preists are sworne, citing in the margen the Bull of Pius the fourth: this is his first lye in this section, but he will make sure it shall not
be his last, for he incontinentlie addeth two or three more one in the neck of another affir∣ming that those obseruations & constitutions of the Church which Pope Pius mentioneth, are declared by the Councell of Trent to be those traditions which the Church receiueth with equall reuerence & religious affection (for so the knight insincerelie translates the wordes pari pietatis affectu) as she receaues the holie scriptures: Ego firma fide credo omnia & singula qua continētur in symbolo fidei &c. Bul: Pij. 4. sup. form. iur. prof. fid. adding more that heere was the firste alteration made touching the rule of faith, with diuers other falsities too large to recount. And yet if when he read the foresayd Bull he had not for hast scipped ouer the whole Creed (which the Pope pla∣ceth in the verie firste part of the profession of faith) showeing euen by that vnfaithfull tricke how little faith he hath, I thinke he would neuer haue had the face to calumniate in this manner. And if to speake in commen∣dation of diuine & Apostolicall traditions in that forme of speach which the Councell vseth, were to make alteration in the rule of faith as the knight will haue it, yet is it appa∣rentlie false that the Tridentine Councell was the firste author of that alteration, for that (to omit other authorities of ancient Fathers of the same nature) sainct Chrysostome who li∣ued in the beginning of the fouerth age of Christian religion vseth the same manner of
phrase if not playner, Com. in c. 2. Epist. 2. ad Thes. sayeing that it doth ap∣peere that the Apostles did not deliuer all by epi∣stles, but manie things without writing, but as well these as those deserue the same faith. The which is not onelie as much as can be expressed for the authoritie of traditions, but also a more playne & commendable testimonie then anie Romanist euer vttered concerning the same. From whence the reader may deduce that the knight is heere also out of the right way of the primitiue Church, in which he runneth forward till the verie end of his section, & like a man ouer heated breatheth out nothing but abuses of diuerse moderne diuines which he citeth & in a cauilling & captious sort peruerts their true sense & meaning in all, or most pla∣ces by him alleaged. Sec. 8. In the eight section he pretends to proue that the traditions of the Roman Church were vn∣knowne to the Greeke Church & that they want vniuersalitie antiquitie & succession; but on the contrarie that faith which the refor∣med Churches maintaine at this day, is the same in substance which the Apostles publis∣hed in Greece, & therefore hath antiquitie vniuersalitie & succession. And this is the sub∣stance of his section, if anie substance it hath. But in truth he proueth his position with such mediums, that I am scarce willing to re∣late them for losse of time; the greatest part of
his proofes being but eyther his owne bare & false affirmations, or onelie friuolous argumēts long since ansered & destroyed by Bellarmin, and other Romanists, & partlie also by my selfe in my Censure; or else they are onelie au∣thorities drawne from his owne brothers both in religion & lyeing, as from Illiricus whome Bellarmine doth cleerlie discouer to haue binne most expert in that black art, or from other professed enimies of the Roman Church as Nylus & other Grecian Scismatikes: adding also the resistance or disclame of some Gre∣cians in different occasions, & heere & there a without doubt of his owne citing diuers au∣thors vnfaithfullie for his owne aduantage contrarie to their meaning, especiallie Bellar∣mine whome he abuseth in diuers places, par∣telie by peruerting his sense & partlie by man∣gling his sentences, as lib. 2. de verbo Dei cap. 16. lib. 2. de Monach. cap. 30. lib. 1. de Sanct. beatid. cap. 19. mingling also some vntruthes, as that most of the Greeke & Latin Fathers did hould that the faithfull till the resurrection doe not attaine to the beatificall vision of God &c. And now let the prudent reader iudge whether Sir Humfrey doth proceed sollidlie, or rather not most absurdlie & weaklie in that he goeth about to eleuate the antiquitie, vni∣uersalitie, & succssion of the Roman faith ey∣ther in generall or particular points by virtue
of a scattered companie of moderne Grecians, who in those matters they dissent from vs contrarie to the doctrine of their most ancient & renowned auncestors, haue no more autho∣ritie then the pretended reformers themselues; nay & especiallie considering them to be of a religion which agrees neyther intirelie with ours, & yet much lesse with theirs, what a madnesse is it in the knight to make vse of their authoritie, eyther to infringe the anti∣quitie, vniuersalitie, & succession of the Ro∣man doctrine, or for confirmation of his owne? Dicunt (Armeni) in Christo Domino v∣nam natu∣ram esse, vnam vo∣luntatem vnamque operationē. Aub. Mir. not. Episc. p. 43. Hodie (Ae∣thiopes) & baptisantur & circum∣ciduntur. Idem p. 54. Neyther is Sir Humfrey (thou' most re∣pugnant to the knowne truth) content to say, that the Greeke Church hath continued the truth of his doctrine in all ages, but he also addeth further that if we looke beyond Lu∣ther, we shall easilie discerne that the Musco∣uites, Armenians, Egiptians, & Ethiopians, did teach their reformed doctrine, euen from the Apostles time till now. By which porticulars I doubt not but the reader may perceaue euen without a comentarie how ridiculous he ma∣kes himselfe & his Religion & to what streits this mā was put, & how impossible it is for him to auoyde the by way in the proofe of his an∣tiquitie, vniuersalitie, & succession, who by his owne confession was forced to fetch his faith from such by places & deuious regions where yet he hath not found it, but remaineth still
in his owne vnquoth English by way. The nynth section pretendeth to proue that the scriptures are a certayne safe & eui∣dent way to saluation, & traditions a by way. In which section Sir Humfrey beginneth with a large homelie about the certaintie & safetie of scriptures, which two wordes be∣cause he peraduenture dreamed the night be∣fore he writ this, that he had seene them in the scripture, the one in the firste of S. Luke 4. the other Philip. 3.1. he assured himselfe he had thrust the Papists frō the wall at the first push. But alas for pittie, his dreame proued so false that when he awaked he found himselfe in the channell; for in neyther of those places are those wordes found, nay nor yet the sense which he intendeth heere, which being no other then that onelie scriptures & no tradi∣tion is to be followed in anie matter of faith or manners, neyther those two places of scripture nor anie other testimonie that he bringeth ey∣ther out of anie scripture or Fathers doth proue his peremptorie position, but onelie shewe that all scriptures are profitable to in∣struct a man in all good workes to the end he may be perfect, & moreouer that the scriptures be as Bellarmine sayth a most certaine & most safe rule of faith; yet that they be the sole or onelie certaine & safe rule, neyther Bellarmine nor anie other Romanist, nor yet anie proofe
or testimonie which the knight produceth doth eyther teach or testifie. It is true Sir Humfrey alleageth diuers authors, but all ac∣cording to his accustomed manner, that is ney∣ther much to the purpose nor yet verie faith∣fullie, & the testimonies of those eyther imper∣tinētlie produced, or alreadie cleared by Bellar∣mine & other Controuertists, to containe no∣thing contrarie to the Roman doctrine in this particular: or else such obscure grolles as neyther his predecessors, as I thinke, did euer cite by reason of their smale authoritie, nor are they of that moment that they deserue anie ansere at all: as Waltram & Fauorinus which at the leaste by reason of the ill vse he maketh of thē serue the knight for nothing more then to leade him out of the common path of the euerduring & constant Church (as a sure guide which according to the scriptures cannot faile euen by the power of hell) into a dangerous diuerticle of scriptures expounded by dedu∣ctions proceeding from the priuate spirit of particular men, which is all he concludes in this his section. Sec. 10. From hence Sir Humfrey passeth to an∣other matter, that is to the testimonies of the ancient fathers, where he chargeth the Ro∣manists that they eyther openly reiect them, or secretly decline their authority by euasions in particular pointes. This is the tenth section
a great part of which is repeated out of his firste booke & ansered by me in my censure. He makes a large preamble touching the clayme the Romanists make to the ancient fathers as patrons of their doctrine, & as if they did arrogate that which is not their owne: but the discourse is very idle & mutatis mudandis, may be verie iustely verified of the knight & his predecessors, especiallie Iewell & Plessis who both of them were the greatest braggars in that kind that euer were, & yet none so shamelesse in corrupting the Fathers workes & abusing their sense, as themselues. The rest of this section is verie meane stuffe consisting of captious constructions of the sayeings of some Romanists, & contorting them to this matter as if they did disesteeme or reiect the ancient Fathers authoritie which is impossible to be true, as is manifestlie conuinced by the continuall vse they make of them much more then the Nouellists, as it is well knowne to the world: And the truth is that the Romanists onelie modestlie confesse especiallie when they are vrged to it by the clamours of the sectaries, that some of the Fathers in their single opi∣nions, or in such cases as they did not all con∣sent together, did sometimes perhapps fall into some erroneous point of doctrine, & that they are not alwayes & in euerie point to be fol∣lowed in their expositions of scriptures or o∣therwise
in matters nothing concerning the controuersies of these tymes: But onelie when they all agree in matters of faith, or by graun∣ting that in pointes of practise (for example about the Communion in one kinde or priuate Masse) they are not all & in all matters ex∣preslie for them: How beit they knowe they neither are against them all things considered. Which if it be duelie pondered is no inconue∣nience at all, in regard that these things & such others be mutable according to the diuer∣sitie of times & persons, & consequentlie might be otherwise thē by practised thē by vs. Neyther doe the Romanists when they affir∣me the Fathers to be for them teach (as the knight doth falselie & deceitfullie suppose) that all the Fathers in euerie point of faith be it transubstantiation or anie other, are positiuelie for them; but onelie that the whole streame nay nor anie part of them is positiuelie against them in anie such doctrine, & that in the most pointes they are expresselie & wholie for them, & against the reformers in all. Pag. 290. Out of which the reader may collect how impudently the kinght doth belye the foresaid Romanists, when he affirmeth that, they are reputed no good Catholikes by their owne tenets that teach not contrary to the vniforme consent of Fa∣thers, especiallie considering that he himselfe hath already related how the same Romanists
take an expresse oath to follow that consent. Sect. 4. init. And by this it may in like fashion be easilye perceaued, how little credit this man deserues when he accuseth his aduersaries of citation of counterfeit authors, wheras he himselfe doth deale so vniustly in that nature, especially with Bellarmine, that he doth not onely mu∣tilate his wordes, but also citeth that which is not to be found, as by way of example you may see page 290. where he affirmes Bellar∣mine to professe that they are not to be num∣bred among Catholiques that thinke the Vir∣gin Mary was conceiued in originall sinne; for hauing deligently passed ouer two seuerall times the 15. chap. of the 4. booke de amiss. grat. which is that same Sir Humfrey citeth, I find no such sentence nor words in it, but rather the quite contrary doctrine, as by his owne words in my margen related clerely appeares:Neque de∣sunt qui impudenter affirment ab Ecclesia Romanae defendi cō∣ceptionem immacula∣tam Virgi∣nis Mariae tanquam articulum fidei. Bell. loco cit. neither is it lesse plainly false which he affirmeth for the conclusion of this section, to wit that Bel∣larmine & the Romanists in generall some times condemne the Fathers as counterfeit some times they purge them as if they were full of corruptions, & that according to seue∣rall occasions they haue their seuerall deuices to produce them or auoyd them at their plea∣sure, yea & that they cōfessing thē to be coun∣terfeit, yet produce them for their doctrine: all which particulars are so farre from truth, that
they cry shame on the author, & so much the more in regard that he & his brothers are not a little guiltie in this busines, but doe daily offend in the same kinde as by many instances might be proued & particularly in that one for example of the Imperfect, which passing vnder the name of S. Chrisostome is conuinced by Bellarmine & others not to be his, in regard it houldeth the Homousians for heretikes, & yet is it commonly cited by our aduersaries & euen by Sir Humfrey himself in diuers places of his workes, in which they verifie most fitly that of the Apostle, Rom. 2.21. in that while they preach to others that they must not steale, they steale themselues. Neyther yet doe any of the testimonyes which the kinght produceth for his accusation of Bellarmine in this nature proue his intent, nor any thing more then that both Bellar∣mine & other Romanists doe indeed some times produce such authors in fauour of their doctrine as are not by all Romanists held to be of certaine & vndoubted authority, or at the least not certainly iudged to be the workes of those authors whose names they beare, thou' otherwise althose who cite them hold them for workes of ancient standing & not coun∣terfeit, at least in the substance of theie autho∣rity, as the knight doth counterfeitly indeuore to perswade his reader: nay Bellarmine whome
the knight particularly taxeth in this behalf showeth himself so iust & sincere in this point that he is not content eyther alwayes, or for the most parte to aduertise the reader when he cites doubtfull authors in his tomes of contro∣uersies; but also to take away all occasion of scruple in himself, & of calumniation in others, he hath made a particular censure of such au∣thors as are in anie sort held for doubtfull or Apochriphal, or otherwise called in question. And so to conclude this, the reader may see by what indirect courses Sir Humfrey huddles vp this parte of his by-way for himself & freinds to spend their tyme in. Sec. 11. In his eleauenth section he indeuoureth to proue that the substantiall pointes of the Ro∣mane faith as they are now receiued & taught by the Church of Rome were neuer taught by the primitiue Church nor receiued by the an∣cient Fathers; these are the contents of the se∣ction, but it containes so little substance that we may trulie say it stands onelie for a Cipher to increase the number. He begins with a great commendation of the scriptures, because he would seeme to say some thing plausible to the common people, but I knowe none make lesse estimation of thē in reallitie then he & his consorts who tye them like a nose to the grin∣destone, to the interpretation of those pri∣uate spirits who haue walked with in the com∣passe
of a hundred yeeres or little more, rather then to the consent of all succeeding ages since they firste were penned. And I pray you what is this preamble to the purpose of prouing the Roman faith not to haue binne taught by the ancient Fathers or the primitiue Church? the knight produceth certaine places out of sainct Augustine, & Ambrose, to proue that they preferred scriptures before the writings of the Fathers, & that they appealed from them to scriptures: but what Romanist in the world denyeth that the scriptures haue incomparable preheminence aboue all other writings what∣soeuer? or what Roman Catholike doth not willinglie graunt that when the scriptures are plaine & the doctrine of the Fathers obscure or doubtfull, prouocation from them to the scriptures is rightlie made: But that euen in such cases as the Fathers doe vniformlie agree in matter of faith or generallie receaued pra∣ctise of the Church, it is vsuall & lawfull to appeale from them to scriptures, especiallie when they are not plaine & manifest; this I say neyther those holie Fathers produced by the knight did euer teach, neyther can anie reason be found to proue it, but rather it is cleerlie against all reason, as opening the by-way to all sortes of heresie. And if Sir Humfrey when he read S. Au∣gustine contra Crescon: had but passed one other
step forward, he might haue found that fa∣mous Father not to appeale to scripture onelie, but also to the authoritie of the Church, since that presentlie after he had sayd that he held not sainct Cyprians epistle for Canonicall, but examined it by Canonicall scripture (which are the words our aduersarie cites) he addes & that with a great emphasis sayeing. Non acci∣pio inquam, I say I doe not receaue that which S. Cyprian holdeth of rebaptization, because the Church doth not receaue it for which blessed sainct Cyprian shed his bloud: By which the reader may plainelie perceiue that one & as it were the cheife motiue which sainct Augustine had to reiect the doctrine of rebaptization, was not the sole authoritie of the scripture, as not being in that case so cleere as to conuince S. Cyprian, but he struck the last stroake by force of the authoritie of the Catholike Church. And thus you see Sir Humfrey is still out of the way of the Fathers which he him∣selfe citeth, if they be ritelie vnderstood; & followeth his owne crooked tract, relating the particular pointes of the Roman doctrine vnfaithfullie as he vseth to doe & making ma∣nie conditionall promises to subscribe in case the ancient Fathers be found for vs, but re∣mitting the performance to his next opportu∣nitie, which is so farre to seeke that I assure my selfe he will neuer finde it.
Sec. 12. In his twelfth section he comes to particu∣lars contending that S. Augustine is reiected by the Romanists in the seuerall pointes in which he agreeth, Page 317. as he supposeth, with the Reformers. I expected Sir Humfrey would haue performed the large promise which he made in his precedent section, sayeing he dares confidentlie auowe that in all fundamentall pointes of difference the Romanists eyther want antiquitie to supplie their firste ages, or vniuersalitie to make good the consent of Christian Churches, or vnitie of opinions to proue their Trent articles of beleife: but in steed of prouing this he goeth about the bush & euading the difficultie which he found im∣possible for himselfe to ouercome, he onelie indeuoures to persuade his reader that accor∣ding to the Romanists owne confessions, sainct Augustine is wholelie for the presumed refor∣mers doctrine; for proofe of which he produ∣ceth diuers instances out of Roman diuines, but effecteth nothing, in regard that althou' it is true that some of the Romanists confesse that S. Augustine did dissent from their opi∣nions, partlie in the interpretation of some cer∣taine passages of scripture, & partlie in some other particulars, yet none of them confesse that in anie mayne point of religion or faith euen those which haue binne declared by the late Councell of Trent, that holie Doctor dis∣senteth
from them, & in this consists the equi¦uocation, which togeather with some vn∣truthes, which he vttereth, as when he affir∣mes that those which he rehearses heere, be cheife points in question betwixt vs, & such like, is the by-way in which his worship wal∣keth with great grauitie all the lenght of this section. Sec. 13. In his next ensueing section which is the 13. in number, he pretends that S. Gregorie who sent S. Augustine the monke into En∣gland to preach the Christian faith is directlie opposite to the Roman religion in the mayne pointes of faith. By the contents of this section it appeeres that the knight is as fitte to write matters of diuini∣tie as an asse is fitte to play on the fiddle, & he makes such fiddling worke as one may plainlie perceiue that eyther he doth not vnderstand the Fathers, & other Catholike authors that write in Latin, or that passion & malice quite obfuscate his witts when he reades them. In his 350. page he affirmes that in the vndoub∣ted writings of Gregorie there will be found few or no substantiall pointes which are not agreable to the tenets of their Church, & al∣together different from the Roman, this he sayth but in stead of proofe comming to par∣ticulars he committs diuers palpable fraudes: for firste whereas he professeth to compare
the doctrine of Tridentine Councell & his owne with the doctrine of sainct Gregorie in lieu of that he cites the doctrine of Bellarmine, the notes vpon the Rhemes testament, & the expurgatorie Index, which altho' they be au∣thenticall Catholike authors, yet are they not rules of the Roman faith. Neither yet doth our aduersarie conuince them to be repugnant to sainct Gregories true meaning in anie one point of faith. And I earnestlie wish I had time & place to discouer to the reader the egre∣gious fraude the knight hath vsed in his trāsla∣tion & interpretation of this holie Fathers wordes touching the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist: Greg. in 6. ps. poenit. for by this onelie passage, he might frame a coniecture of the rest. Secondlie wheras our aduersarie treateth in this section of substantiall pointes of faith, yet some of the particulars in which he exem∣plifies, are not substantiall points of faith, but rather of manners which according to diuersi∣tie of times may alter & change, as priuate Masse, the double Communion, reading of scriptures in vulgar language, in which there is a mayne difference from matters of faith, which can neuer varie. Thirdlie of all the pointes which he rehear∣seth being all as I take it 9. in number. There is but onelie one in which it can be sayd with anie coulourable probabilitie that sainct Gre∣gorie
in anie of the places heere cited doth contradict the doctrine of the Roman Church, & that is the point of the Canon of the scrip∣tures, in which patricular althou' he refused to giue the bookes of Machabees the title of Ca∣nonicall scripture, (as yet S. Augustine & others did before him, & the rest of the writers, for the most parte, euer since haue donne (whether it were because he ment onelie they were not contained in the Canon of the Iewes, or for that the whole Church had not then declared them for Canonicall vnder that name) Ne∣uerthelesse he is not to be iudged more repug∣nant to the doctrine of the present Roman Church in that point, then those who notob∣standing that in the primitiue Church certaine bookes of the new Testament, as the epistle to the Hebrewes & others, were doubted of, yet now with infallible certaintie & faith re∣ceaue them for diuine, & sacred scripture, al∣thou' they were not accounted & beleiued for such by all the orthodoxall Fathers of the Church in all former ages since the time of the Apostles who firste published them to the world. Especiallie considering that the same sainct Gregorie neuer denyed neyther in the place cited nor in anie other of his workes, but that as the declaration of the Church was suf∣ficient to assure all faithfull people that those bookes of which before his dayes there had
binne doubt, were then trulie Canonicall scripture thou' not knowne for such in euerie age before him: so might the same succeeding Church in later times determine the like of those bookes which in his time so generallie & vndoubtedlie were not as yet held for such. Neyther according to the rules of diuinitie can that man be reputed not to be of the same religion of which another is, because he now beleaueth some thing more in the materiall obiect of faith then the other did in that time in which he liued; but at the most it can onelie be truelie verified that he hath the same habit of faith thou' some what more extended in the obiect, as neyther the Apostles were of a di∣uerse faith when they were firste instructed by Christe before his passion from that they had after his resurrection, when yet doubtlesse they receaued more expresse, & extensiue knowledge in matters of faith then before they had receiued. And sure I am S. Gregorie without exception cites both the booke of To∣bie, & Ecclesiasticus: & sapience most fre∣quentlie: none of which bookes neuerthelesse the misreformers admit for the worde of God. And till Sir Humfrey or some of his associates can produce out of S. Augustin & S. Gregorie as plaine & pregnant places either for his owne tenets, or against the Roman doctrine as the Romanists haue long since produced for theirs
as their workes vpon euerie seuerall contro∣uersie make apparent, let them for shame ne∣uer claime them for theirs in anie one point of controuersie: for notobstanding they make a plausible vse of some fewe patches of their more ambiguous, ill construed, & ill related sentences, yet turne but the iudicious & vnpar∣tiall reader to the bookes them selues, & he will ingenuouslie confesse & absolutelie crye a loud, all is ours. And if it would please his maiestie of his royall clemencie to suffer vs freelie to make tryall of our cause by scripture, & Fathers, I knowe which side would be founde minus ha∣bens, manie graines to light. But it is our great miserie (yet in one sense our great happines) to be so crossed & curbed with seueritie of tēporal lawes that we cannot be safe in the most pri∣uate corners, much lesse can we appeare in any publike assemblie for defense of our Religion. Vid. Bell. in qua∣tuor Cōtr. tom. valēt. Anales. fid. But yet supposing that S. Gregorie had binne contrarie in that particular of the bookes of Machabies (for touching the rest mentioned by the knight he is sufficientlie cleered from that imputation by Bellarmine & other Ro∣manists) yet could it not possiblie proue that monstrous great proposition of our aduersarie, to wit that S. Gregorie in his vndoubted wri∣tings directlie opposeth the Romish faith in the maine pointes thereof: & consequentlie
from hence it manifestlie appeereth how farre Sir Humfrey hath walked by the way, when in the end of his eleauenth section he auouched his reader should plainlie discerne how the la∣ter Popes & Bishops doe differ from the for∣mer, & how these two Fathers of the Church (meaning sainct Augustine & sainct Gregorie) concurre expresselie with the doctrine profes∣sed in the reformed Churches different from the Roman; it being most apparent by the premisses, that by anie thing which he hath heere produced out of the foresayd Fathers, he hath neyther proued anie one point of his owne religiō, nor disproued ours; but hath one∣lie prestigiouslie deluded the eyes of the reader with a coulorable florish, & yet in realitie re∣maineth still in the same byway in which he hath hitherto walked separate from the royall street of the ancient Doctors of the primitiue Church. Sec. 14. The next section being the fourteenth is that the ingenuous Romanists confesse that the Councells which they oppose against the Reformers, were neyther called by lawfull authoritie, nor to the right ends. Heere I finde that to be most true which a pleasant Protestant pronounceth of the Puri∣tans sayeing, their religion willinglie admitts no founder, but Bragger & they flourished much about a time. And in sober sadnes the best Sir Humfrey can make of his aduer∣saries
confession throu' out his whole worke in fauour of his doctrine, doth nothing more then plainlie conuince him to be of no other progenie: Neyther doe their confessions fit his purpose anie better then if he should put his shooes vpon his handes, or his hose vpon his head. A patterne of this you may see in this verie section, in which how soeuer he vaunteth of the confession of his aduersaries, & that by two principall conditions (as he sayth) ancien∣tlie in vse for the authoritie of Councells are both acknowledged to be abrogated by later Councells, to wit because, quoth the knight, now a dayes the Pope calls Councells without right, & he & his assemble them in their owne name & for their owne ends: for proofe of which calumnious position he cites but onely two authors & those scarce held for sound mettle among the Romanists: neyther yet doth eyther of them plainlie auerre his position as it is vttered by him; but they onelie speake by way of reprehension of such abuses as might be practised in that nature by the malice of men without taxing the Pope or anie other in particular, as the knight would maliciouslie inferre out of their wordes for the confirmation of the sinister opinion he hath of the Church of Rome & her head in earth. The rest which he hath in this section is but
eyther his owne bare assertions & those not true, as that from Moyses to the Machabies all temporall Princes practised power of calling assemblies, & that assoone as Kings receiued the Christian faith they executed the same power, & that the later Councells celebrated in the Roman Church are not assembled in the name of Christe: all the rest I say is eyther such stuffe as this, or else malitious corruptions of some Roman diuines as appeeres in Bellar∣min & Valentia, the sense of both which au∣thors he deceitfullie peruerteth, the one lib. 1. de Concil. cap. 10. the other tom. 3. d. 1. q. 2. p. 5. by which false & indirect dealing he doth nothing in this whole section but shewe him∣selfe to proceed in that by-way which his pro∣genitors Luther & Caluin haue shewed him in their corrupted writings. Sec. 15. In the 15. section Sir Humfrey affirmeth that Councells giue no support to the Romish religion: In his former section he professed great reuerence & respect towards the autho∣ritie of Councells especiallie the fower firste, yet heere he spareth not the verie firste Gene∣rall Councell of those same fower which he so highlie commended before, but at once he striketh at no lesse then 60. of the 80. Canons it is commonlie held to containe, like a squin∣teyed waterman looking one way & roweing another, iust, as he did before in his feigned
commendation of traditions & Fathers. But let the reader marke what this man is to proue & how preposterouslie he proueth it, & he will presentlie iudge him not to be squinteyed onelie, but eyther starke blind or starke mad. He is to proue as he sayth firste that manie generall & particular Councells haue erred in euerie age which yet are produced for the Ro∣man religion, but how doth he proue this I praye? marie because the Councell of Cayphas sayth he, is confessed by Bellarmine to haue perniciouslie erred when it adiudged Christe a blasphemer, therefore by Bellarmines confes∣sion Councells produced for the Roman reli∣gion may erre. Obstupescite caeli! O yee hea∣uens stand yee astonished to heere this mans logike! & this being his firste card iudge what the rest of his hand may be, & how like he is to conclude, who argueth from Cayphas to Christe, from the old lawe to the new, from a Councell of false Iewes to Councells of true Christiās: Vid. Bell. de Conc. l. 2. cap. 8. the reader may see Bellarmins anser to this parologisme, if anie further anser it de∣serues in his opiniō, for in my iudgemēt it nee∣des no more but a loud lafter, & thus I leaue it. He passeth to the second age & sayth that the Councell of Antioch is cited by Gretzerus, by Turrian, by Baronius for the worship of images, & yet that the firste publishers of the
Councells neuer mentioned it. But what is this to the purpose of prouing that by the con∣fessions of Romanists manie decrees & Ca∣nons of Councells by them produced for the Roman religion are counterfeit or deuised to proue the Trent doctrine? doth it follow that because some publishers of Councells did not find this Councell or other such like in their dayes, therefore they did confesse them for spurious or Apochriphall or that those who afterwards haue brought them to light as the authors aboue named Baronius Turrian & Binnius haue not as much authoritie to publish them for authenticall as you & your criticall Cooke to denie them or condemne them for counterfeit; Censura Patr. especiallie considering that those who allow this particular Councell of which we now speake, are all knowne to be of farre greater knowledge in matters of antiquitie then those that collected Councells before them, to witt Merlin & Crabbe Surius & Ni∣colinus, who althou' they be one more in num∣ber then those moderne Romanists who al∣lowe this first Councell of Antioch as found in the librarie of ancient Origen, yet neyther doth the greater number contradict the lesse, nor yet if they did haue they so much autho∣ritie as to preuaile before them. In the third age the knight setts the Car∣thaginian Councell celebrated by S. Cyprian
& his Collegues, which Councell, sayth the knight, may serue to proue that some Coun∣cells rightly called are dischareged by our ad∣uersaries, adding that this Councell is therfore reiected by the Romanists by reason that S. Cyprian & the whole Councell apposed the title of the Popes supremacie. But in this proofe Sir Humfrey committeth diuers grosse faultes, firste in that he supposeth falsely that a Councell orderly conuocated ought not to be reiected, which is a position that I am sure no Romanist, & as I thinke, no sectary before Sir Humfrey euer defended: & the reason is for that it is not the assemblie, but the proceeding & concluding of a Councell is that which giues it decisiue authority, other∣wise a Councell without definitions sub∣scriptions & confirmation should necessarily be receaued, which is most absurd. Secondly the kinght telleth his reader a manifest vntruth, where he affirmeth that the foresayd Councell is therfore dischareged be∣cause S. Cyprian & the whole Councell appo∣sed the title of the Popes supremacie; for that Councell was assembled onely about rebap∣tization of those which had binne baptised by heretiques, neyther is there any mention of the Popes authority eyther good or bad: but onely S. Cyprian by way of preface or pre∣uention warneth those Bishops that were pre∣sent
that euery one deliuer his sentence or ver∣ditt freely without iudging one another, be∣cause saith he, none of vs doth constitute him∣self Bishop of Bishopps, & so what is this I pray to the Bishop of Rome or Popes supre∣macy whome S. Cyprian so much respected that euen in this occasion as S. Hierome testi∣fieth, Dialog. aduers. Lucif. he directed his sinod to Pope Stephan, which is an euident signe that he was not con∣trarie to the Popes supreme authority, but ra∣ther did disetely in that his fact acknowledge the same. Thirdly Sir Humfrey dealeth falsely when for conclusion of this point he saith that this may serue for proofe, that Councells righ∣tly called are descharged by his aduersaries, when they make against the Trent faith, it being manifest that this Synod containes not any one of those matters which he contemp∣tuously termeth the Tridentine faith. From whence it appeeres that in steed of proofes the liberall kinght hath giuen vs his owne impo∣stures: And thus it fareth with him throu' all this section captiously concluding vniuer∣sall propositions of particulars, as that some Romanists doe cite for the Popes supremacy one or two Councells of whose authority others make doubt, therfore the doctrine of the Popes supremacy is wholely grounded vp∣pon vncertaine Councells: notobstanding he himself acknowledgeth that besides these few
doubt full authorities, there be many more in number cited by Bellarmine & others that are vndoubted: & with such sophisticall illations mingling diuers equiuocations & false sup∣positions, confounding generall Councells with particular & confounding truth with falsity, yea & much falsity without any mix∣ture of truth, he concludeth his section in such a fashion as it is easie for anie that hath his witts about him to perceaue he intendeth no∣thing else but to leade his reader into that same by-way which he still laboureth to finish for himself & others of his owne profession. Sec. 16. In his sixteenth section the knight makes hoat warre against the Councell of Trent; & after he had in a couning & secret manner spit his poyson at diuers other Councells of more ancient standing in the precedent section, he singles this out alone as his most professed enimy, & most seuere censurer of his faultes & crimes, vsing all his whole forces & art to diminish his strength & power, & that not in hugger mugger but in plaine & manifest ter∣mes: affirming the same to be of smale or no credit as being neyther lawfully called nor free, nor eyther generall or generally receiued. He sayth it was not lawfully called because it was assembled by the Popes vsurped authority & not by the Emperour: but this being the firste part of he proofe, it is both false in it
self & also left vnproued otherwise then by his naked affirmation, Serenissimo etiam Im∣peratori gratias a∣gere, & gratulari iure optimo debemus. — ille de nostris his rebus pro sua ex∣imia pieta∣te sollicitus mirifice fuit Orat. hab. ses. 9. & so it needes no other confutation then denyall; how beit so certaine & manifest it is that the Emperour consented vn to that Councell & approued both the conuocation & proceedings of it (as much as lay in his power) that I am persuaded the sectaries them selues with all their audacious∣nesse haue not the face to deny so playne a truth, & so plainely expressed in the oration had in the last session of the sacred synod, in which great thankes ar rendered vnto him for his zeale & care therin imployed. The second part of the proofe consists of a false supposition that no Councell can be legi∣timate except it be conuocated by the Empe∣rour: but that this is false it is clearer then the day, otherwise it would follow that those Councells which were celebrated before there were any Christian Emperour in the world should haue binne vnlaufully called, as euen that of the Apostles themselues: Act. 15. & more if that position of the nouellists were true, what truth or authority can the Councells of the preten∣siue reformed Churches haue, none of which as yet had euer any Emperour of their religion (& as I hope in God neuer will haue) at least since the daies of Luther euen by their owne confessions: which pouerty of their poore rag∣ged flock it seemes Sir Humfrey had quite
forgotte when he vttered that false maxime of the reformed doctrine. Secondly he sayth, the Councell of Trent was not free, Hi (nun∣cij) Aqui∣lon is partes prope om∣nes pera∣grarunt, rogarunt, obsecrarūt, obtestati sunt, tuta omnia, at∣que amica promiserūt. &c Orat. vt supra. & yet he con∣fesseth in this same place that he denieth not but that safe conduct was promised as well to the Lutherans as to the Romanists, & yet as it seemes like cowardelie dastardes they feared danger, timuerunt vbi non erattimor. And if they feared where there was no feare in whome I praye was the fault? now for freedome of speech in proposing of matters & discussing them Sir Humfrey cannot deny if he will stand to the testimony of his owne Dudithius cited by him∣self who plainly supposeth freedome in that nature, in that he affirmes being a Protestant that the feild had binne theirs if they had not binne ouercome by number. Thirdly he affirmes that it was not generall, but how could it be more generall then by a generall & amicable conuocation of all Princes Prelates & learned diuines, which the Bull of indiction declares. And as for the number of those who came vnto it thou' the knight doth vse all his art for the diminution of it, yet was it farre greater then he vouchsafed to re∣count, as the Catalogue prefixed to the Coun∣cell doth plainly declare, amounting to the number of 255. Acclam. Patr in ∣nc Conc. of those who subscribed to the decrees; & the truth is, if more had come more had binne admitted, & none reiected, which
euen of it self alone excepting others is a suf∣ficient note of Generallity. Fourthly, he saith it was not generally receiued, but in this he vseth one of his vsuall equiuocations, for althou' in some places as yet it is not receaued in matters of reformation & practise as in those places especially in which it hath neuer binne proclamed. Neuerthelesse in matters of faith it is generally receaued of all Roman Catholikes wher soeuer they bee, farre or neere, in Europe Asia, or America, or other forreigne Countries conuerted to the christian Catholike faith, & so the reader may see that this saieng of our aduersaries which they perpetually buzze into the eares of the simple people that the Councell of Trent is not generally receaued by the Romanists them∣selues, is meere cousenage & imposture mali∣tiously inuented to auert their mindes from the most wholesome doctrine & profitable pre∣cepts of the same for the generall reformation of the Church, which because the false refor∣mers plainly see it trenches to neere vppon their Copyhold, they ioyne heauen & hell together to infringe its authority. And here I aduertise the reader that our aduersarie vseth the relations of Some histories touching the proceeding of the Tridentine Councel which ar not admitted by the Romanists, & particu∣larly those passages of Thuanus, of whome I haue receiued credible information that
dying a Roman Catholike he made a general retractation of all such positions or relations as he had publishedlesse aduisedly, or any way dissonant to the doctrine, or practise of the Roman Church: & so all such passages as Sir Humfrey produces out of his workes, ar esteemed as voyde of force for confirmation of anie parte of his doctrine. The rest which Sir Humfrey vttereth in this section is nothing but certaine hereditarie vntruthes & impostures which he receaued from Caluin, Illiricus, Tertium nonnulla, atque etiā quartum discussa: summa sae∣pe conten∣tione certa∣tum &c. Orat. hab. ad finem Concil. & Sleidan & the coun∣terfeit historie of the Councell of Trent pu∣blished in the English tongue in disgrace of that most renowned Synod, whose authoritie will they nill they, they must suffer vs to ho∣nore, imbrace & obey at the least till such time as they can showe vs one of their owne of the like generallitie, grauitie, & authenticall & exacte proceeding which it hath vsed in discus∣sion & determination of the most receaued doctrine of former & present ages, which if they cānot performe, then let thē confesse they haue left the cōmon & royall way of the anciēt Church, & fallen into a by-way of parlamen∣tall, or pure consistoriall gouernment in mat∣ters of faith, not heard of in primitiue ages: as neyther, was their extrauagant forme of Con∣uenticles, trulie generall, nationall, or pro∣uinciall, as appeeres in their Pseudosinods of
Gappe, Vide relat. Synod. Dordrecht & Dort, in which the reformed Pre∣lates carryed themselues so zealouslie, that as it is crediblie reported they spent 2000. pounds in Renish wine to heat their spirits before euer they had decreed anie one point of their con∣trouersies. Sec. 17. In his seauenteenth section Sir Humfrey doth nothing but foyst, babble, & abuse Bel∣larmine & other Romanists about the Church as if they extolled her aboue the scriptures & accusing here to haue spoyled herself of them, & as if it were vncertaine among them whe∣ther the Roman Church is the true Church because they teach it hath diuers acceptions, which is all false & friuolous matter; for that altho' the Church according to the heteroge∣niall partes & diuers functions of the persons of which it consists, may admit seuerall deno∣minations, as are the essentiall, representatiue, or virtuall Church, in which point also per∣aduenture there may be found some difference among the Romanists in their manner of speech & speculations: yet in substance they all agree that the visible Church to which the faithfull must seeke in their doubtes is the vi∣siblie & perpetuallie succeeding Church from the time of Christe till this day, which is the plaine way in which etiam stulti ambulant, euen the most simple sort of people may easilie finde & walke in; all other Churches especiallie the
inuisible Congregation of Sir Humfrey & his fellowes is but a blinde diuerticle & by-way, fitter for wanderers & vagabonds then for the true & honest people of God to walke in. Sec. 18. In the title of the 18. section, the knight pretendeth to proue that the Plea which the Romanists drawe from the infallible autho∣ritie & title of the Catholike Church is false vaine & friuolous. Althou' the name & authoritie of the Ca∣tholike Church hath euer binne so odious to all sortes of sectaries, that they made it a cheife parte of their labours to impugne the same, of which, seuerall instances might easilie be pro∣duced: yet this practise of theirs hath neuer bin so much vsed or so earnestly pursued as in these present tymes. For as it is well knowne that their Captaine & Antesignane Luther strucke his firste stroake at the Pope & Churches power to graunt indulgences, so is it also appa∣rent by experience, that all his followers con∣tinue the same battle with all their strenght & stratagems. For proofe of which wee need goe no further then to this our aduersarie. Who throu' his whole workes laboureth nothing more then to diminish the lustre, & power of the Catholike Roman Church; in so much that in this verie section he maketh choise ra∣ther to lay violent hands vpon the sacred Bible, & shamefullie to corrupt three seuerall places
of the diuine scripture then faile of his purpose, or want colour for his peruerse intent, which to the end the reader may more plainelie vn∣derstand I will particularlie reherse. The firste place therefore consists in diuers passages of the epistle to the Romans especially in the firste chapter, where that which the Apostle by way of admonition speaketh onely to those particular Christians & members of the Church which were then at Rome, exhor∣ting them to be constant in their faith & humble themselues least God cut them of for their sinnes as he did the Iewes; the knight doth violentlie drawe it to the who Roman Church, as if S. Paul did intimate t t had a possibilitie of falling, & consequentlie was but a particular Church, feygning also that sainct Paul did therefore pray for the continuance & stabilitie of the Roman faith, as if saith Sir Humfrey he had for seene by the spirit of pro∣phesie they would glorie in their owne me∣rites: all which is quite repugnant to the mea∣ning of the text, as the reader may easilie per∣ceaue. And the like abuse of the knight the reader may see in other places which he cites to the same purpose viz. to proue that the Ro∣mane Church is faileable as 1. Thessal. 8.2. Thessal. 3.1. Tim. 3.15. Ephes. 3.14. In all which places he vseth much of his accustomed craft peruerting the sense most sacrilegiouslie
in all those sacred texts, & in the firste to the Corinthians he falsifieth the wordes, putting thou for vs, the particulars of which I am sorie I cannot stande to examine, to the end his grosse cousenage might more cleerlie appeare, and how vnder coulour of scriptures the sacred word of God & truth is adulterated euen by him who so much braggeth & glo∣rieth in it. After this same fashion he eludeth two pregnant places of Fathers for the authoritie of the Church the one is of Sainct Cypr. lib. 1. epist. 3. the other is of sainct Augustine contra epist. fund. cap. 5. & to coulore his euasion about the wordes of sainct Augustine which are these, Praterea Ecclesia quae nunc est in fide errare non potest ergo si credidarit aliquem li∣brum esse canonicum ex eius te∣stimonio  loneum, firmum quo sumetur à Theologis argumen∣tur. Canon lib. 2. c. 7. Euangelio non crederem nisi Ecclesiae Catholicae me commoueret authoritas, he citeth Canus lib. 2. cap. 8. as if this author did fauore his false interpretation of sainct Augustines meaning; who neuerthelesse (besides that his wordes are not cited home by Sir Humfrey) he onelie affirmes that sainct Augustine did not intend in that place to make rhe Church the formall reason why an infidell or one lately conuerted beleiues the Ghospell, but onelie the necessarie condition of his beleife of the Canonicall scriptures; which doctrine of Ca∣nus makes nothing at all for our aduersaries intent in this place, which is to disproue the infallible authoritie of the Catholike Church,
which Canus doth not denie, Lib. 7. de Canon. c. 10. but professedlie maintayneth & particularlie in the verie pre∣cedent chapter in other places in a most Ca∣tholike manner. To this purpose the knight also cites Du∣rand, Driedo, & Gerson, but rehearseth not their wordes which notobstāding I haue seene cited by Chamier; but if they be truly & sin∣cerelie vnderstood, they conuince nothing against the infallible authoritie of the Church, as neyther the wordes of sainct Thomas who onelie affirmeth that sainct Augustine spea∣kes of the Church as an oueruling cause, but not as the foundation of faith, which no Ro∣manists denies, but all vniformely teach that their faith is founded vpon the word of God, whose onelie authoritie is the supreme rule of the same, but the Church the proponent onelie. In the rest of his section Sir Humfrey makes a diuersion to the vniuersalitie of the Church for which he onely produceth some imperti∣nent reasons of no force with the authorities of the Councells of Ferrara & Basill, waldensis & others, none of which proues any thing ap∣pertayning to the matter in treaty, but onely serue to patch vp this part of his bypath, in which I leaue him. Sec. 19. The 19. section following affirmeth that the Church is finally resolued into the Pope,
whome saith the kinght the Romanists make the husband & the spouse, the head, & the bodie of the Church. This man is so full of falsity & vntruth that it seemes his whole li∣uing is by lyeing, I am perswaded he hath had his breeding in brasen faced College where impudency & vntruth are the cheefe lessons in the schooles. And heere the kinght hath in a manner gone beyonde if not beside himself in that faculty. For I finde no lesse then there lyes euen with in the narrow limits of the title of his section: nay there is not any one part or parcell of it true, by which alone althou' the reader might make a strong coniecture of the rest, yet will I giue him an instance or two in particular which doubtlesse will quite con∣uince his iudgment of the authors knauish dealing. In his 502. page, now at last saith he, they haue made him (meaning the Pope) the whole Church in so much that some are not ashamed to professe that the Pope may dispense against the Apostles, yea against the new testament vppon good cause, & also against all the pre∣cepts of the old. This lye is so exorbitant & monstrous, that it seemes he who made it doub∣ted it would not be taken vppon his owne bare word, wherfore he fled to the authority of his frend Iewell whome he quotes in the margent to make it more authenticall, as if that famous
Father of false dealing could sufficiently sup∣ply all that which in that nature is wanting in himself. But I hope the iudicious reader will register them both in one predicament & giue no more credit to the one then the other, but send them togeather to the whetstone. Another instance I giue the reader out of the 504. page, where the knight chargeth Bellarmine to teach that if the Pope should so much erre as to command vices & forbid vir∣tues, the Church were bound to beleiue that vices are good & virtues euill, vnlesses she will sinne against her conscience. It is true the Car∣dinall hath the same wordes which Sir Hum∣frey cites hitherto, but yet he vseth most dis∣honest & double dealing, in regare that if he had either rehearsed the whole place intirely as it lieth in Bellarmine, or else had veiwed his recognition, he might easily haue found the authors true meaning to be, not that in gene∣rall & euery matter & all occasions, but onely that in doubtful cases & in things not neces∣sarily good or ill of themselues, & in matters indifferent, such obedience is to be giuen to the Pope, least otherwise men should proceed against their consciences, & therfore saith he, Si Papa, If the Pope should command that which is cleerly knowne to be a vice, or should prohibite that which is cleerly knowne to be a virtue, then we ought rather to obey God
then men. And so we see, that taking away the imposture & cousinage of the kinght, there is nothing in Bellarmines doctrine that may either iustly offend the reader, or that makes for the purpose heere intended of pro∣uing that the Pope ought to be obeyed whe∣ther his doctrine be true or false, as our aduer∣sary doth falsely & calumniously affirme. All the rest which the knight hath in this section is onely sophisticall fopperies & crackes of his crazed braine abusing the doctrine of diuers Romanists & framing such sense to their words as cōmeth neerste to his owne purpose & is farthest from theirs, & so falsely fathering it vppon them, & confounding the faith of the whole Church with matters disputable & in opinion, he concludes discourse of all which let the reader consider whether the Romanists or he himself rather be not in the by-way he hath fallaciously framed for his ad∣uersaries. Sec. 20. In the section followeing which is the 20. in order, he affirmes, that the Church, which he saith is resolued finally into the Pope, hath neither personall nor doctrinall succession, neyther in matter of faith nor fact. It appeeres by the knights proceedings in this whole section, that he hath met with his greatest enimie against whome he vseth all his art & cunning hoping to haue the mastrie by
striking most stronglie at the head that is the Pope, whome to make his bloue the fuller, he feignes to be the whole bodie, & like a vene∣mous spider gathering poyson from the fragāt flowers of the Roman doctrine spits the verie quitessence of it against his sacred person. Yet a great part of his matter is but loathsome in∣culcations of that which he hath a hundred times repeated, & which haue binne as often anseared by my selfe & others. But because his importunitie is so great, I will giue the rea∣der a taste, thou' I confesse it is most tedious vnto me to eate so often of the same Crambe. The knights cheife plot in this place is by confronting the doctrine of the ancient Popes not onelie in matters of fact, but of faith also with the moderne doctrine of the Roman Churches & Popes, he beginnes with priuate Masse sayeing that Pope Anacletus did decree that after consecration, all present should communicate according as the Apostles set downe, & the Roman Church then obserued. Now this Sir Humfrey compareth with the doctrine of the late Councell of Trent, which determines, vnder paine of excommunication, that Masses in which the Preists alone com∣municates are not vnlawfull or to be abroga∣ted; as if this decree were contrarie to the o∣ther, which directlie it is not, for that althou' the wordes of Anaclet doe shewe the common
custome of his time, yea & of the Church of his time (notwithstanding they also insinuate that the contrarie had binne practised at the least in some places) to haue binne that all pre∣sent at Masse did de facto communicate, yea & that those, that did not should be put out: Yet in regard the Councell of Trent doth neyther denie nor dissallowe of that custome (nay ra∣ther expreslie desires the continuation of it) but onelie defineth that such Masses as are ce∣lebrated without more communicants besides the Preist are not to be condemned & abollish∣hed as the clamorous sectaries of our daies doe contend, it is more then euident that there is no contrarietie to be founde betweene the one & the other, nor more then if the same Councell had defined, that those Communions are not vnlawfull, or not to be condemned in which infants are not admitted to receaue the Sacra∣ment, notobstanding the custome was in the primitiue Church to admitte them. To omitte that Sir Humfrey is verie ignorant in the do∣ctrine of the Roman Church if he knoweth not that althou' in matters of faith there can be no chaunge, yet in matters of manners al∣teration may be made; so that according to di∣uersitie of times, places, & persons, that which once hath binne practised yea & commanded by one Pope & Councell at one time, may be otherwise practised in another, & that with∣out
anie preiudice, but rather with great profit (in some cases) to the vniuersal Church which doctrine because the knight wanteth eyther witt or will to conceiue it rightlie, he runneth a madding throu' his whole section vpon an erroneous supposition prouing nothing but his owne spleene against the Pope, & want of vnderstanding, & iudgement. And in this same Frantick fashion he dea∣leth with sainct Gregorie in his 9. epistle of the Register; & the Bull of Pius quartus concer∣ning images, equiuocating in the word adora∣tion, which by reason holie S. Gregorie takes it for diuine honour, he teacheth with great rea∣son, that althou' images may be lawfullie made & vsed with due reuerence as he sheweth in another place, yet they cānot be lawfullie ado∣red in the other sense. From whence Sir Hum∣frey will needes collect that the moderne Pope Pius contradicteth that which his famous pre∣decessor did teach before him, in that he decla∣reth according to the doctrine of the Triden∣tine Councell, due honour & veneration is to be giuen to the images of Christe & his sainres in which neuerthelesse there is no contrarietie at all, but rather great agreement & confor∣mitie not onelie in the matter it selfe, but euen in their manner of speech. And by these two pointes which are the cheife matter of moment which our aduersarie
hath in this section, the reader may easilie cōie∣cture of the rest; & if besides this, if he doth but marke how deceitfully he dealeth with Bellar∣mine in the conclusiō of this section about the succession of the Popes to S. Peter, I am per∣suaded he will neuer trust Puritan writer as long as he liues. But note the impostors sub∣tletie, that which Bellarmine sayth of the im∣moueable placing of the seate of sainct Peter at Rome by Christes appointment which he affirmes not to be a matter of faith or im∣mutable precept of God, this honest dis∣putant applies it to the absolute being of sainct Peter at Rome & the seating of his chaire ther, & then vpon this false & detorted vnderstan∣ding of his doctrine, inferreth as from his owne confession that therefore at the best it can be but probable that the Pope should succeed Pe∣ter in that Seat, & thre is no necessitie to be∣leiue it, for that Bellarmine saith it is no point of faith, & that if Christe gaue anie such pre∣cept, it may be changed, thus the knight. And yet the truth is that in none of those places the Cardinall speaches of the succession of the Pope to sainct Peter, but onelie of the certain∣tie of the connexion of the Apostolicall seate with the particular Roman Church, & whe∣ther the one is so strictlie ioyned to the other that it cannot be transferred to another place viz. to Antioch where sainct Peter did fitlie
for a time abide, or to some other Episcopall seate of the Catholike Church, which Bellar∣mine affirmes not to be a point of faith or im∣mutable diuine precept: but of the infallibility of the succession of the Pope in the seate of S. Peter he makes no doubt, but constantlie de∣fends it to be a matter of faith & diuine insti∣tution as is manifest by his owne wordes in the 12. chapter of his second booke de Rom. Pont: where he saith expresselie Successio Ro∣mani Pontificis in Pontificatu Petri ex institutione Christi est, & a little after Si quis tamen petat an iure diuino Romanus Pontifex Pastor sit & caput totius Ecclesiae, omnino id esse asserendum. And now by these plaine wordes of Bellarmine it manifestlie appeereth he is so farre from stan∣ding vpon probabilities in the point of succes∣sion of the Pope to sainct Peter, that all those places which the knight cites out of the second & fourth booke de Rom. Pont. as that, non est improbabile Dominum iussisse vt Petrus sedem suam Romae figeret. And, non est de fide diuina & immutabili praecepto Romae sedem Petri esse constitutam; est tamen probabilissimum & pie cre∣dendum. And those other wordes, forte non est de iure diuino Romanum Pontificem Petro succe∣dere. And those, Ius successionis Romanorum Pontificum in eo fundatur quod Petrus Romae suam sedem fixerit. All those places of which the knight makes a praye to deceiue his reader, are
spoken not of the succession, but of the reason of the succession, of the Pope to the A∣postle Sainct Peter: for Bellarmine doth expresselie distinguish in the same place saying, aliud esse successionem aliud ratio∣nem successionis: & the firste which is the succession, he teaches cleerlie to be by the institution of Christe, but the manner of the same succession that is the reason where∣fore the Bishop of Rome rather then the Bis∣hop of Antioch or anie other doth succeed S. Peter in that Seat hath it beginning from the fact of Peter: But Bellarmine neyther in anie piace of those cited by Sir Humfrey nor in anie other affirmes that the right of succession is founded in the fact of Peter: But this was the craft of our subtle knight whereby he might inferre that the fact of Peter being no matter of faith, but at the most of morall certaintie, the whole frame of the Roman religion might therefore seeme to be doubtfull & vncertaine. And to this end he falselie applied to the suc∣cession it selfe that which by Bellarmine was spoken onelie of the manner of the same suc∣cession. From which vniust proceeding of Sir Humfrey we may gather by the way, that there is no dealing with these people but at hand blowes, I meane by producing of the bookes out of which they make their allega∣tions, otherwise if they can but scape without
examen, they will make no scruple to cousen their owne Fathers as experience hath alreadie taught vs. To conclude I assure the reader that the rest of the matter in this place is but such loath∣some stuffe as this, mingled with so manie impudent vntruthes that I am not able to re∣count them seuerallie: All which because I perceaue the more it is stirred the more it stin∣kes, I will leaue it to himselfe to make the best he can of it, & if by corruption & fraude he will needes build a by-way for vs Romanists, he doth but labore in vayne, since that he can no sooner finish it, but that we can assoone returne it vppon himselfe & fellowes. Sec. 21. In the next section which is the 21. the knight treateth of the Popes iudgment, which he saith, is not yet certaine & agreed vpon among the Romanists, notwith standing it is by them made the rule of faith. In this section I finde nothing meritorious of a schollers labour either in reading it or an∣sering it, for it is but an idle continuation of the authors former fooleries concerming the Popes authority in the determination of mat∣ters of faith, which on the one side he will needes haue it so that the Romanists hold his iudgment for an infallible rule of faith, & yet he himself cites diuers Romanists which doe not hold the Popes authority to be infallible,
which in my opinion is no lesse then playne dotage. For who is he, if he be not quite depri∣ued of iudgment doth not conceiue that if there are Romanists which doe not defēd the Popes authority to be infallible there most of necessity be also some, yea & the same Romanists that hold his iudgment not to be an infallible rule of faith; from whence it doth further necessa∣rily issue that the infallibitie of the Popes iudg∣ment in determining Controuersies is no point of faith among Romanists, how be it is com∣monly held for the most safe doctrine, & con∣sequently as the proposition of the title of this sectiō is but a fallacious paradox of the knights owne inuenting, so are all the authorities & proofes which he produceth to shewe that there is vncertaintie among the Romanists of the Popes infallible iudgment in the rule of faith in vaine & of no force, as tending to de∣monstrate that which is not denied by all Ca∣tholike diuines. And thus Sir Humfrey mar∣cheth on in the by-way of his owne deuious francies euen to the end of his section, neuer omitting to excercise himself by the way in some part of impiety against the Popes, car∣ping malitiously at the euill life of some of them in particular: all which how true or false it is (yet not doubting but that they haue binne much calumniated by emulators & heretiques & ill aduised persons as by the writers of their
liues appeereth, I cannot heere stand to exa∣mine by reason I study & professe breuity, but will onely answere generally with pious S. Augustine in the like case of obiectiō touching the Popes which liued before & in his time, that although some traytor had cript in to that or∣der of Bishops which is deducted from Peter himself to Anastasius, (I say to vrbanius) who doth now sit in the same chaire, yet should he not preiudice the Church & the innocent Christians to whome our poruident Lord sayd Doe what they say, but doe not what they doe. Sec. 22. In the 22. section the knight affirmes that the Church vppon which the learned Roma∣nists grounde their faith is onely the Pope: but the Church vppon which the vnlearned rely is no other then their parishe preistes. It is iust so, why? because ipse dixit because Sir Humfrey sayd it. But how doth he knowe it to be so? by scripture or by tradition? if by scripture, let him turne his Bible & produce the text: if by tradition, he is a traytor to his owne cause. One said plesantly, that the faith of a Puritan is resolued 1. in Biblia 2. in spiritum 3. in carnem, firste into the Bible, secondly into the spirit, thirdly into the flesh; & heere rests the last resolution of their religion. But now seriously to the matter, but indeed there is little matter except by matter we vn∣derstand
corruption, & of this I am certaine there is no want. For to begin with the title of the sectiō, it hath two partes & they both false: the one is that the learned Romanists ground their faith vppon no other then the Pope; the other that the vnlearned rely vppon no other then their parish prestes, neyther of which is absolutely true as experience doth teach. And yet if it were true that the simple sort of people did rely wholy vppon their Parish preistes, what then? may not simple Romanists as sa∣fely rely vppon their Parish preistes as simple reformers vppon their Parish ministers, who are sometimes euen as simple & ignorant in di∣uinity as themselues, setting aside that perhaps they are a little more expert in reading the text of the Bible in English, or a misreformed ho∣milie. And touching the learned Romanists they doe not rely vpon the Pope onely, but chiefly vpon the word of God as also the most simple Romanists doe thou' not interpred according to ther owne priuate sense as the pretended refor∣mers doe, but expounded according to the con∣sent & commonly receiued sense of the vniuer∣sall visible Church. To this I adde a most odious & slanderous lye of the knight where he saith of the beleife of the Romanists that if it be receiued with an affected ignorance & a blind obedience, Page 573. the partie shall be saued by the fire of Purgatory,
which is most palpably false, & neuer asserted by any Romanist, but coyned by his owne froathie braine, besides this & the like dishonest dea∣ling he abuseth Bellarmine in diuers places, as lib. 1. de iustif. cap. 7. in which place wheras Bellarmine produceth S. Bernards expositiō of those wordes of Iob; the oxē did plowe & labore, the asses did feed by them, to proue against secta∣ries, that iustifieing faith consists not so much in knowledge as in assent, sayeing, docet Ber∣nardus, Bernard teacheth that by the oxen are vnderstood the learned doctors of the Church, by the asses are meant the ignorant, which by their simple beleife rest satisfied in the vn∣derstanding of their superiors: nimble Sir Humfrey applyeing this (thou' very fondly & preposterously) to the disprofe of the ignorant peoples relyeing vppon their pastors in their faith by changing the word dicit, he sayth, (meaning S. Bernard) in to these wordes the Cardinall, saith he makes his reader beleiue that the foresayd exposition is Bellarmines owne glosse, wheras yet he doth but allege it out of S. Bernard onely to confirme his owne doctrine touching the nature of the forme of iustification. Another place the knight corrupts in the same Bellarmine lib. 5. de Euchar. cap. 5. con∣cerning the doctrine of Peter Lombard, & S. Thomas, where the Cardinall affirming that
they were not carefull of the question now in controuersie, to wit whether that which the Preist celebrateth daily be properly a sacrifice, but supposed the affirmatiue part as a thing knowne to all men; the crafty Cauallier re∣lates the wordes of Bellarmine so transuersly that the reader cannot but vnderstand by them that the Cardinall affirmes that those two most famous diuines cared not whether the Masse were a proper sacrifice or no; but that they did onely content themselues to hold that it is a commemoratiue sacrifice onely, as the refor∣mers teach. And now let these examples suffice to demonstrate the infidelity of our aduersarie in this section: to omit much other impertinent false & captious matter & allegations, diuers of which I haue ansered in my censure, & are heere superfluously repeated by the knight towards the building of this part of his croo∣ked & blinde by-way, which as you see by the matterialls of it, is so fowle & rugged that it is not fit for any person of reputation to ap∣peere in it. Sec. 23. The next section is the 23. in number affir∣ming that the visibilitie of the Church is no certaine note of the true Church but rather the contrarie thus Sir Humfrey; but he that should duelie consider how farre euen by his owne confession he is ingaged to the Iesuit his aduersarie to proue his owne Church to haue
binne visible in all former ages since the Apo∣stles times till this day, doubtlesse he would much wonder at this his title: altho' if contra∣rilie he ponder how slowe the same Sir Hum∣frey hath binne in the performance of his an∣ser to that challenge, then he would instan∣tlie cease to maruell, perswading himselfe that the knight hauing better considered of the matter, he is resolued vpon a contrarie course as it may now more then probably appeere by the contents of this present section in which he professeth to impugne that same visibilitie which so manie daies, monethes, & yeeres agoe, he solemlie auouched to make good viz. the succession of his owne Church. I for my part am verie sorrie that the knight hath so altered his designe in regard I haue long since had a vehement desire to haue a sight thou' it were onelie tanquam per speculum in anigmate, as in a perspectiue or astronomicall glasse, of those faire faces which haue lien in lauender so manie hundreth yeeres together; yet now I perceiue there is no remedie but patience, & so I will leaue those inordinate desires, & exa∣mine how soundlie the author proceedes in the impugnation of that which according to his promise he ought rather to defend then con∣fute. Wherefore to the intent he may seeme to haue sayd some thing to the purpose, he stateth
the question in another sense thē that in which it is disputed betwixt the Romanists & the re∣formers, he putteth the case in a conspicuous & eminent visibilitie of the Church in all ages perpetuallie: And this visibilitie I graunt diuers of the testimonies which he produceth doe proue not to be necessarie to the true Church: Neyther doe I denie that the proofes our aduer∣sarie bringeth, if is suppositiō of such a glorious visibilitie were true, but this is out of the quire, for the question is onelie whither such visibi∣litie is a certaine note of the true Church as that in all times some at the least true professors of it may be assigned & named: & this kinde of visibilitie of the true Church is not dispro∣ued by all, or anie one of the testimonies which are heere alleaged by the knight, but all of them are in vaine produced. But now as he himself doth name Adam, Abel, Enoch, Noe, Abraham, Lot, Tobias, Ieremy, Simeon, An∣na, Ioseph, Marie, Elizabeth, to which diuers others might be added in euerie seuerall age, I say as he could & did name these visible pro∣fessors of the old lawe, so doe we demaund of him to shewe & name vs in like manner some professors in euery seuerall age before the daies of Luther who haue professed the same reli∣gion in all pointes which is now professed in the pretensiuely reformed Churches. For this is the true state of the question betwixt ys, & this
is that which we hold for a necessarie note of the true Church, & as we are readie at all ti∣mes to performe this, yea & some of vs haue alreadie performed it long since in proofe of the visibilitie of the Roman Church, so doe we expect the like from the defenders of the re∣formed Church in proofe of the visibilitie of the same. And to deale plainlie, till Sir Hum∣frey or some bodie for him performes this taske, & in this sense, what soeuer he or his companions eyther doe or can produce to im∣pugne the visibilitie of our Church, we hold it for a meere by-way inuented onelie to auoide that difficultie which absolutelie in their vn∣derstanding they iudge insuperable, & impos∣sible to be cleared. Sec. 24. In the next section which is the 24. the knight prosecuteth the same matter that is the visibilitie of the Church in the new testament; but he walkes quite out of the true way from the beginning to the ending. He pretends to shewe that the Church hath not binne con∣spicuouslie visible but latent & obscure in all ages, & yet to demonstrate this he produceth nothing but such testimonies as proue there haue binne euer manie heresies scismes, per∣secutions & people of ill life, which haue so much darkened the splēdor of the true Church that it was sometimes vnder cloudes & mistes, prouing with a multitude of testimonies with
great ostentation that which we Romanists doe not denie: nay we all ingenuouslie con∣fesse that the true Church must not of neces∣sitie be alwayes eminentlie & flowrishinglie visible, yet neuer so obscure & couered which cloudes, but that the professors of it may be found & named euen in the middest of her greatest mists, for we say with sainct Ambrose, Li. 4. Hex. cap. 2. videtur sicut luna deficere sed non deficit, She seemes to faile like the moone, but she doth not faile, obumbrari potest, perire non potest, she may be obscured but she cannot perish; so that in this section Sir Humfrey in steed of an egge giues vs a Scorpion, & in lieu of prouing the Church, to haue binne so obscure & latent that none of her members can be found & na∣med, he onelie or cheeflie produceth the errors & heresies of those who did most impugne & obscure her: In so much, as both those who were called, & those who where chosen by Christ, did erre grie∣uously both in manners & doctrine &c. By-way page. 611. nay it seemes his passion did so much transport him, that rather then faile of his purpose of impugning the absolute visibi∣litie of the Church in all ages, he layeth vio∣lent hands euen vpon the holie Apostles, accu∣sing then that they erred both in doctrine & manners as in his 611. page the reader may see in plaine termes, to omit that all or most of the authors which he cites are eyther of his owne profession, & obtruded in among the Romanists, as for example Morney, Erasmus, Cassander, & other suppositious writers, or
else such pious Catholikes, as out of their zeale haue iustlie reprehended the priuate errors, & abuses of particular persons (thou' in generall termes as the custome is) which haue in seue∣rall ages like darnell among corne sprung vp in the feild of the visible Church; & this being the substance of the contents of this section, I remitte it to the reader to iudge whether the knight hath not runne an extrauagant & by course for the building of this parcell of his by way. Sect. 25. In the 25. section vpon a supposition of the declination of faith & manners in the Roman Church which he falsely supposeth as proued in his former section, our aduersarie proceedes to an application of certaine places of scripture to the same supposed declination of the Pope & Church, but so ridiculously & corruptedly that on the one side a man of iudgment that reades it will hardly absteine from laughter: But on the contrarie he will be sorie to see the diuine word of God so profaned & abused es∣peciallie by those who so much bragg of the scriptures that they will scarce voutsafe to read anie other booke but pure Bible. And to the end the knights counterfeit proceeding in this particular may appeere, I will reherse one in∣stance or two that by them the reader may consider of the rest. Page 670. how comes it to passe (saith he) that the number of the faith∣full
are so few, that at all times, they cannot easily be discerned? His ansere is, because it was foretold in the 18. of sainct Luke, that when the sonne of man commeth he shall not finde faith vpon the earth: marke the wisdome of this great Salomon & admire it. S. Luke as his wordes doe plainelie testifie, speakes & prophesies of the time of the comming of our Sauiour to iudge the world at the day of the generall iudgment, & yet Sir Humfrey most absurdlie, abusedlie, & falselie applyes them to that vast Caos or large space of time, which hath passed since the time of the Apostles to the dayes of Luther; yea & as it seemes by his discourse euen to the time of Christs comming to iudgment in the end of the world: as if ac∣cording to his reformed Logike this were a good consequence, when the sonne of man commeth he shall not finde faith vpon the earth, therefore the number of the faithfull is so smale that at all times they cannot easily be discerned: ô acute & subtile Logician! & in my opiniō much fitter for the carte thē the schoole of Dialect. Another example I giue the reader in two places cited by the knight, the one out of the 2. of Peter 2. chap. the other out of the 18. of the Reuel. 3. verse which he applyeth to Indulgences & pardons saying in his page 671. how comes it to passe that Indulgences & par∣dons are graunted for monie & made the trea∣sure
of their Church? Because sayth he it was foretold there shall be false teachers among you by whome the way of truth shall be ill spoken of & throu' couetousnes shall with fayned wordes make marchandise of you. Now it is true the place out of sainct Peter thou' falselie & fondlie applyed, & might farre more fitly be accommodated to the pretensiue reformed Puritanicall Nouellists whose grea∣test part of schollership si to rayle at the Pope & Roman Church, yet it is not vntrulie re∣hearsed, but in the place quoted out of the Apocalips, there is not one title to this purpose, excepting that the Apostle once nameth the word merchants; which neuerthelesse, accor∣ding to the true sense of the text, maketh no more to the matter in hand, then if he had na∣med the word minister. The rest of the places of scripture which he cites according to the common & current ex∣position of the Roman Church euen at this present, are vnderstood partly of the precur∣sors of Antichrist which are the heretikes & persecutors in generall of all ages: & partly of that great Antichriste properly so called, whose comming all true Catholikes haue euer expected onely about the end or consumma∣tion of the world: howbeit if a man were de∣lighted in trifles & trickes he might much more commodiously applie those same places
to Luther & his sequaces, as hauing their pedi∣gree & discent from seuerall heretikes of for∣mer times, then eyther to the Pope or Church of Rome, as may also plainly appeere by the 39. articles of the new Creed of England, of which excepting those fewe that agree with the doctrine of the Catholike Church, there is scarce any that haue not binne defended by other heretikes ef more ancient standing, as diuers learned Romanists haue demonstrated in their seuerall treatises. By all which it doth appeere that althou' Sir Humfrey hath vsed no other proofes in this section then the pure text of scripture, yet hath he made so bad vse of it that all the world may cleerly perceiue that he is entred much further into his by-way then he was before. Sec. 26. The 26. followeing is the conclusion of the treatise, in which the author laboreth to showe the safety & certainty of his owne way, & the vncertainty of the Romish way; This is the whole drift & scope not of this section onely but of the whole worke, as being a breife summe of the same. I confesse that if the Romanists were bound to giue credit to Sir Humfrey linds bare word in matters of faith & maners, then they ought of necessity to yeald him the safe way & con∣tent themselues with the by: but they are otherwise taught & instructed, they knowe
that for the space of aboue 14. hundred yeeres togeather they had vnquestionable possession of the safe way to saluation, & may iustly say with ancient Tertullian. Nos prius possedimus, we had firste possession, why then should we yeald vnto you & take the by-way which you haue framed & inuented of later yeeres? nay why should we not rather with the same Ter∣tullian boldly demaund of you who are, accor∣ding to the sayeing of another ancient father, prodigiously borne of your selues Quiestis vos? vnde & quando venistis? vbi tamdiu latuistis? who are you? from whence & when did you come? where haue you layne hid so long time? & with S. Hierome Quisquis es assector nouorum dogmatum queso vt parcas Romanis auribus, parcas fidei quae apostolico ore laudata est who soeuer thou art that art a defender of new doctrine I beseech the spare the Roman eares, spare that faith which is commended by the Apostles owne mouth: & in another place. Cur post 400. annos docere nos niteris quod ante nesciuimus? why after 400. yeeres (I may say after 1400. yeeres, doe you goe about to teach vs that which be∣fore we knew not? & with optatus, vestrae Cathedrae originem ostendite qui vobis vultis san∣ctam Ecclesiam vendicare. Shew the origen of your chaire, you that callenge to your selues the holie Church: wherfore if you vnder pre∣tence of a reformation will enter into posses∣siō
of the safe way, if you will claime the truth, & leaue falsehood for vs, it is not sufficient for you with a plausible flourish of speech (as you vse heere Sir Humfrey) to say so it is, but you most firste proue your claime & conuince your title, & that not by accusation of vs (that which you haue onely performed through both your bookes) for, si accusasse sufficiat quis erit innocens? if to accuse be sufficient who will be innocent? but by positiue proofes of your owne, which as yet neyther you, nor any of your copemates haue euer perfor∣med. You pretend sole scripture for your eui∣dence, but in place of Gods word you obtrude vnto vs your owne glosses & captious illations & sophiticall inferences or deductions, & you for your part Sir Humfrey, you knowe you are ingaged by promise to ansere the Iesuites chal∣lenge, which is not as you affirme (hoping so to scape the brunt of the battell, to proue out of some good authors that the Protestant Church (so you please to call it for matter of state, althou' yours, as I suppose is not truly the Protestant, but the Puritan Church) was all waies visible; which althou' I knowe I haue made manifest that as yet you haue not performed that taske neyther, I am confident, euer will be able to performe the same, yet that is not truly the Iesuites chal∣lendge, but that you produce some which haue
professed your religion in euery point, & in euery age before the daies of Luther. This is the charge you haue vndertaken, & till you haue discharged your selfe of this, your ho∣nor still remaines at the stake, & for all your bragges your safe way is to the Romanists & all other of mature iudgment, but onely a by-way, & serueth onely for a cowardly excuse of your want of abillitie to performe your pro∣mise. But now to returne to the contents of this section in particular from which I haue in some sort digressed. I say it consists onely in a recapi∣tulation of those seuerall pointes of contro∣uersie which I haue alreadie examined, in con∣firmation of which since the author hath pro∣duced nothing which I haue not sufficiently confuted & conuinced to be of no force, but all eyther false equiuocall or impertinent, it is most apparent that what soeuer he from hence collecteth by way of conclusion is noe conclu∣sion, nor of any more authority then his owne bare affirmations or negations, & consequently notobstanding the vaine knight will needes seeme to haue the victorie & to haue gained his cause, yet I make no doubt but that the pru∣dent reader will rather iudge in fauour of the anserer then of the abiector, especially con∣sidering how farre more easie a matter it is for any man to impugne the doctrine of another
then to defend his owne. Wherfore I ioyne issue with myne aduer∣saries opposing the doctrine of the Roman Church to those same positions of the preten∣ded reformed Churches which the knight hath heere sett downe, applying the same to the safe way & by-way as he hath donne, by-way of antithesis or oppositiue comparison bet∣wixt them both in the manner followeing. And firste I say; The Romanists teach that not scripture onely, but scripture with diuine & Apostolicall traditions receaued for such by the vniuersall Church in all ages, the approued generall Councells, & the infallible authority of the perpetually visible Church of God are the onely certaine meanes & safe way to salua∣tion. But Sir Humfrey with his complices teach that scripture onely interpreted other∣wise them by authoritie of the most vniuer∣sallie florishing Church according to perpe∣tual tradition of the Fathers & doctors of the same is sufficient to saluation, & this is a doubt∣full & by way. Secondly the Romanists teach that the scrip∣tures are a most certaine a most safe & perfect rule of faith, yet in some places obscure & am∣biguous as euen some of their aduersaryes confesse, & therfore it is not sufficient alone, but requires the authority of the true Church commended in the same scripture as an infal∣lible
interpreter; & this is a safe way to salua∣tion: but the Reformers teach that the scrip∣ture with the interpretation & conference of one place with another by euerie priuate man or woman that can but reade it, is a sure euident & perfect rule of faith, & this is an vncertaine & by-way. Thirdly, the Romanists teach that tradi∣tions appertayning to faith or manners recea∣ued from Christe by his Apostles or from the Apostles themselues by inspiration of the holie Ghost, & as such conserued in the Church by continuall succession, are to be imbraced & reuerenced with like pious affection as the scriptures; & this is a safe way to saluation: but the reformers teach that onelie those traditions concerning faith & manners that can be pro∣ued by scriptures of which sort they denie anie to be in the Church notobstanding sainct Paul in the scripture expresselie commandeth the Thessalonians to hold his traditions deliuered vnto them by word of mouth or by epistle. And this is an vncertaine & by way. Fourthly the Romanists teach that the vniforme consent of vndoubted Fathers is to be followed in the interpretation of scriptures & some certaine persons in the Church as pro∣fessors of diuinitie & some others for the auoy∣ding of noueltie in doctrine, take an oath of the same: & moreouer that where they finde
that consent, they are to receaue it as a certaine rule for the true expounding of the scriptures without contradiction or inuention of other new sense or glosses, & this is a safe way to sal∣uation: but the reformers teach that the vni∣forme consent of vndoubted Fathers is to be followed onelie so farre as according to their priuate spirit or iudgment they agree with scriptures, which is a captious & deceitfull rule of expounding them: And this is an vn∣certaine & by-way. Fiftly the Romanists teach that the Chri∣stian Catholike Church is a congregation or companie of people beleiuing & professing the true faith of Christe vnder one cheife head our Sauiour Iesus Christe & his vicar in earth the Pope or Bishop of Rome as cheife Pastor & visible gouernour of the same vnder Christe, sayeing with all that the notes whereby the true Church is knowne from all other hereti∣call & scismaticall conuenticles are not onelie & cheiflie exteriour splendour, amplitude, & miracles, as our aduersarie doth deceitfullie in∣sinuate; but principallie the name Catholike, antiquitie, continuall succession &c. And this is a certaine & safe way: but the reformers teach the Church is a Congregation of pa∣stours & people with out anie certaine & infal∣lible authoritie & assigning for markes of the same that which is common to all congrega∣tions
euen of heretikes & schismatikes accor∣ding to their seuerall opinions, as all & euerie one of them holding they haue the true word & Sacraments rightlie preached & admini∣stred in their conuenticles, which consequen∣tly can be no certaine markes of the true Church in particular, no more then the name of a Christian in generall can be an infallible note of a true beleiuer; & this is an vncertaine & by-way. Sixtly the Romanists teach that General Councells by the Popes authoritie or appro∣bation conuocated & confirmed are not onelie of great vse in the Church: But also of cer∣taine & infallible power for the determination of all doubts & controuersies in religion which may arise in seuerall times & occasions, & this is a certaine & safe way: But the Reformers teach that General Councells althou' they say they be of great vse & authority in the Church to determine controuersies in religion, yet they hold them of vncertaine authoritie & subiect to errour both in faith & manners, & this is an vncertaine & by-way. Seauenthly; the Romanists teach that the cheife rock & angular stone vpon which the Church is built is Christe the Sauiour of the world, yet they say with Christe himselfe that Peter is also in his kinde a rock vpon which he promised to build his Church, & this is a cer∣taine
& safe way: But the reformers teach, that Christe alone is the onelie rock vpon which he built his Church which is repugnant to the expresse wordes of Christe in the scrip∣ture sayeing to Peter, vpon this rocke will I build my Church: & this is a diuerticle or by-way. Eightly, the Romanists teach that the ope∣ration & effect of the Sacraments depend chei∣flie & principallie vpon the institution of Christe, yet they say withall, that both for the securitie of the consciences & comfort of the receauers &c. The Preist must haue a sincere intention to minister, the Sacrament & not in ieast as Luther & some other sectaries doe teach & this is a certaine & safe way to saluation. But the Reformers teach that onelie the insti∣stitution of Christe is sufficient, & the Preists sincere intention not required, & this is an vn∣certaine & by-way. Nintly the Romanists teach, that Christe is our onelie mediatour of redemption, & who onelie of himself & by his owne power know∣eth the secrets of our hartes; yet withall they say that his Saintes in heauen, who in & by him doe assuredlie knowe the secrets of our hartes in such things especiallie as cōcerne the good of our soules, are our mediatours of in∣tercession, by offering our vnworthie prayers to God, & this is a certaintie & safe way to
saluation: But the reformers calle vpon Christe onelie & exclude & neglect his saintes & seruants whome neuerthelesse he himselfe doth promise to honore in heauen, condem∣ning also for impious & sacrilegions the saintes intercession for sinners, which notwithstan∣ding he doth not condemne for such in anie parte of holie scripture, & this is an vncertaine & by-way. Tenthly the Romanists teach we ought to adore Christes bodie present in heauen where he sits on the right hand of his di∣uine Father, yet withall they say it is lawfull yea & we ought to adore him whersoeuer he is, & particularlie in the blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist, & this is a certaine & safe way to saluation: But the reformers teach that the bodie of Christe ought not to be adored in the Eucharist but onelie in heauen, & this is an vn∣certaine & by-way. Eleauenthly the Romanists as the word of God instructs them, confesse themselues to be vnprofitable seruants in regarde neyther they nor their actions bring anie profitte to God who hath no need of anie thing, & yet they say withall that no man liuing can be iustified by his owne merits, that is such merites as pro∣ceed purelie from his owne naturall forces & actions, & more then this that all those who expect saluation must beleiue in Christe with a
liuelie faith & wholely relie vpon his meritts & satisfaction as vpon the proper & principall cause of their saluation; yet they say besides this, that altho' they may not relie vpon their owne merits or the satisfactions of the saintes alone, neuerthelesse they may vse both the sa∣tisfaction of saintes & their owne merits as a meanes to saluation, by virtue & application of the merits & satisfaction of Christes passion, & also that they can by the grace & assistance of God obserue his commandements, yea & by virtue of the same diuine grace performe some workes of supererogation or not com∣manded by precept of God but counselled by his aduise, & this is a certaine & safe way to saluation: But the reformers teach they are vnprofitable seruants (which I confesse that in deed they are both to God & his Church as euer were anie in the world) & that no mans good workes altho' they proceed from the speciall grace of God can in anie sort iustifie him before God, & that euerie Christian must so wholie relie vpon the merites of Christe, that he beleiue also that no man can haue anie of his owne euen by the power & grace of God, & that he is bound to expect & hope for saluation without anie such workes or merites, meerlie by a sole & bare faith that his sinnes are remitted in Iesus Christe, & this is an vn∣certaine & by-way.
Heere you see a plaine confrontment of di∣uers particular pointes of controuersie betwixt the Romanists & the reformers by way of af∣firmation & negation, & because I knowe that my aduersarie & I are not agreed of a Iudge of our cause, I for for my part remit my selfe to the indifferent reader as our onelie vm∣piere to determine of the matter not onelie for as much as concernes the contents of this par∣ticular section, but also of the whole worke, who if he consider with due ponderation the proceedings of both parties, & compare the sincere & plaine dealing which I haue vsed with the insincere and double dealing of my aduersarie, who hath so perseuered in his indi∣rect courses that euen in the end & conclusion of his worke he hath practised no smale par∣tiallitie and fraude in the rehearsall of the do∣ctrine of the Roman Church, as particularlie where he affirmes that the Romanists teach that diuers traditions of faith and manners whereof there is no ground nor euidence in the scripture are to be reeeaued with equall re∣uerence and respect with the scriptures them∣selues: and that they relie partelie vpon their owne merites and satisfaction of Saintes for their saluation and the like. I say if the iudi∣cious and vnpartiall reader duelie ponder all the particulars, I doubt not but he will easilie discerne the house of truth and safe way to sal∣uation
to be where he findes honestie and plainenes, and in the contrarie the house of falsitie & the by-way where he findes tricks & cousinage. And therfore the more to fa∣cilitate & rectifie his iudgment in the busi∣nesse I will reduce the whole argument of the knightes booke to a forme of sylogis∣me in this manner. That Religion is a by-way leading the weake & vnstable into dangerous pathes of error which is founded vppon coulou∣rable showes of Apochriphall scriptures, vnwriten traditious, doubt full Fathers am∣biguous Councells and pretended Catho∣lique Church. But the religion of the Church of Ro∣me is founded vppon colourable showes of apochriphal scriptures, vnwritten tradi∣tions, doubtful fathers ambiguous Coun∣cels & pretended Catholique Church. Therfore the relgiō of the Romā Church is a by-way leading the weake & vnstable in to the dangerous pathes of error. Now, the minor of this sylogisme in which the whole force of the conclusion, and by consequence the whole scope and authoritie of the worke depēdes, not one∣ly hauing binne in the discourse of my an∣seere to euerie seuerall section disproued for false & counterfeit, but alsoe more
appeare to be such ex ipsis terminis euen of it selfe by the termes & propositions of which it consists, to all such as shall consi∣der it with due attention: I persuade my selfe the iuditious reader will presently perceaue & determine with him selfe that the author of the worke hath quite fayled of his proiect, & that by composing a by path with a sinister intention to father it Falsely vppon his aduersaryes, he hath in stead of that, onely framed an ingen for his owne torment. And thus hauing attayned not onely to an accomplishment of myne owne desires in finishing my labours, but also in some sorte to a satisfaction of the request of my aduersary in regard that at the least in sho∣we (as I perceaue by the conclusion of his preface) he desireth nothing more then in ansere to his booke; I now conuert my speech vnto him & tell him, that as now according to his owne petition I haue im∣partially read his booke, & clearely & faith∣fully, yea & as moderately or more mode∣rately then his owne immoderate procee∣dings require, discouered vnto him not one or two but a multitude of errors, vntru∣thes, & corruptions, and false applications both of scriptures Councells & particular authors as well ancient as moderne: soe
doe I in contemplation of the same expect from him the retractation which he pro∣miseth vppon condition his faultes be showne vnto him, which if he shall accor∣dingly performe I will not onely as he pro∣fesseth with holy Iob of the ansere of his aduersary, binde it as a Croune vnto me, but alsoe saying with the same renowned saint, I will read it & pronounce it at eue∣ry step I make, yea and offer it to my vn∣derstāding as a most princely present, ear∣nestly praying in the meane tyme with the same Iob, vt desiderium meum audiat Omnipo∣tens. That the omnipotent may heere my desire of his reclamation & re∣duction to the most vniuersally florishing Catholique Ro∣man faith.
A SVPPLIMENT OF ADDITIONS TO THE APPPENDIX. I Haue alreadie noted diuers most foule corruptions and falsifications in Sir Humfrey linds pretented safe way in soe much that I am almost quite surfeted with the multitude of them, yet in my opinion ther is scarce anie amōg all those which co∣mes neare to the false dealing and cousi∣nage which the same Sir Humfrey vseth in the 205. page of his Deuia, which if it were for noe other reason, yet for this a lone it might most iustely deserue the name, not as it is falsely applyed to the Romanists, but as it is his owne proper worke, which if the reader will but please to haue a lit∣tle patience, I will plainely set before his eyes. Wherefore Sir Humfrey in the place now cyted vndertaking to proue that trās∣substantiation wants antiquitie, vniuer∣salitie, and succession, hauing first cited some testimonies both out of Greeke and Latin authors (which neuerthelesse are either of noe force for his purpose, or els
haue ben ansered partely by Bellarmin and other Catholique diuines, and partely by my selfe in my Censure he stumbles last vpon the late Patriarch of Cnnstantinople whome he alsoe produceth to the same in∣tent in the 10. and 13. chapters of his first anser to the Germanes, affirming that this author teacheth what is meant by that change or transmutation made in the Sa∣crament, saying, he tells vs: the bodie and bloud of Christ are truely misteries not that these, Metaballomena, are changed in to humane flesh but wee vnto thē: thus Sir Humfrey soe confidently as if he had ben Greeke Professor in Oxford he coud haue done no more. And in deed I must needs confesse that this passage of his is able to make a greate showe especially bringing a Greeke worde in the midest of it. But now when I came to examen the matter in the booke it selfe and conferred the Greeke and the Latin togither as I founde it printed at witerberg a place voy∣de of all suscipition on our syde, I found first that the author speakes soe plainely of the reall presence and transsubstantiation, that altho' he vseth not the verie same wor∣de, yet doth he vse other wordes equiua∣lent, as, conuersion, transmutation, or the lyke, at the least ten or a dozen tymes, o∣nely
in those verie chapters. Nay and more then this, I fynde that where he speakes of the conuersion or transmutation he vseth that verie worde Metauallo, which the knight denyeth him to vse, where he dini∣eth the change of the bodie and bloud in to humane flesh, which is a forceble argumēt a contrario that the Patriarch speakes of a reall change whersoeuer else in this matter he vseth that worde. Secondly. I fynde that those wordes which Sir Humfrey cytes are not spoken by the Grecian Patriarke of the proper transmutation in the Sacrament, but of an other transmutation which belong onely to the vse of the Sacrament to wit, he sayth and that verre truely, that when a faithfull person receiues the Sacrament, the bodie and bloud which he receiues are not chan∣ged in to humane flesh, but the receiuers in to them. Non quod haec (saith the Patriarch) in corpus humanum transmutentur sed nos in illa melioribus his praeualentibus: and here it is that he vseth the worde Metaballomeua and de∣nyeth it to be verifyed in this kynde of mu∣tation, speaking according to that which an ancient Father of the Church sayth to the same purpose: Non tu mutaberis in me, sed ego mutabor in te. That is to saye. O lord thou shalt not be changed in to mee, but I in to
thee. Which spirituall change or vnion the same Patriarch doth learnedly prosecute and declare with examples, not intending by that to exclude the reall presence of Christs bodie & bloude in the Sacramēt by transsubstantiation (as Sir Humfrey would willingly persuade his simple reader but supposing and includeing the same as in di∣uers of his passages in these twoe chapters is most apparent, and particularly where he sayth not farre before, ac quamdiu panis po∣situs iacet, nihil nisi panis est repositus tantum Deo: postea verus panis fit & reuera transmu∣tatur, cuius rei ratio & modus nullo ingenio, nullo ore humano explicari potest. And page. 97. Honorabilia haec dora in ipsum Dominicum transmutantur corpus quod haec omnia recepit, scilicet quod crucifixum sit, quod resurrexit, quod in Caelos ascendit. Tbe honorable giftes (he meanes the bread and wine) ar changed into the lordes bodie it selfe &c. and in the precedent page, qui operationis sanctorum my∣steriorum proprium hoc opus statuunt vt dona (intellige panem & vinum) in diuinum Christi corpus & sanguinem, transmutentur, in finem hunc vt fideles sanctificentur, peccatorumque re∣missionem, regni haeriditatem, & id genus alia accipere credant, non tales beatos praedicamus? Thus the Patriarch soe perspicuously that he who either vnderstādes Greeke or Latin
yea or English either, may euidently see that the Patriarch is cited by our aduersa∣rie euidently against himselfe, and quite contrarie to his true meaning. Yet was not Sir Humfray content with that, but as a mā runing forwarde in mad∣nesse to his owne confusion he cites the sa∣me author in his former tenth chapter in∣tending to proue out of him that it is not the reall and substantiall flesh of Christ which is offered but the Sacrament of his flesh, he tells vs sayth the knight, that the flesh of Christ which he caried aboute him was not giuen to his Apostles to be eaten, nor his bloud to be drunke, neither doth the bodie of our lord descend frome hea∣uen for this were blasphemie, which wor∣des I confesse the Patriarke hath (excep∣ting these: in the Sacrament: Which are ad∣ded to the text by Sir Humfrey) but as he hath them soe hath he others omitted by our aduersarie the knight both before and after these, which clearely declare his myn∣de touthing the reall presence. The prece∣dent wordes are these: Dominus enim illa no∣cte accepit panem gratias egit, fregit, & dixit, accipite & comedite. non dixit hoc est azinum, aut typus corporis, sed hoc est corpus meum, hic est sanguis meus: that is our lord that night tooke bread, gaue thankes, brake it, and
said, take and eate. He said not this is vn∣leauined bread, or this is the figure of my bodie, but this is my bodie, this is my bloud. And then immediately ensue the wordes cited by Sir Humfrey, after which alsoe immediately followes: Sed & tunc, & nunc inuocatione & gratia omnipotentis illius sacrorum rituum Antistitis Spiritus sancti, sacrarum precationum & diuinorum oraculorū interuentum panis quidem in ipsum Domini cor∣pus, vinum vero in ipsum Domini sanguinem conuertitur & transmutatur. But both then and now by inuocation and grace of that omnipotent Prelate of sacred rities the holie Gost, by interuention of sacred pray∣ers, and diuine oracles, the bread truely is counuerted and changed into Christs bo∣die it selfe, but the wine into to his bloud. In which wordes the learned and pru∣dent reader can not but see both the re∣all presence and the conuersion or chan∣ge of the elements of bread and wine (which is nothing els but transsubstan∣tiation) into the bodie and bloud of Iesus Christ most plainely specifyed. Which may abundantly serue to demon∣strate the truth of the Patriarkes meaning, and that no man liuing excepting such a lad of mettall as the coragious knight would haue had the face to make vse or rather
abuse of such a testimonie as this, soe quyte opposite to his purpose, multa enim de illâ (Cae∣na) audiū∣tur apud vas quae no∣bis displi∣cent. Ierem. Patriarch especially the second place being taken out of that chapter in which the author him selfe in the begining of the same doth expressely affirme, that ther are manie things maintai∣ned by the lutherans in the supper of our lord which displease the Grecians, one of which doubtlesse and not the least, is the point of transsubstantiation which the Lu∣therans reiected in their remonstrance to the Greeke Church, and Ierimie the Patri∣arcke maintaines in his anser to the same. To all which may be added yet more ex∣presse wordes of the same Patriarke say∣ing thus. Statuit igitur Catholica Ecclesia mu∣tari conseeratione facta panem quidem in ipsum corpus Christi, vinum vero in ipsum sanguinem eius per spiritum sanctum &c. The Catholique Church therfore (saith he) defins that the consecration being made the bread is changed into the bodie of Christ but the wine into his bloud by the holie Gost &c. And it is to be noted that he vseth the wor∣de Metauallomena in these places in which he speakes of the conuersion or transmu∣tation of the bread and wine into the bodie and bloud of Christ, which doth manife∣stly de monstrate the Grecian Patriarch to maintaine that same change of the bread
and wine in the consecration of the Eucha∣rist which the Romanists in Latin call trans∣substātiation which is sufficient to cōuince the preposterousnes of the iniudicious knight in makeing vse of this great Prelate for his owne contrarie position. Touching inuocation of saincts and their worship Sir Humfrey in the 232. page of his deuious way alledges against the Ro∣manists the confessiō of the Greeke Church quoting in the margen the same Patriarch of Constantinople and relating his wordes in his anser to the German Doctors cap. 1. Wher according to his relation, the Patri∣arch sayth in the name of him selfe and fellowes, that they doe not properly inuo∣cate saints but God, fot neither Peter nor Paule heare anie of those that inuocate them, but the gift and grace that they haue according to the promisse: I am with you till the consummation of the world. Thus the knight rehearses that authors wordes but yet corruptedly, for first the Patriarch hath not those negatiue wordes: We doe not properly inuocate saints, but this affirmatiue: inuocation doth proporly agree to God onely, and it doth agree to him primarily and most immediately (which wordes Sir Humfrey leaueth out) but inuocation made to saints is not properly inuocation but acciden∣tally,
and as if we should say by grace or fa∣uor: which latter words alsoe the knight partely mangled and partely omitted. Secondly the Patriarch dot not saye Pe∣ter and Paule doe not heare their inuoca∣tors but he sayth: they doe not exaudire, that is they doe not heare and graunt by their owne power the petitions of those that inuocate them. And ther is soe much betwixt audire & exaudire, that his hearing and graunting that which is heard, that al∣thou' the one vndoubledly agree to the saints both in the doctrine of the Grecian Church and the Roman: yet of the exau∣dition or hearing with a graunt, doubt may be made euen according to the do∣ctrine of the Roman Church whether it is proper to saints or noe, in regarde it may be cōceiued that altho' the saints be truely intercessors betweene vs and God, yet haue they not power to graunt out requests but onely to mediate for vs by way of impetra∣tion. And therfore the same author saith that Peter and Paule doe not exaudire that is, not soe heare vs as they them selues graunt our petition which they heare but  that is according or by the fa∣uor they haue by virtue of the promisse of our Sauior: I will be with you till the end of the world, as the Grecian Patriarch doth
sufficiently declare. And that the Grecians doe in generall termes graunt inuocation of saints (which is that which both agrees with the Roman doctrine and differs from the doctrine of the pretented reformers) it is manifest not onely out of this place but alsoe out of other places of the Patri∣arkes anser, as particularly in the 13. chap∣ter pag 102. wher it is said by him: that in the sacrifice or masse, mentionem beatissimae Vir∣ginis facimus, laudes eius praedicantes, interces∣sione sanctorum omnium petentes, misericordiam Dei implorantes pro viuis mortuisque supplican∣tes &c. And yet more plainely in the verie 21. chapter cited by our aduersarie, where the Patriarke hath these wordes. Haec medi∣tatio nunc in Ecclesia fit & depraedicatur, & ad sanctos exclamamus, & ad dominam nostram & ad sanctos Angelos: & ad dominam quidem no∣stram, tersancta domina Deipara pro nobis inter∣cede peccatoribus: ad sanctos autem Angelos, omnes caelestes potestates sanctorum Angelorum, & Archangelorum orate pro nobis &c. This me∣ditation is now made & preached in the Church: we both crye aloud to the saints and to our ladie, and to the Angels: and to our ladie truly, thrise holie ladie mother of God intercede for vs sinners. But to the holie Angeles all you, Celestial. Po∣wers of holie Angels, and Algels pray for vs &c. Loe heare the verie same forme of
prayer to saints which the Romanist vse: soe that the reader may easily iudge how pre∣posteroussy Sir Humfrey hath proceeded in the citation of this auther. And howsoe∣uer it is that the Grecians will not call this proper inuocation of saints, yet that is but questio de nomine, a question onely aboute the name or worde inuocation, which little importes supposing that in reallitie and substance they disegree not from the Ro∣manists, but rather are most conformable vnto them euen in the manner of their in∣terpellation. And besydes this if wee note the Lutherans wordes to the Patriarke, it will euen thēce manifestly appeare what the Grecians de∣fēd touching his point. For say the Doctors: Non dubium est quin sit de sanctis reuerenter sentiendum, & loquendum &c. non tamen sen∣timus eos esse inuocandos vt sint nostri mediatores atque iutercedant apud Deum pro nobis qui iam mortui sunt. Which wordes of the Luthe∣rans being those which they directly op∣pose against the doctrine of the Grecians in this particular, it is clearer then the leight of the sunne that the Grecians a∣gree with vs, and be contrarie to the tenets of Sir Humfrey and other sectaries of our tymes. And thus we see that altho' Sir Hū∣frey both in this and diuers other places of
his bookes doth much labore to persuade the reader that the Grecian Church agrees with the pretented reformers and differ from vs in doctrine of controuersie, neuer∣thelesse his worke wil not fadge, it being manifest to them whoe haue viewed the doctrine of their Patriarke in his foresaid anser to the lutherans, that excepting the point of the Popes supremacie (in which neuerthelesse the Grecians doe not in eue∣rie respect agree with them) they doe not fully ioyne with the nouellists of our age in anie one of the questions in controuer∣sie betwixt vs and them. And soe I may conclude that Sir Humfrey not obstan∣ding all the fraudes and diuises he hath v∣sed in laboring to make the Grecians see∣me to stand for his faction, he doth but onely rase duste to molest and dasle his rea∣ders eyes. More ouer the same Patriarke page 243. of his anser to the lutherans doth absolu∣tely prnounce that saints are to be invoca∣ted for thus he saith. Ad haec nos ope diuina respondemus inuocandos esse sauctos quod ipsi eti∣am auxiliari pessint. And he addeth after war∣de. Nec id faciunt solum viui sed etiam mortui. And a little lower he subioyneth. Inuocatio∣ne sanctorum daemones abiguntur, morbi fugan∣tur, tentationes tolluntur &c. Also page 244.
honorandi igitur sunt sancti tanquam amici Dei. In like maner touching the images of Saints he further addeth. A nobis etiam ima∣ginibus ipsorum reuerentium exhiberi, aut adora∣ri nemo reprehendit. &c. That is, none of vs re∣prehendeth that reuerence, or adoration be ex∣hibited to their images. Meaning of the Saincts. And in the page following he saith in this manner. At (inquit aliquis) Deus dixit. Deum tuum adorabis & illi so∣li seruies: & non facies vllam similitudinem. He ansereth thus. Est vero ita; sunt hoec lege diuina sancita, verumtamen qui hoc praecipit Deus, idem docet nos in deuteronomio. Non ado∣rabis ipsa, non seruies. And page 254. Soe he speakes. Vt igitur qui non honorat filium (vt ait dominus) non honorat patrem: sic qui non honorat imaginem nec illum quem imago refert honorat. And in the same page. Qui non a∣dorat Crucem, eum nequidem Dominum crucifix∣um adorare iustum est. Non quidem certe natu∣ram ligni &c. Sed memoriam & picturam per∣pessorum &c. Finally of merit he saith thus. Haec & similia sunt ob quae homo regno coelesti dignus ha∣betur. That is these & the like ar these thing for which a man is held worthie of the ce∣lestiall kingdome, thus much touching the
abuse of the Grecian Patriarke by Sir Hum∣frey. But one of the grossest errours that I finde committed by our aduersarie in the Doctrine of the latinists or Romanists, is in his page 234. where he hath these wor∣des. Others (as namely Antisiodorensis & Biel) teache that neither the Saints pray for vs, neither are we to praye to them. Thus Sir Humfrey, further adding that he may safely conclude these and the like rea∣sons considered that inuocation of Sains wants antiquitie, vniuersalitie, & succes∣sion. And yet I hauing examined the matter & taken a viewe of the 30. Lection of Ga∣briel Biel which is the place the knight ci∣tes for his hallucination, I finde that au∣thor expressely teacheth the affirmatiues of both those negatiues which he falsely affir∣mes him and Antisiodore to maintaine. Wherfore touching the first proposi∣tion, Biel in the place cited hath these wor∣des for his conclusion. Credendum est igitur & nullatenus dubitandum sanctos in patria in∣tercedere nobisque suffragari merito, ac prece, siue voto. And for proofe of the same he addeth thus. Quae veritas authoritate ostenditur & ra∣tione, authoritate vtriusque testamenti veteris & noui simul, & sanctorum Patrum. And be∣fore
his conclusion he saith: fuit haeresis quo∣rumdam, nimia temeritate omnem sanctorū cul∣tum penitus tollere volentium qui nullum sanctis honorem impendi debere mussitabant, neque vllas ad eos preces dirigi, nec eorum reliquias venerari. Huius author & haeresiarcha primus fuit Jouinia∣nus &c, Which wordes altho they doe suf∣ficiently declare what this author holdes of the second parte of this point, yet doth he more expressely vtter the same towardes the end of this lection saying: ex quibus patet pre∣ces nostras spemque consequendae beatitudinis per mediatores sanctos in Coelo inanes non esse sed ordi∣ne à Deo iustituto nos ad eorum auxilia confugere debere & debita veneratione eos semper implorare. By all which wordes Biels doctrine is foe plaine for the Romanists, & soe plaine against Sir Humfrey that I am verily per∣suaded he either neuer read this author touching this particular, or if he read him, he did not vnderstand him. And the like I say of Antisiodore whoe being in the same place cited, I fynd that he himselfe teacheth quite contrarie to that which the knight chargeth him with. For wheras he is alledgeth by Sir Hūfrey in the 4. parte of his summe lib. 3. q. 6. to resolue that neither the saints doe praye for vs, nei∣ther are wee to praye to them: it is true An∣tisiodore relates the opinion of manie whoe
say that neither are wee to praye to the saints nor they praye for vs but onely im∣properly, to wit because we pray God that the merits of his saincts may helpe vs, whē∣ce it is consequent that their merits may helpe vs: Neuerthelesse for his owne reso∣lution of the question he puts the contrarie proposition saying. Concedimus quod oramus Sanctos proprie, & ipsi orant pro nobis proprie, vt cum dicimus sancte Petre ora pro nobis, &c. Wee graunt saith Antisiodore that wee praye to the saincts properly, & that they pray for vs properly as when we say: Sainct Peter pray for vs. And now loe here how faithlessely the knight hath proceeded in his allegation of the testimonies of these twoe authors, whoe both soe plainely conspire against him: & let the reader alsoe consider how little reason our aduersarie had to conclu∣de that inuocation of saincts hath neither antiquitie, vniuersalitie nor succession, sup∣posing that he can conclude no other safe∣tie out of these and the like premisses then such as proceeds frome his owne forgerie & deceite. And altho' Gabriel cites an opinion of manie others that graunt the Saints doe praye onely improperly for vs by me∣diation of their merits, yet doe they not ex∣clude all prayer to saincts, as Sir Humfrey
& the rest of his pretensiue reformed bro∣thers doe, whoe if they would but graunt the same, the Roman Church would not soe much complaine of them; neither is the difference of those Romanists frome others in the substance of this question in controuersie, which is whether the saincts intercede & praye for faithfull Christians liuing in this world, & whether we may praye vnto them & inuocate them, in both which partes of doctrine all Romanists agree, but these diuines mentioned by Biel doe dissent from the rest onely aboute the maner of intercession which saints doe vse making a question whether they performe that charitable acte by formall prayer ma∣de vnto God for vs or by interposition of their merits by that meanes to moue his di∣uine maiestie to graunt our requests, which manner of mediation as it is not the cheefe question betwixt our aduersarie of these ty∣mes & vs, soe neither is it an argument of defect of antiquitie, vniuersalitie, or suc∣cession in the Roman doctrine, nor anie proofe of the same notes to concurre in the tenets of the moderne sectaries as Sir Hum∣frey doth falsely suppose & proueth not, but onely equiuocateth in the state of the question, or rather by affected ignorance
transuersteth the meaning of the foresaid diuines touching this point taking the ma∣ner for the substance of the matter, & soe either throu' affected ignorance or plaine malice diludes his reader. To let passe that altho' the foresaid authors doe not graunte that the saints vse anie formall or pro∣per forme of prayer to God for vs, yet doe they not deuie our in vocation vnto them. Nay supposing these diuines of whose doctrine the kinght would faine take hould as if it were contrarie to the vniuersalitie of the Roman faith: supposing I say as Sir Humfrey him selfe relates out of Gabriel they defend the mediation of saints by their merits at the least, if he had had is sen∣ses in readinesse, he might easily haue either inferred that those same authors in like māner hould that we may inuocate & pray vnto them euen peoperly & formally: or at the least it is plaine he neither ought nor could deduce the non inuocation of saints frome the foresaid mediation, as erroneou∣sly he doth, & consequently he greatly abu∣seth the maintainers of that opinion in that he produceth them against the vniuersali∣tie, antiquitie, and continuall succession of the Roman doctrine in this particular; see∣ing they differ not a iot frome other Ca∣tholique diuines in it touching the substan∣ce
of faith: yea they are soe farre from this, that they expressely consent with them both in the doctrine of mediation & me∣rits, both which points neuerthelesse the Nouellists doe obstinately impugne, soe that it appeareth as a manifest trueth that Sir Humfrey can not possible with all his arte & deuises scrape anie thing out of them for the antiquitie, vniuersalitie, & succession of his pretensiue reformed congregation, but rather that which doth quite destroye it if he had his dyes aboute him to percei∣ue it. To the wordes cited by Sir Humfrey pa∣ge 263. concerning images; Biel subioyneth these. Nec tamen propter haec imagines proij∣ciendae sunt aut de oratorijs eliminandae occasione idololatriae deuitandae, aut peregrinationes ad certas imagines vel certa loca praesertim consecra∣ta vel etiam consecranda penitus reprehendenda, non enim vsque quaque negandū est quin in certis locis singulariter reluceant beneficia & maiora crebrius quam in alijs vel propter imagines sancto∣rum, reliquias ibi conditas, uel occulta ministeria (alias mysteria) futuris temporibus ibi celebran∣da aut celebrata vel alias causas nobis occultas propter quas Deus vnum locum elegit suo cultui, non alium, Thus much Biel in can. missae sec. 49. Which wordes neuerthelesse are slylie o∣mitted
by Fir Humfrey, & his freind Cas∣sander, which other wise are soe plaine for the Catholique practice in this matter euen at this day, that they confounde them both. And this is their false plot which they vsed to make this most Catholique author seeme to fauore their ill cause, wheras in reallitie he is plainely against them. Page 152. of the by-way, Canus is cited by Sir Humfrey lib. 3. cap. 3. And falsely alledged as if he gaue a reason wherfore traditions are aboue scriptures. For he onely affitmes that they are of greater force to conuince haeretikes then scriptures, that which in substance was taught long since by ancient Tertullian & is no blemish vnto the written worde of God, which in other respects both the same Canus & all other Romanists at the least equalize yea prefer before the vnwritten doctrine of the Church in generall. In his citation of Canus page 399. of his by way, Sir Humfrey puts the obiection as if it were the doctrine of the author whoe propoundeth & ansereth the sa∣me in his last chapter of the first boo∣ke, sharpely reprehending Pighius out of whose opinion the obiection is fra∣med by Canus & reproued. Altho' he in∣sinuates with all that the error of Pighius.
Is not in matter of faith & doctrine ne∣cessatie to saluation, which is that onely which Canus professeth to maintaine in the defense of the authoritie of Councels, Nos enim in dogmate fidei & deeretis ad salutem fidelium necessarijs Conciliorum authoritatem as∣serimus: in rerum gestarum iudicio & ordine non asserimus. Canus de locis lib. 5. cap. vlt. ad sep. ar∣gumentum. When Costerus pag. 44. of his Enchir. prefers traditions before the word of God: he takes tradition as it is writen in carnall tables of the harte by the finger of the holy spirit: & on the contrarie he takes the writ∣ten worde of God precisely as it consists in letters & caracters which may perish or be corrupted by the false construction of he∣retikes, or otherwise. And therfore Coste∣rus calles the first internall, the secōd exter∣nall scriptures in the margen of the same page 44. And when the same costerus citcd by Sir Humfrey page. 149. of his Deuia, in the first chapter of his Euchyr. saith these wordes. praestantia huius scripturae &c. the excellen∣cie of this scripture doth surpasse the scrip∣tures multis partibus, in manie respects or by manie degrees those scriptures which the Apostles left vs in partchement, he doth not speake of the vnwritten tradition of
the Church, but of that scripture which (as afterwardes he declareth) Spiritus sanctus in cordibus imprimere dignatus est, that is which the holie spirit doth digne or vout∣safe to imprinte in our hartes. Which as he speakes before in the same chapter, is no∣thing els but the spirit of consent of the Catholike Church in faith, and the con∣cording doctrine of all faithfull Christians, not of those onely which now liue in the whole world, but those alsoe whoe by con∣tinuall succession haue propagated the faith of Christ from the tyme of the Apo∣stles which is that Scripture which the A∣postle saith 2. cor. 3. is read by all men, and the vnction. quaest. 2. Io. 2. docet nos de omni∣bus &c. which teaches vs all things, which as he further addeth afterwardes hath all truth in it selfe and containeth all faith and mysteries of Christian religion, and resol∣ues all doubtes which may aryse in matter of faith, and soe costerus compareth not the vnwritten worde with the written pre∣cisely but the internall with the externall, which internall scripture is iustely prefer∣red by him before the bare written worde or caracter, because as he takes it here it includes the true sense of both the one and the other: by which it appeares that the exceptions which Sir Humfrey takes at
this authors wordes ar captious and voyde of reason. Vrspergensis is produced by Sir Humfrey page 400. of his deuia as a witnesse that the second councel of Nyce or seuēth generall synod assembled in the yeare 788. was re∣iected in the councell of Francford as vt∣terly voyde and not to be named the se∣uenth. And yet hauing examined this pas∣sage in that author, I fynde he speakes not a worde of the Nycene councell but of a cettaine councell of Constantinople which he affirmes to haue ben called the seuenth synod general by the Emperatrice Irene and her sonne Constantine: his wordes are these. Sinodus etiam qua ante paucos annos in Constantinopoli congregata sub Irene & Con∣stantino filio eius septima & vniuersalis ab ipsis appellata est, vt nec septima nec aliquid diceretur quasi superuacua ab omnibus (nimirum patri∣bus Concilij Francfordiensis) abdicata est. Vrs∣perg. pag. 176. in which wordes of what soeuer Councell vrpergensis intended to speake, yet none of them mention the Councell of Nyce as all those whoe vnder∣stand latin may easily perceiue. And if Sir Hunfrey will replye and say that tho' that author doth not mention the Nycene Councell in wordes, yet doth he sufficien∣tly declare his meaning to be of no other
Councell then the seeond Nycene Synod in regarde he affirmes it to haue ben vnder Irenne and her sonne, and the same which was condemned in the Councell of Franc∣ford, I anser that by reason this author doth vtter twoe things which seeme to implye contradictiō to wit that this Coun∣cell was assembled at Constantinople and yet that it is the same which was reiected by the Councell of Francford, it euidently fol∣loweth that no certaine argument can be drawne frō his wordes whatsoeuer his mea∣ning was, and this is sufficient to shewe that he is cited in vaine by the knight. Secondly I say not obstanding vspergen∣sis hallucination, and suppose he did truely meane that the Councell of Nyce concer∣ning the adoration of images was repro∣ued by the Synod of Francford, as some o∣ther authors admit in their disputatiōs with the sectaries of our tymes, yet doth this no∣thing auaile our aduersaries cause both in respect the Synod of Francford is not ac∣cepted by the Romanists for an authenticall Councell in this particular, as alsoe for that (as some opinate) it proceeded vpon false information, and persuasion that the fore∣said Synod of Nyce had decreed that ima∣ges were to be adored with diuine honor, and by this meanes the Fathers and do∣ctors
ther assembled were deceiued and committed an error of fact. Which error neuerthelesse neither can nor ought to pre∣iudice that doctrine which was before esta∣blished by an authenticall generall Coun∣cell as was the secōd Synod consisting of a happie cōiunction of both the latin & Gre∣cian Church as of sune and moone. And the reader may see that Sir Humfrey hath both dealt some thing insincere in the allega∣tiō of Vspergensis, and alsoe hath proceeded preposterously in that he indeuored to in∣fringe the authoritie of the greater Coun∣cell by the vncertaine proceeding of the lesse. Page 261. of the same deuia he detortes the S. Irenaeus wordes contrarie to his mea∣ning against Apostolicall traditions. And yet S. Irenaeus euen in the wordes which are cited by him, speakes onely against those who denyed absolutely that the trueth is deliuered by the Scriptures but onely by tradition, and soe made them selues or their onwe traditions the rule of faith. Of which number of hererikes saith he were Valenti∣nus Marcion, Cerinthus, Basilides, of who∣me he vttered the wordes cited by Sir Hum∣frey, as affirming that the truth could not be founde by Scriptures by those whoe were ignorant of traditions for say they: the
truth was not deliuered by writing but by worde of mouth, yet notobstanding this the same Irenaeus afterwardes speakes a∣gainst others whoe doe not denye scriptu∣res, or rather against such as follow scrip∣tures onely and reiect traditions receiued from the Apostles by succession of preists and conserued or obserued in the Church saying that they haue founde the pure truth. (as the pretended reformers nowe commonly babble) of whome he saith that They neither consent to scriptures nor tradition, and against whome (saith the saint) we ought euerie way to resist. Soe that it is cleare that he disputes here onely against such heretikes as neither yealde to scriptures nor traditions, and therfore he putteth for the litle of his chapter in this place quod ne∣que scripturis neque traditionibus obsequantur haretici: that heretiques neither obey scriptures nor traditions: both which S. Irenaeus doth expressely imbrace. And by this lett the reader iudge how in∣tempestiuely the knigh doth produce this testimonie against those (I meane the Ro∣manists) who neither reiect the scriptures nor approued traditions but like twoe indi∣uided companions receiue them both: and let him alsoe consider whether the doctrine of holye Irenaeus in this place be not farre
more contrarie to the tenet of the pretēded reformers then to the doctrine of the Ro∣man Church: whoe make onely scriptures expounded according to their owne sense the sole rule of faith. Especially considering that the same ancient Father in the next ensuing chapter doth expressely receiue A∣postolicall traditions saying in the verie first wordes: traditionem itaque Apostolicam in toto mundo manifestam in Ecclesia adest perspice∣re omnibus qui vera volunt audire, & habemus annumerare eos qui ab Apostolis instituti sunt Episcopi in Ecclesijs & successores eorum vsque ad nos qui nihil tale docuerunt neque cognouerunt quale ab his deliratur. By which wordes it is manifest that S. Irenaeus doth confute his aduersaries the heretikes not by scripture onely, but alsoe & cheefely by traditiona∣rie authoritie of the Bishops succeeding fro∣me the Apostles: which is directly opposite to the tenets especially of the purer sorte of nouellists whoe neither admitte tradi∣tions nor Episcopall authoritie but the onely written worde for absolute and sole Iudge of all Controuersies & confutation of heresies. Caietan in his Commentarie vpon the historian bookes of the old Testament (as I am persuaded) doth not plainely affirme (neither doth Canus charge him with that error)
that the bookes of Machabies are not ab∣solutely Canonicall, as Sir Humfrey alled∣geth but he onely reprehendeth him for vsing a vaine distinction of Canonicall scri∣ptures as if there were some Canonicall one∣ly for instruction of manners and not for matters of faith: against the infirmitie or vnsoundnesse of which distinction Canus vseth this reprehensiue conclusion saying. Cum sub eodem contextu omnes illi libri nullo fa∣cto discrimine definiantur esse Canonici (scilicet Ecclesiasticus. Sapientia, Tobias, Iudith, Machabaeorū libri duo, & Baruch) ridiculum est vt partim in vna significatione partim in alia libros Cenonicos habeamus. Ac si hāc semel distin∣ctionem admittimus authoritate Conciliorum at∣que Pontificum nullus liber Sacer constare po∣terit. And presently after Id quoniam absurdum omnino est, retineamus potius eam rationem opor∣tet quam Caietanus voluit evertere vir (vt saepe iam dixi) cum primis eruditus & pius, sed qui in libris Canonicis constituendis Erasmi nouitates ingeniumque secutus, dum alienis vestigijs voluit insistere propriam gloriam maculauit. And soe you see Canus doth not confesse that dire∣ctly Caietan maintained the Machabies not to be Canonicall but onely with that di∣stinction: neither did in deed Caietan more denye the authoritie of those bookes then
he did the Epistle to the Haebrewes, & that of S. Iames which neuerthelesse he held ab∣solutely for Canonicall tho' not perhaps in the same rigorous sense in which he iud∣ged all the rest of the bookes of scripture to be in the Canon, by reason those, as alsoe some other partes of scripture, haue ben by some ancient authors doubted of, in which doubt onely he seemeth to founde his distinction. Touching the Canonicall bookes of the olde Testament Sir Humfrey doth most falsely alledge the authoritie of S. Isidore persuading his reader that he reiecteth tho∣se same bookes which he and his compa∣nions in the newe religion condemne for Apochripha. Weras in deed that ancient author numbereth them all in the Christiā Canon. And to the end the knights impu∣dencie may more plainely appeare I will rehearse S. Isidores expresse wordes concer∣ning the same whoe in his 6. booke of ori∣genes or etymologies saith thus. Quartus est apud nos ordo veteris Testamenti eorum librorum qui in Canone Haebreo non sunt: quorum primus sapientiae liber est. Secundus Ecclesiasticus. Tertius Tobias. Quartus Judith. Quintus & Sextus Ma∣chaboeorum. Quos licet Haebraei inter Apochry∣pha separent, Ecclesia tamen Christi inter diui∣nos libros & honorat & praedicat. By which
wordes it is soe euident that this holie Fa∣ther standes for the Romanists and against the pretensiue reformers in this point; that I much maruell how Sir Humfrey could haue the face to produce him in fauor of his cause. Nay more then this out of the di∣stinction which he maketh betweene the the Hebrewes & vs Christians in receiuing the foresaid bookes for Canonicall, I frame a firme coniecture that either all or most of these ancient authors whoe seeme to ex∣exclude them out of the Canon, doe onely intend to declare that they were not inclu∣ded in it by the Iewes as S. Hilarie. S. Hiero∣me, & S. Epiphanius & other authors: con∣cerning which point the reader may please to reade the same S. Isidore in lib. Prooemio∣rum de libris veteris, & noui Testamenti. In the 431. page of his by-way the kinght abuseth Canus whome he there ci∣tes lib. 12. cap. 13. For he foysteth in by a parenthesis of his owne the worde reall which neither Canus hath, nor yet put∣teth the force of his reprehension of the bishop of Bitont in that he affirmed in the Councell of Trent that Christ did not offer his reall bodie in his last supper, but be∣cause he affirmed that Christ did not offer his owne bodie absolutely, abstracting frō reall or not reall, the question not being in
that passage of the reall presence, but of the Sacrifice of Christs bodie & bloud in the Eucharist, which as it seemes by Canus re∣lation the foresaid Bishop in the discussion of this point by way of proposition was of that priuate dictamen, how beit after war∣des he willingly conformed him selfe to the rest of the Fathers & to the decree of the Councell. By which it is plaine that this Bishop was not of anie firme & setled opinion which might fauor Sir Humfreys doctrine in that particular. Illud primum a∣nimaduerto iure Cornelium Episcopum Bitonti∣num in Conelio apud Tridentinum à Patribus & Theologis vniuersis explosum qui dixerit Chri∣stum in Coena non suum corpus & sanguinem ob∣tulisse. Canus loco citato. And soe you see this is one of Sir Humfreyes prittie pettie trickes which omong other greater will serue to reple∣nish his pages. The kinght alsoe in his 157. page of his deuia corrupteth the same author cited in his third booke & third chapter. Where for these wordes, in sacrificio Eucharistiae simul cum corpore sanguinem sacerdotibus esse confici∣endum, & sumendum &c. Sacrae litterae nus∣quam forte tradiderunt: he translates, the consecrating & receiuing of ehe bodie, & bloud of Christ by the preist &c. Are nowhere happily to be found in scripture. In which pas∣sage
the attentiue reader may easily see that the knight plaieth the iugler most nimble∣ly. For wheras Canus putteth the force of his sentence in the wordes simul together, or at once, & in the other worde sumendum, making an hipotheticall proposition of all his wordes ioyned togither: our craftie Cir∣culator soe hādleth the matter that his rea∣der may imagin that Canus affirmed that the consecration of the Eucharist according to the custome of the Roman Church is not found in the bible. That which that au∣thor neuer dreamed, but onely intended to produce as an instance of Apostolicall tra∣ditions that copulatiue of the practice of the preists consecrating & actuall recei∣uing both the bodie & bloud at one & the same tyme in the vse of the Eucharist, which Canus supposeth rather to be a tra∣dition then expressely contained in the text of scripture. More ouer Sir Humfrey cites Gretzerus but onely twise: first in his defense of the tenth chapter of the third booke of Bel∣larmin de verbo Dei pag. 15. And of his owne by way page 503. And secondly in the sa∣me Gretzers defense of the first chapter of the first booke of Bellarmine verbo Dei. In the first place he abuseth that author in that he produceth him to proue that the
Church is finally resolued in to the Pope as head & bodie of the same. And yet in the verie same chapter page 1456. & next lea∣fe Gretzer plainely teacheth that our faith is lastely resolued in to diuine reuelatiō, or in to God reueiling or that which is the sa∣me in to the prime veritie in which our faith is founded. His wordes are these in latin. Nam sides nostra vltima resoluitur in re∣uelationem diuinam seu in Deum reuelantem seu quod idem est in primam veritatem qua & niti∣tur fides nostra tanquam fundamento paimario tametsi non inficior fidem quoque resolui in Eccle∣siam seu Ecclesiae propositionem, altho I doe nor denye that faith is resolued in to the Church, or the proposition of the Church: &c. Immedia∣tely after this he saith. Sed haec resolutio non est omniuo vltima & in principium plane sub∣stantiale & essentiale: sed tantum vt in funda∣mentum secundarium seu vt in conditionem sine qua fides neque recipitur neque retinetur. And euen in these wordes by the knight, the Pope alone is not put by Gretzerus for the whole Church, but he doth onely say, he denyeth not that the Romanists vnder∣stand by the Pope the Church in one acce∣ption, not absolutely. Which is manifest out of his wordes in the precedent page where he saith: Intelligimus etiam nomine Ec∣clesiae Pontificem pro tempore viuentem quod ipse
congregare & conuocare potest Concilium, & hunc summi Pastoris & aliorum Praesulum cae∣tum dicimus esse immediatum & ordinarium & visibilem omnium Controuersiarum quae de reli∣gione existunt Iudicem. By which wordes it is apparent that Gretzerus doth not take the Popes person alone for the head & bodie of the Church, but for the head of the bo∣die of the Church. How be it I doe not de∣nye but that the Pope as head & cheefe parte of the whole Church may by a senec∣doche be taken for the whole Church as he is accepted both by Gretzer and other di∣uines, but yet this acception will nothing profit Sir Humfrey whose wise designe in this place is to persuade his simple reader that the Romanists take the Pope alo∣ne without a generall Councell truely and properly for the whole Roman & Catho∣lique Church which is his owne phamtasti∣call dreame, not our doctrine. In the other place Sir Humfrey plainely falsifyeth this author, for wheras Gretze∣rus onely redargueth his aduersaries whoe falsely affirmes that what soeuer the deuill suggesteth to this or that Pope in particu∣lar euen against manifest scripture, the Ro∣manists receiue it for Gods worde, saying, that these things be crepitacula nugantium Praedicantium, the clappers of prating prea∣chers,
& that in truth wee Romanists one∣ly receiue & reuerence for the worde of God that which the cheefe Bishop doth by Cathedrall definition propose vnto vs as the supreme master & Iudge of controuer∣sies: Sir Humfrey by fraudulent displaceing of the worde onely & putting it before the worde of God, quyte peruertes the sense ma∣king his reader beleaue that Gretzer affir∣mes, that onely to be the worde of God which the Pope proposeth, and as if they held not the scripture it selfe to be Gods worde; the contrarie of which neuerthe∣lesse the Iesuit deliuers immediately before in expresse termes saying that, it (meaning the scripture) is had & reuerenced by the Pontificians for the worde of God which is soe well knowne that the impudencie of the Predicants can not denye it. And thus much touching the corruption & abuse of Gretzere by the calumnious knight. Moreouer wheras Sir Humfrey cites Ca∣stro in his 12. booke as affirming the de∣nyall of Purgatorie to be a most notorious & knowne error of the Greciās & Armeniās, that author is abused by him, for he meanes onely of the moderne Grecians not of the ancient Grecian Fathers, as the knight gi∣ues his reader to vnderstand, falsely apply∣ing Canus wordes page 181. to the Greek
Church of the first ages, soe that here is plaine forgerie. In like fashion in his 536. page of the De∣uia, he falsifyes the same author lib. 1. cap. 9. For where Castro saith: quamuis enim tenea∣mur ex fide credere verum Petri successorem esse supremum totius Ecclesiae pastorem, for those wordes quamuis teneamur that is, altho' we are bound, Sir Humfrey translates, admit we are bounde to beleeue that point, as if Castro had doubted of it, of which neuerthelesse he makes not anie question, but onely saith, men are not obledged to beleeue by faith that this or that particular person is true Pope. Neither yet doth he denye that euerie Pope hath infallibilitie in a reight line of succession frō S. Peter as the knight doth falsely taxe him: but he affirmes onely that it is not a matter of faith soe to belee∣ue of euerie Pope in particular. And therfo∣re he addeth that altho' he were not to be accounted an heretike that should denye obediēce vnto this or that particular Pope, to wit Clemēt or Leo, yet should he not for doubt of his election sustract him selfe from his obedience. And soe we see that here his no other argument then of want of honest dealing in our aduersarie. And yet in his 21. section of the deuia page 551. he traduceth the same Alfonsus
as if he had scoffed at the Dominicans in generall for that thay were wonte to brag before the people that he that hath once receiued their habit can not erre or fayle in fairh. Wher it is true that Castro repre∣hends sharpely, & not without reason, so∣me particular religious men that vsed such speeches, but he is soe farre from saying they are Dominicans, that he expressely addes that least he should seeme to taxe the whole order he purposely conceiled the name. Ne hoc toti ordini ac societati impressisse videar nomen ordinis ex industria subticui. & this he did of Charitie. But Sir Humfrey contrarily is soe farre from the exercise of that great virtue that he will needs make Castro to impose that vpon a whole order which he meant onely of some particular person of persons. Which is a trick of a iuggler thou' a verie pore one. Neither can I conceiue, except it were by reuelation, howe Sir Humfrey came to know that Ca∣stro spake of the Dominicans more then of anie other religious order, but let that passe for one of his great miracles. Touching the mariage of priests cassander is corrupted by Sir Hūfrey in the 23. art. of his consult. p. 990. where for antiquae consue∣tudinis immutandae, he puteth in English, the change of the lawe, and soe leauing out the
worde ancient as alsoe the wordes prisci moris, which signifyes the custome of celibate to haue ben no newe lawe as he would falsely persuade hir reader, but established in an∣cient tymes. And more then this he foy∣steth in to his translation the worde necessa∣rie in steed of flagitare videntur, And thus like a bungling boteher he patcheth togi∣ther those vncertainties of Cassander to make himselfe and others a deceitfull safe∣garde of greater confort and benefit for the soule which he erroneously supposeth ra∣ther to be in his misreformed faith them in the Romish. And now how vnfaithfull, wea∣ke, & pore proceeding of Sir Humfrey this appeares to be, let the indicious reader con∣sider. The knigh moreouer traduceth Bellar∣min in the preface to his booke de Roma∣no Pont. translating in euerie place for Graeci, the Greeke Fathers, as if the Cardi∣nall did confesse that the ancient and most famous Greeke Fathers to wit S. Chryso∣stome, S. Basil Epiphanius and others did impugne and resiste the supremacie of the Bishop of Romane. Wheras it is plaine Bel∣larmin meaneth onely such Grecians as sate in the Councell of Calcedon whoe frandu∣lently defined in absence of the Popes lega∣tes, that the Patriarch of Constantinople is
soe the second after the Roman Bishop as that yet he hath equall priuiledges, whence Sir Humfrey will needs inferre that the su∣premacie of the Pope wantes succession: as if the Popes resistance to this attempte of vsurpation in those Grecians were suffici∣ent to exstinguish a true and estblished suc∣cession of all former tymes. In his page 104. of the deuia touching Salmeron the knight falsely affirmes out of chamier that he speakes in the person of the Grecians when he vttereth those wor∣des. For as much as the benedictton of the lord is not fuperfluous &c. For Salmeron neither mentions Grecians nor Latinists but onely argues for the second opinion which he putteth of those which seeme to hould that Christ did not consecrate his bodie and bloud with those wordes. This is my bodie. But whose soeuer those wor∣des bee the matter is not great, yet certaine it is that Sir Humfrey dealeth falsely and deceitfully in that he produceth them and Salmeron to proue that the grand point of transsubstantiation (as he pleaseth to ter∣me it) hath neither foundation in the scrip∣tures, nor certaintie in the Fathers, nor v∣nitie among the Romanists whenas neither those wordes of Salmeron are spoken to proue that the grand point of transsubstan∣tiation
(as he pleaseth to terme it) hath neither foundation in the scriptures, nor certaintie in the Fathers, nor vnitie among the Romanists. When as neither those wor∣des of Salmeron are spoken to anie other end but onely to confirme the opinion of such as hould that out Sauior did not con∣secrate with those wordes: This is my bo∣die. Howbeit, both he and they agree most vniformely in that how soeuer Christ him selfe did whose power being infinite was not tyed to anie wordes at all for the effecting that which he intended no more then he was in the operation of mi∣racles & particularly in the miraculous transsubstantiation of water in to wine in the mariage feast of Cana: yet Preists whoe are but his substitutes or instruments in that sacred action doe vndoubtedly conse∣crate with those determinate wordes: This is my bodie, in which all Romanists yea & Grecians (excepting some moderne Gre∣cians whoe adde some other deprecatorie wordes) doe consent & vnanimously ac∣corde. Wher vpon Salmeron before he co∣mes to rehearse opinions touching that point whether Christ him selfe did conse∣crate with these formall wordes, saith plai∣nely. Illud igitur tanquam certum & constitu∣tum est apud omnes hanc fuisse nobis formam con∣secrationis
praescriptam, & iure diuino institu∣tam ac nobis traditam. Which wordes suffi∣ciently declare that there is no incertaintie among the Romanists aboute the foresaid wordes of consecration: Nay & if ther were that incertaintie among diuines aboute the forme of the Eucharist which Sir Hum∣frey pretendeth, yet doth it not follow that the Doctrine of transsubstantiation is vn∣certaine supposing that both Salmerō & all the same diuines agree that the bread and wine are truely transsubstantiated or turned in to the bodie & bloud of Christ, & con∣sequently this author is impertinently al∣ledged as hauing nothing for the knights purpose. Besydes that parte of the wordes which he cites out of Salmeron whether they be the Grecians or not, they include clearely the doctrine of transsubstantia∣tion, to wit those in particular, when he gra∣ue it transmutation was alreadie made: & soe the vnwarie knight hath alledge this passa∣ge against him selfe. For if the change of the bread & wine was made before Christ gaue the Sacrament to his disciples, the Ro∣manists haue their desire & intent, that Christ did truely transsubstantiate the ele∣ments, it importing little to this que∣stion by what meanes he performed his action.
Page 547. of his deuia the kinght cor∣rupts Salmeron by a mangled relation & false construction of his wordes which he produceth to proue that some Romanists & particularly Salmeron hould the Popes iudgement infallible. But how soeuer it be that some Roman diuines hould the Popes authoritie euen without a generall Coun∣cell infallible in determining controuersies in matters of faith, & others the contrarie which as Bellarmin noteth is no matter of faith. Yet certaine it is that Salmeron is he∣re abused by Sir Humfrey for that in this place cited (what soeuer he doth in others) he rather attributes all infallibilitie in re∣soluing & declaring matters of controuer∣sie, cheefely to the assistance & power of the holy spirit, then either to the Pope or Church. His wordes are these. Neque haec sunt satis nisi accedat vnctio & eruditio Spiritus Sancti quem Dominus mansurum nobiscum in aeternum, qui & in generalibus synodis, & in Christi Vicario & Petri successore residens omnes incidentes quaestiones & ortas de fide controner∣sias sua authoritate terminet atque absoluat. Thus Salmeron prologom. 9. can. 1. Wher the reader may perceiue that the kinght hath either ignorantly or malitiously applyed the relatiue qui to the Pope, which neuer∣thelesse is referred by Salmeron to the ho∣ly
Gost. As anie Grammer boy that vnder∣stands latin, may eassely perceiue. And yet blinde Sir Humfrey whoe not being yet a perfect Gramarian, will needs playe the Doctor of diuinite, englisheth & rehear∣seth Salmerons wordes thus. The lorde pro∣mised his Spirit to Christs Vicar & the successor of Peter & by his authoritie the determins all matters of faith. Let the reader compare the english with the latin & he will presently discouer the fraud. S. Isidor Pelusiota writ the Epistle cited by Sir Humfrey page 630. to a monke na∣med Zenon, complaining vnto him of want of virtue & corruption of maners in the Church in comparison of the primatiue tymes, all which that holy man affirmes to proceed from dissention & wickednesse or malice of these whoe gouerne especially of preists thou' not of all: but he hath not a worde of the Pope, or of anie defect, or of the latencie or inuisibilitie of the Church which our aduersarie professeth to prose∣cute in that his section. And this which I say is made plaine by the last clause or conclusion of the epistle which is this. At tu ò conspicue Ecclesiae alum∣ne ne ad eos qui naufragio pereunt animum at∣tendas nec cum segnibus & ignauis teipsum com∣pares: verum scientiae lumen splendidius, subinde
redde per vitae probitatem ac virtutem ipsum ir∣rigans. Atque sponsum expecta ingressum quidem cum ijs qui animis & corporihus virgines sunt. De ijs autem qui virginitatis & sucerdotis di∣gnitati per flagitia sua contumeliam intulerunt, supplicium sumpturum. By which wordes it is plaine here is nothing of anie reformatiō in Faith made or yet desired in those dayes which is that Sir Humfrey aymeth at. Nor is ther anie worde which fauors lu∣thers pretēded reformation of the Church. Neuerthelesse if Sir Humfrey and his con∣sociates could but pick vs out one halfe dozen of such chaste and religious monkes as these, out of all the seuerall Congregatiōs of their illuminate brothers since the dayes of Luther, then would we most willingly giue licence vnto them to reforme the Church at their pleasures. Sir Humfrey in the 24. chapter of his deuia cites a great number of Romanists with intention to proue the inuisibili∣tie of the Church: & the medium he vseth for his proofe be the testimonies of those authors whoe acknowledge abuses to haue ben in the Church in their seuerall ages euen till the dayes of luther: & whoe signi∣fye in their writings that they haue desired reformation of such abuses. Out of which
holting premisses Sir Humfrey inferreth this crooked conclusion to wit that Luther was the man that made the soe long wished re∣formation. Which illation as the reader may easily perceiue is as lame as her parēts, neithet is that consequens anie more neces∣sarie then that Mahomet was the reformer of the Church because at the same tyme and before he founded his sect ther were perhaps some things which wanted amēd∣ment. And yet much lesse can anie man imagin how out of those twoe propositions viz that diuers learned and pious people complained of abuses and corruption of maners and desired redresse, therfore the Church was latent and obscure or inuisi∣ble, or yet further that that latent and obs∣cure Church was the Church of the pretēded reformers, or that those zelous and godly persons who soe complained in seuerall a∣ges, were members of the same, and not ra∣ther virtuous and religious Romanists as in deed they were, all which inferences because Sir Humfrey neither doth nor can possible proue to be sounde and legitimate, ther∣fore he hath spent much tyme in vaine in that he maketh a large rehearsall of the speeches of such authors as haue noted the common and publike vices of their dayes, which and the like sinnes and abuses no
Romanist euer denyed but they may be euen in the members of tre true visible Church. Now to come to particulars to the end the follie of our aduersarie may more plai∣nely appeare I will examen some passages which he citeth out of Gerson which being those which seeme most plausible for his cause when the reader shall see them decla∣red and rectifyed, he will without anie more exacte discussion be able to iudge of others of lesse apparence and color. I confesse that Gerson was free in his spe∣aches as being a zelous and plaine man, and a sharpe represender of vices, neuerthelesse I finde not in his writings but that he was an humble acknowledger of the Popes autho∣ritie yea and an earnest defender of those points of doctrine which luther and the rest of the pretended newe reformants hould for errneous and false opinions, for superstions and idolatrie. As the vse of ima∣ges, prayer to saints, Purgatorie, the seuen Sacraments, the reall presence and the rest of the matters in controuersie betweene vs and thē: de numero Sacramen∣torū scien∣dum quod septē sunt Gers. 2. part. Act. 26. as his workes printed at Strasburg in foure partes or tomes declare, neither did he euer desire anie reformation in the sub∣stance of these particulars, howe be it I de∣nye not but that as he might finde some a∣buses
in the practise of the same, soe might he alsoe wish for amendment of them, but this is not contrarie to the doctrine and practi∣ze of the Romanists but most conformable to the same, whoe as they confesse that so∣me things deseruing correction may creepe in to the particular members of the Church yea and into the head and cheefe pastor him selfe, soe doe they not onely desire but alsoe procure reformation of the same by all direct and lawfull meanes. And soe whatsoeuer Gerson saith in this nature if it be not detorted to a sense contrarie to the true meaning of the author (as here it is by Sir Humfrey) the Romanists most willingly imbrace it as profitable to the soules of manie and for the good of the v∣niuersall Church. It is true Gerson speakes something har∣shely and by excesse when he saith: euen as wee see in like manner in some countryes touching censures and lawes inuented a∣boute particular obseruances or rules not necessarie to saluation which are often ty∣mes preferred before the lawes of God and of the Gospell, And this same wee see mâ∣nifestely in the decrees and decretalls. whē∣ce it is that some tymes a monke is more seuerely punished for going without his hood then for cōmitting adultring or sa∣criledge,
and he that offendes against one of the Popes commandements then he that sinnes against one of the commaundemēts of God, and the Euangell, according to that reprehension of our Sauior: you haue frustrated the commaundements of God for the traditions of men. In an other place the same Ger∣son complaines of the abuses and sin∣nes of fryers, Nunns, and preists of the great varietie of images which he bids the reader consider whether they be not occa∣sion of idolatrie in the simple people: of the canonization of newe saints and re∣ligious orders, of which he saith ther are to manie alreadie, and that the feasts of the newe saints are more religiously obser∣ued then the feasts of the Apostles, of A∣pocrypsall Scriptures and prayers, super∣stitious opinions of obtaining remission of sinnes by saying soe manie Pater nosters in such a Church before such an image. And in his treatise de Concil. Gen. vnius obedi∣entiae he saith thus: if the Church may not be reformed according to the state in which it was in the tyme of Christ and his Apostles, yet at least it should be brough to the state it was in the tyme of Pope syluester. In an other place Gerson as it were by way of complainte saith in hac tempestate
(meaning in that season in which he liued) he did see, matters standing as they did, that scarce anie due determination or spee∣die and free execution of iustice was found in doctrine appertaining to faith, religion, to good and hoalsome manners, vnlesse it were by strong fauor of the secular po∣wer. This is that in substance which Sir Hūfrey alledgeth out of Gerson yea an something more then he him self produceth: And yet neuerthelesse as the reader may easily vn∣derstand there is nothing agreeable to the reformation of Luther and Caluin. For Gerson onely reprehends, and that iuste∣ly, some particular persons in some parti∣cular countryes and in some particular ob∣seruations, which soe exactely and rigo∣rously obserue theit rules & lawes & soe ex¦orbitantly estreeme of them that they often tymes by indiscreet zeale are more diligent in performing them then they are in kee∣ping the lawes of God, and that they some tymes punish more seuerely a religious per∣son offending against one of those mona∣sticall rules or statutes, or against one of the Popes preceps, or lawes of the decre∣talls, or others, then they punish him whoe committeth adulterie or sacrilege. Wher as those twoe false reformers Martin and
Iohn were not content with this, and to procure a reformation in some particular persons, rules, and statues, but they too∣ke away all monasticall obseruations ei∣ther of vowe, rule, or constitution, and ex∣tingnissed all Ecclesiasticall lawes both of the Pope and Church as much as lay in their power violating, euerting, and razing the verie buildings of religious houses and consuming by fyre the bookes of the de∣cretals and whole Canon lawes, quyte de∣stroying that and much more by rage and furie which Gerson out of a pious & Chri∣stian zeale onely wished to haue amended. Gerson complained of the euill life of fryres and nunnes with desire to haue them reformed and reduced to the obseruation of their ancient rules and constitutions, o∣nely excepting against the multiplicie and varietie of religious orders: suntque per haec caelestia tonitruasu∣blata pro∣hibita & damnata omnia isti∣us generis vota peni∣tissimè. Lut. tom. 2. fol. 272. But those companions in impietie Luther and Caluin would haue all religious and monasticall discipline wholely extingnished as Sacrile∣gious damnable, and contrarie to the lawe of God vsing opprobrious speaches against all Religious persons & their profession. Gerson tooke to consideration whether the multitude and varietie of images might not be occasion of idolatrie in the simple people yet did not he reproue the due ho∣nor
of them: But our newe reformers or rather deformers either will haue no ima∣ges at all in Churches as Caluinists, or at the least they will not haue them honored with religious reuerence as Lutheranes, repro∣uing all kinde of veneration or worship of them as superstitious and idolatrous. Gerson onely reprehended the excesse (as he apprehended) in the canonization of soe manie newe saints & the more re∣ligious obseruation of thers feastes then of the feastes of the Apostles by some particu∣lar persons or Churches: but these twoe pro∣phane fellowes allowe not of anie religious celebration of the feasts of either ancient or moderne saints neither of Apostles nor Euangelists, neither of confessers nor mar∣tyres, making account onely of the sabaoth day (as they cōmonly call the sunday) in that nature: alsoe houlding the canoniza∣tion of noe saints for either necessarie, law∣dable, or authenticall desiring rather their memories should be extingiushed rhen re∣uerenced. Gerson likewise comdemneth instely superstitions comitted by particu∣lar persons in the worship of saints, & vai∣ne obseruations, & ouer great credulitie gi∣uen by them to euerie passage recounted in some inauthentichall legendes, yet admit∣ting & defending due & moderate honor
of saints & the authentical & true histo∣ries of their liues: But our pretended refor∣mers reiect all religious honor of Saintcts & hould the relatiōs of their liues & mira∣cles for Apocriphall & fabelous at the least of moderne saints. Gerson defended the Roman doctrine of indulgences most Catholiquely as his treatice of that matter doth testifye, Indulgen∣tiarum cō∣cessio non est parui pendenda seu contem¦nenda sed amplectēda deuote, & in fide spe & chari∣tate Domi¦ni nostri Iesu Chri¦sti qui po¦testatem lium claui¦um Eccle∣siasticarum dedit homi¦nibus Ger∣son p. 2. act. 23. and onely taxed some particular pardons of sinnes as he relates, for saying soe manie pater nosters in such a Church, before such an image, calling them superstitious opi∣niōs and friuolous additions as hauing ne∣uer ben approued by the Roman Church: But our newe doctors & masters Luther & Caluin vtterly condemne all sortes of In∣dulgence graunted by the Pope yea and the power of the Church to graunte them. Gersō speaking onely of some vitious Ec∣clesiastical persons reprehendes preists for that vnder the pretense of maydes they keepe cōcubines yet plainely supposing the lawe of Celibate or single life of cleargie to haue ben in vse in and before his tymes as a thing lawdable and fitting for their voca∣tion: & quoniā assidue no∣stri sacerdo¦tes sacris occupantur mysterijs quid diuini¦us quam vt continua polleant ca∣stitate. Gers. 2. part. dia∣log. de ce∣lib. Act. 4 But those twoe luxurious imps the one a professed fryer, the other a vowed priest, according to their newe reformation
teach it lawfull and laudable for preists not obstanding their vowes of chastitie, to chā∣ge the state of chastitie in to the state of ma∣riage they being the first that gaue example of that sacrilegious action and leading the daunce them selues. Gerson complaines that Cathedrall Churches are made dennes of theeues, and consecrated monasteries markets & Innes: But by the followers of Luther and Caluin, those holie cloysters are not onely made markets and Innes, but euen stables and hogstyes, & Cathedrall Churches as it were common burses or exchanges for relation of newes and negotiations, in which mani∣fould iniustices and illicit contracts are plotted and accorded to the great profa∣nation of the house of God ordained for onely prayer, seruice, and Sacrifyce, soe that if Gerson were now aliue doubtlesse he would rather taxe the pretended re∣formers in this nature then those Catho∣lique profaners of his owne tymes. Gerson bids inquirie to be made if ther be not Apocryphall Scriptures, and prayers introduced in the Church to the great pre∣iudice of Christian faith, not meaning of anie Scriptures or prayers approued for Ca∣nonicall, and pious by the authoritie of the Roman Church as are the bookes of ma∣chibies,
Sapience, Ecclesiasticus, Tobie, and Iudith and prayers to saints all which Ger∣son him selfe did receiue for such but he onely reprehendes such false Scriptures or prayers as some newfangled priuate per∣sons had published and inuented with out warrant or authoritie of the prelates and gouernors of the Church: But Luther Cal∣uin and their schollers peremptoriely reiec∣ted and excluded out of the text and ca∣non of seripture the forosayde bookes and some others, as allsoe all manner of pray∣ers to sainrs, euen those prayers and kookes of scripture which had ben most anciently approued and read in the seruice of the vni∣uersall Church at the least since the tyme of Innocēt the first Pope of that name, and soe vsed in the dayes of S. Augustin and e∣uer since till the late dayes of Luther. And now by this breefe collation or cō∣parision which I haue made the reader may plainely viewe the great difference ther is betweene the desired reformation of Ger∣son and that of the pretended Innouators of our tymes, the one being almost quite opposite to the other: the one intending onely to redresse the Church in some parti∣cular accessorie defects, the other indeuo∣ring violētly to destroye the whole frame and foundatiō of the visible Church and to
build a newe one: and finaly the one being a reformation either wholely or cheefly in the life and maners of some corrupted per∣sons the other cheefly in faith & doctrine and not regarding reformation of life but rather giuing more scope and libertie to li∣centiousnesse then euer was heard of in the Christian world. And altho' Gerson doth insinuate the necessitie of reformation euen in matters of faith and religion, yet doth he not me∣ane of the faith and teligion maintained approued and practized by the Roman Church, but he speaketh onely of the er∣rours of heretikes & some abuses of other particular persons cropen into the exercise of the true religiō in which he desired refor∣mation to the end the state of the Church may remaine and cōtinue firme in her for∣mer puritie without staine of erroneous doc¦trine or corrupted manners. In all which he wished the slownesse of the prelates might be hastened by the power of the se∣cular authoritie of kings and Princes, ra∣ther then lye vnamended, with danger of the Roman faith and preiudice to the sal∣uation of soules. Which pious zeale of that renowned chanceler was highly to be com∣mended as farre different from the procee∣dings of the authors of our newe pretended
reformation who to acquire them selues a name of famous men vnder the colour of reforming the Church made a preye of the same with infinit losse of Christian soules and generall domage to virtue and religi∣ous life. More ouer I am to aduertice the reader that in the citation of this author Sir Hum∣frey hath cōmirted twoe notable fraudes. The first is in that he reherses a great parte of his wordes as if he had founde them allogether & in one continuated order or text, wheras the author hath them in di∣uers places & to diuers purposes. For ex∣ample Sir Humfrey ioyneth that which Gerson saith of remission of sinnes by so mainie Pater nosters, which he hath in his treatie of Indulgences, with that other pas∣sage of preferring the particular obserua∣tions of some countries before the lawe of God, which he hath not in the same place, but in an other treatise intituled de directio∣ne cordis. Secondly I finde those wordes of Ger∣son which all or most of them being spoa∣ken by him onely of correction of man∣ners, the kinght applyeth thē to matters of faith to persuade his reader that ther were corruptions in the Church euen in mat∣ters of faith, and that the chancelor procu∣red
reformation of them. An exemple of this fraude you haue in the 650. page of the deuia, where the knight sayth Gersō wished at the least a restoring of the ancient faith of the Fathers tyme citing for this his trea∣tice intituled, de Coucilio Generali vnius obe∣dientiae, and quoting these wordes in the margin. Ecclesia sinon ad statum Christi & Apostolorum Saltem ad statum Syluestri restitu∣enda. Which wordes neuerthelesse Gerson speaketh not of matters of faith, but onely of the prouision and collation of benefices as both his whole discourse and especially his precedent wordes doe most clearely de∣monstrate. Which are these. Sed longe aliter imprimatiua dolatione donatione. distribuebantur bona ta∣lia quam postmodum tempore praelatorum qui cae∣perunt paulatim refrigescere a sanctitate priorum tandem abusi sunt collationibus bene ficiorum & ciusmodi administratione quod Papae ad se paula∣tim multa reuocauerunt vsque adeo quod fi∣naliter datis occasionibus & acceptis quas non est hic opus recitare quasi tota iurisdictio & col∣latio talis paenes Papam & eius curiam remane∣bant. And after theses wordes Gerson vt∣tered those other at which Sir Humfrey cat∣ched yet according to his inueterated cu∣stome related not syncerily, which if other∣wise he had truely reheharsed they would haue presently discouered the truth and
of what matter they were deliuered, for Gerson saith: vel redeundum esset ad statum Ecclesiae tempore syluestri & Gregorij quando quilibet Praelatus dimittebatur in sua iurisdictione & sollidudinis parte. nowe let the reader con∣fer all these wordes of Gerson with the ci∣tation of Sir humfrey in the page aboue noted & he will presently perceiue howe he hath corrupted thē both in tenor and sense, and how he hath foysted in the worde Ec∣clesia wher it is not to be founde in the text of the author. As alsoe in the place taken out of Gersons in his consolatorie tract of rectifyind the hart, he transposeth and mangleth his wor∣des leauing out the worde particular: and for the wordes in aliquibus religio∣nibus, translating, in manie conuents puting manie in steede of some. And where the sa∣me Gerson in an other place complaining of the imperfections and vices of the regu∣lar and secular Cleargie doth explicate him selfe not to meane of all but of some parti∣cular persons, Sir Humfrey guilefully omits his wordes which are these. Sed nunquid ho∣die omnes Domini & Paelati in intedictis & post dicendis culpabiles sunt malis? absit, reliquit enim Dominus sibi in Israell septem millia virorum quo∣rum genua non sunt curuata ante Baal. and where the author speaking of disorders of
the monasteries of nunnes and fryres vseth the worde quasi to giue the reader aduertise∣ment that he speaketh not absolutely but onely by way of comparison: In cōsolat. the maliti∣ous knight leaues it out, as if it were not to the purpose, as he omits alsoe the worde nō∣nunqnam when the author speakes of the dāger which some tymes happeneth among the simple sorte by reason of the multipli∣citie of such things as he ther mentio∣neth. In like manner in an other tract in wheras the Chancelor at the first making some doubt of the obtaining of a certaine Indul∣gence by saying soe manie Pater nosters be∣fore an image of the Crucifix, yet afterwar∣des doth moderate his owne speeches soe that it plainely apppeares he doth not con∣demne the same, the fraudulent knight soe relateth the passage as if Gerson had not o∣nely taxed that forme of indulgēce in parti∣cular but alsoe had absolutely renoūced the Romā doctrine touching the lawfullnes of Indulgēces in generall: his wordes are these Circa haec itaque & similia multum caute pro∣cedendum est & prouidendum, ne opponatur fir∣ma vel pertinax credulitas propter erroris pericu∣lum neque etiam oportet eiusmodi omnino & per∣tinaciter dissentire, nec etiam penitus contemnere & improbare, est igitur ambulandum in his via
media &c. by which and other the like sub∣missiue & temperate wordes which he hath afterwardes in the same place, the reader may see Gerson was as farre from being one of the newe reformers as is the spirit of hu∣militie frome the spirit of pride and con∣tempte, which is the onely guide of all those whoe reiect and impugne the Roman doctrine in all points of controuersie. Finally in those wordes cited by Sir Hū∣frey out of Gersons Apolotgeticall dialog, wheras the author speakes in the case of scisme when the true Pope was not certai∣nely knowne, and cheefely of one particu∣lar point to wit of the condemnation of that proposition, a tyranne may be lawfully killed by priuate authoritie or by anie priuate man. the deceitfull knight soe applyes the wordes as if Gerson had generally dispared of the reformation of the Church, and the more easily to persuade his reader he omit∣tes the wordes, hac tempestate and those re∣bus vt sunt manentibus. Gersons wordes truly rehearsed are these. video quod in doctrinis quae religionem, quae bonas & salubres respiciunt mores, vix inuenietur in hac tempestate (rebus vt sunt manimentibus nec habito forti fauore po∣tentiae saecularis) terminatio debita vel expedita iustitia Which wordes if the reader compa∣res them with the wordes cited in English
by the knight he will easily spye more faul∣tes then I haue noted. And then from hēce, and the rest which I haue produced tou∣ching the whole allegation of Gerson he will be able to iudge both of the false dei∣ling of our aduersarie & how smale reason he had to indeuore to make that famous and renowned Romanist one of the blind brothers of his inuisible Congregation. But now for conclusiō & plainer intellectiō or vnderstanding of that which I haue said touching this author, the reader must take noticie that Gerson liued in a tyme of a great scisme rased by the erroneous electi∣on of diuers Popes by diuers partes of the faction, by reason of which strife finding in his iudgement no other meanes to bring matters to a peaceable issue and attonemēt then by giuinge greater authoritie to a ge∣nerall Councell then to the Pope, he pre∣ferred the power of a Councel before the authoritie of the Pope: which scisme alsoe was the true cause why he likewise seemed to dispare of the reformatiō of the Church, and therfore he labored to haue a generall Councell vnder one Pope by occasion of which desire he writ his treatie intituled De Cōcilio vnius obediētiae to deliberate the cōpo∣sing of the Ecclesiasticall debate a and Pa∣pal dissentiō all which is by himselfe clea∣rely
deliuered in seuerall places of his wor∣kes and particularly in his Apolageticall dialog fol. 75. saying. hoc vnum scio quod ze∣lus hahendae vnionis in scismate tam desperato tantique temporis, fecit multa tolerari quae fuis∣sent aliunde nec tolerabilia nec toleranda &c. And now by this it is sufficiently cleare that Gerson is not for the new reformation of moderne sectaries in anie one pointe of doctrine or manners. In his citation of Cusanus lib. 3. concod. Cath. cap 16. the kinght hath in his owne page 378. 8. 9. of the by way notably cor∣rupted him, for he reheareses his wor∣des without anie order, & alsoe quite con∣trarie to his sense & meaning as that au∣thors owne wordes most euidently conuin∣ce in his 17. chapter following, where he hath this plaine clause Ecce quod de pertinen∣tibus ad religionem Imperator inter Episcopos iu∣dicare non debet. Et in his 18. chapter he saith thus. Firmitas autem iudicij & omnium quae ita aguntur in concilio per quoscunque ex con∣sensu tantum, synodica dependent authoritate. Quare etsi aliquando sententiasse iudices tales le∣guntur, ex cousensu & synodica commissione vi∣gor sententiae dependebat, & non ex imperiali cō∣missione, cuius authoritas synodum virilem non praecellit. Thus much Cusanus touching iu∣dicatiue authoritie in generall councels,
which as is plaine by these wordes doth not depend vpon the Emperor. It is true Cusanus grauntes (I knowne not how tru∣ely) that he fyndes the Emperor did al∣wayes praesidere that is preced or take the first place in the councels, but he doth not say (as Sir Humfrey feysteth in) primatum habuit, he had the primacie. But o∣nely graunteth the Emperor & his Iudges with the senate, locall preheminence befo∣re the Pope or at the most depending on the Pope, & councell, as his whole discourse in diuers chapters of the booke cited by the kingth. manifestely declare. And cōcerning the cōgregation or con∣uocation of generall Councels, it is almost euident out of the precedent chapters of the same booke that this author graūtes no Primacie to the Emperor, but cheefely to the Pope. For altou' in the begining of the 13. chapter he hath these expresse wordes ex superioribus habetur Imperatores sanctos con∣gregationes synodales vniuersalis concilij totius Ecclesiae sēper fecisse. Yet presētly after expli∣caing him selfe better he saith. Breuiter dico quod ita se habet Imperator ad vniuersalē Ecclesiae Catholicae synodum, sicut Rex ad vniuersale Regni sui concilium, non quad coactiue sed cohor∣tatiue colligere debet. And yet more plainely presently after. Vigilare dehet Imperator & fi∣dei
& pacis custos, & Romani Pontificis primo synodi necessitatem insinuare, & eius consensum congregandi concilij in definito loco requirere. By all which it doth manifestly appeare how shamelessely the kinght abuseth Cusanus, & how smale reason he had to produce his testimonie for the Popes vsurpation (as he termeth it) both in calling & assuming pre∣heminence of place & dignitie, in Coun∣cels, supposing that author (as being Car∣dinall of the Popes creation) soe professe∣dly maintaines his authoritie both in the resolutorie assembling & cōfirming of ge∣nerall synods. And if the reader desire greater satisfactiō concerning the doctrine of this author aboute the Popes authoritie in Councels, let him please to read his epistle to Rode∣ric, & he will easily perceiue howe plainely he purgeth himself from all sinister impu∣tation in that nature: and that if perhaps in his immature age when he writ his Catho∣lique concordance by reason of the great fame which he conceiued of the Councel of Basill, he inconsiderately vttered anie thing which might seeme to diminish the power of rhe Bishop of Rome in respect of a generall Councell: yet afterwardes per∣ceiuing that those whoe preferred the au∣thoritie of Councels before the authoritie
of the cheefe Bishop & pastor the Church proceeded soe farre as to attempt the ele∣ction of the Antipope Foelix, against the true Pope Eugenius, then presently he re∣pented him self that he had soe much ex∣tolled their schismatticall syond, imitating in this both Cardinall Iulian & Aeneas syl∣uius, whoe both of them in the begining defended the Councell of Basill against Eugenius the true Pope, yet in the end re∣tracting their action maintained most ear∣nestly his authoritie against te same sy∣nod. That which is sufficient to manifest the inconsideration, ignorance & insyn∣ceritie of Sir Humfrey in his production of this author whoe suppose he had deliuered his mynde lesse clearcly in one place & occasion, yet did he amēd the same in ano∣ther more exact worke of his owne hand & industrie, & of his owne accorde, how be it althou' our aduersarie takes him at the greatest aduantage he can, yet reightly vn∣lierstanded & alledged he doth not a iot aduantage his cause. In his citation of the Rhemes Testament in the annotation vpon the 6. of the Epi∣stle the Hebrewes v. 16. the knight rela∣teth wordes in which the author of the no∣tes affirmes that God should be iniust if he rēdered not heauen for meritorious wor∣kes,
But to make the matter more odious he craftely omittes the wordes of S. Hiero∣me there cited for proofe of the same lib. 2. contra Iouinianum cap. 2. saying that in deed great were Gods iniustice if he would onely punish sinnes and would not receiue good workes. And if that cōditionall of the Rhemists be not iustifyable, then may our aduersarie more iustely taxe, S. Augustin who lib. de nat, and Grat cap. 2. And lib. 4. contra Iulianum cap. 3. gaue then examples of that forme of speech. Saying in the first place▪ non est iniustus Deus qui instos fraudet mercede iustitiae, and in the second, per quod vera iustitia per hoc & regnum Dei: Deus nam∣que ipse, quod absit, erit iniustus, si ad eius reg∣num non admittitur iustus. Wherfore except Sir Humfrey will ioyne in his accusation those two renound ancient Fathers, he can not in reason accuse those learned doc∣tors. Althou I conceiue it may seeme vnseaso∣nable to my present purpose distinctly to treate of anie matter of doctrine in this pla∣ce and occasion yet in regarde I haue la∣tely reflected that Sir Humfrey professes him selfe an enimie to implicit or vnex∣pressed faith, therfore I esteemed conueni∣ent for the accomplishing of my worke, to
insert a compendious discourse touching that point. And to come to the purpose, I can not conceiue or inuente anie other motiue in our aduersaries for their soe obstinate de∣nyall of vnexpressed faith, except it is be∣cause euerie one of them confidently pre∣sumes to knowe the expresse contents of Scriptures as well as him who made them, yet on the contrarie I am assuredly persua∣ded that in reallitie a verie great parte (if not all their congregatiō) inioyes not this great extrauagant priuilege what soeuer they imagin, or conceiue of them selues. For altho' it is true that the illuminate bro∣thers generally vse to brag they are docibiles Dei, and admit noe other schoolemaster in this matter then God almightie him selfe: yet is it certainely knowne that some of them be soe ignorant that they knowe not as much as their Abcedarie, or Christ crosse rowe. And now of these whoe can not read the Bible, I question our aduersaries thus, either these ignorants beleeue althings cō∣tained in the whole scripture, or no? If they doe not, then they ar heretikes for refusing to beleeue the whole worde of God. If they doe beleeue all, and euerie particular con∣tained in the Scripture, then necessarily they must haue an implicit faith, in regarde
manie particular truethes be there inclu∣ded which they can not possibly knowe by reason they can neither haue them selues, nor receiue a perfect knowlege from anie other of euerie seuerall trueth therin con∣tained: and consequently, if anie faith they haue of those particular verities con∣tained in the Scripture which they knowe not, it is onely an implicit, vnexpressed, or implied faith supposing this consists in no∣thing esse but a generall faith euen of those particulars of which the beleeuers haue no expresse knowledge, except onely in a cer∣taine cōfuse or generall manner, or as they ar contained in other generall propositi∣ons, or matters, which expressely and seue∣lally they know to be reueiled in the worde of God, and of which they haue an explicit, expresse, or disinuolued faith. For as he who eypressely graunteth, or assents to anie general Principle or proposition, for exam∣ple, that all Angels ar incorporall, or wi∣thout bodies, or that all men ar reasonable creatures, doth by necessarie consequens assent implicitly to all the particulars there included, viz, that S. Michael S. Gabriel, and euerie other particular Angel is incor∣poral, and that S. Peter, and Paule, and e∣uerie other particular man is a reasonable creature altho' he neuer had anie particular
knowledge of them: Soe in the verie same manner those whoe with an expresse act of faith beleeue al the Church proposeth vnto them in that kynde, or all the scripture con∣teines: doe likewise necessarily beleeue with an implicit or tacit faith euerie seue∣rall matter included in those general tear∣mes. And this kynde of implicit faith, our ad∣uersaries must either graunt, or else neces∣sarily confesse that euerie Mecanike hath as much knowlege in the Scripture as the most learned Minister, and euerie sheep as much as his pastor: which neuerthelesse euerie rude rustick is able to iudge for most absur∣de, and voyde of trueth. Soe thus we see that of the denyal of an implicit faith eyther the ignorant, and vnlearned sorte of people in the pretensiue reformed Chur∣ches knowe as much in the Scripture as their greatest doctors: or that they ar plaine heretikes because they beleeue no more in the Bible but that onely which they expressely knowe. And the same I say with proportion e∣uen of the learned sorte them selues, in re∣gade they seldome, or neuer ar soe conuer∣sant in Scriptures that they explessely kno∣we euerie seueral proposition, or particular truth conteined in the text, and consequē∣tly
euen they who ar the greatest Rabbies in their reformed flock, haue no explicit, or expresse faith consisting in an assent to all they expressely knowe in the text of scripture, but they must as well as theire brothers, be content with an implicit faith of those particulars they expressely knowe not, or else they ar to be accounted hereti∣kes for not beleeuing them, as I said before of the ruder sorte In respect of both which sortes of people I meane both the learned and vnlearned beleeuers in the pretensiue reformed Churches, this same argumēt may yet farther be vrged euen according to their owne receiued doctrine by which they cōfesse they haue not all their faith expres∣sely in the scriptures, but parte of it drawne by their owne consequences, or deductions from the text of scripture: of all which il∣lations or inferences of theirs it is manifest they could not possible haue anie other faith of them then implicit or vnexpressed, before they made them, in regare that those supposed verities or truethes which they soe deduce were not otherwise contained in the text or deliuered to the Church then in that inclusiue or hidden manner as it most apparent in regarde that if otherwise they had ben contained in the scripture that is clearely or expressely, then no illation or
deduction had ben necessarie for belee∣uers for the bnowledge and establishing of their faith in those particulars, as both na∣tural reason, and euen common sense con∣uince: and consequently either the preten∣siue reformers had an implicit faith of all those obiects which they nowe confesse them selues to beleeue according to that deductiue manner, or else they had noe faith at all of them before they were dedu∣ced: whence it farther followes that euer since they made their foresaid illations or consequences their faith is newe and quyte distinct from their owne faith in former tymes: the absurditie of which most neces∣sarie sequele I remit to the censure of the reasonable, and iudicious learned reader to determine. By occasion of this I desire the reader to take yet more cleare notice of the great per¦uersitie of the proposterous Nouellists, who as they reueile their violēce in repro∣uing the foresaid receiued doctrine of im∣plicit or inexpressed faith, soe likewise they ar no lesse peremptorie in defending their owne newe distinction of fundamental and not fundamental points in Religion, accor∣ding to which their position they obstina∣tely maintaine the Church can erre in mat∣ters of faith, that is in such points of faith
as in their conceite ar not foundamentall. But against the falsitie of this distinction I argue first vpon their owne supposed principle to wit that nothing is to be belee∣ued in matters of faith which is not founde in scripture either explicitly and clearely, or by cleare and certaine consequence wherfore this doctrinal distinctiō of theirs being a matter of faith and yet not founde in scripture in either of those two manners related, plaine it is that according to the pretended reformers doctrine, it nei∣ther deserues faith nor credit. More ouer this distinction is soe newely coyned by our aduersaries and soe farre from hauing anie foundation either in scripture or anci∣ent doctors that I neuer read anie mention of it in the first and cheefe establishers of the pretended reformatiō. Onely Chamier who is in deed a violent defender of Calui∣nisme in his booke de natura Ecclesiae, Cap. 13. num. 11. seemes plainely to suppose the same distinction in substance affirming that the Catholique Church can erre, licet non in fundamento salu∣tis: tho' not in the foundation of saluation. Yet Chamier haueing writ his Panstratia but of late yeares either our English No∣uellists receiued it from him, or inuented it them selues not long before soe that the noueltie of it a lone were sufficient to con∣uince
it of vntrueth and vanitie. And altho' I might iustely take exceptions at the wor∣de it selfe for the newnesse of it according to the Apostles counsel to Timomothie to auoyde profane nouelties of wordes, in regarde the worde not fundamentals as it is applyed to matters of faith and thee errors of the Church ther in by our aduersaries, it is a kynde of profanation both of diuine faith it selfe which is truely fundamental in al respects, and also of the authoritie of the Church which likewise is infallible as much in one matter as an other: Neuerthelesse my cheefe intention is not to insiste in the reproofe of wordes (which I graunt may v∣pon occasion and for better declaration of a trueth, be inuented and vsed by the Chur∣ches authoritie) but I onely stande vpon the sense or obiect of them, directely con∣uinceing the matter signifyed by those wordes not fundamental in faith to be repug∣nant both to scripture and, Fathers. That which I proue by a seconde argument of the same nature to wit because the scripture expressely teaches that 1. Tim. 3. Ecclesia est the Church is a pallar or firmament of truth. And our Sauior pro∣misseth his Father will giue to his Apostles (and their successors) an other Paraclete the spirit of trueth to remaine with them for euer, Ioan. 14. Ioan. 16. which same diuine Spirit (as he
him selfe declares afterwardes in the 16. chapter will teache them all trueth, which vniuersal terme all, includes and signifyes both fundamental and not fundamental truethes, and consequently it expressely excludeth this vaine distinction of the no∣uellists. To which purpose S. Cyrill vpon the 10. chapter of the same Euangelist spe∣akes most fittly and appositly saying, that althou' in this life we knowe onely in parte as S. Paule affirmes, non manca tamen sed in∣tegra veritas in hac parua cognitione nobis reful∣sit: yet not a meamed or imperfect, but an intyre true faith shined vnto vs in this smale know∣ledge. And the place now cited out of the first to Tim. 3. is by all interpreters of scri∣pture both ancient and moderne expoun∣ded of the firmenes and stabilitie which the Church hath by the assistance of the holie Goste in her deliuerie of true doctrine to her particular members, conformable to which sense Tertullian (to omit the rest for breuitie) in the 28. of his prescriptions hath a most fine sentence as it were in deri∣sion of those who teach the vniuersal or Ca∣tholique Churche can erre in matters of faith. Could not (saith hee) the holie Goste haue respected her soe much as to haue induced her into all truth, he hauing ben sent by Christ to this ende hauing ben requyred by his Father to
be the Doctor of trueth, should villicus Christi vicarius the stewarde, the vicar of Christ haue ne∣glected the office of God suffering the Churches in the meane tyme to vnderstande and beleeue other∣wise then he him selfe preached by the Apostles, Thus plainely, generally & absolutely an∣cient Tertullian of the infallibilitie of the Catholique Churche in points of doctrine and faith. And nowe farther supposing that al these passages both of the scripture & their ex∣positors ar absolute, general, & sans limi∣tation, it is most apparent they can admit no such distinction in their true sense & in∣terpretation, but that at the leaste the ca∣tholique Churche can not teache or be∣leeue anie error at all in such things as ar contained within the total obiect of faith in which ther can not possible be anie par∣te or partial which is not fundamental by reason that all kinde of diuine faith is the verie foundation of Religion & christian iustice according to the saying of S. Au∣gustin. Domus Dei fide fundatur, the house of God is founded in faith: & if the foundation of the house of God were faultie, it would doubtlesse fall to ruine, con∣trarie to his owne promisse or affiirmation viz. That the gates of hell shal not pre∣uaile against it.
Neither is it auaileable for our aduersa∣ries to saye that the Church can not erre in the cheefe articles of her faith, as ar the Trinitie, the Incarnation of Christ, which ar fundamentals: but in such points as ar not fundamental, as ar the reall presence, iustification, the true quantitie, & sense of Canonical scriptures, & other such like matters in controuersie with vs & them, the Church may teache erroneous & false doctrine. For thir euasion I replie it is grounded not in inuincible, but in vincible & grosse ignorance of the nature of true faith which being in it selfe one simple, or single entitie or essence as according to the doctrine of the Apostle, God & Baptisme ar. Ʋna fides, vnum Baptisma, vnus Deus; how different soe∣uer its obiect be, it is euer essentially one & the same in it selfe cleare from distinction, & cleare from error, the cōtrarie to which neuerthelesse should necessarily be true if ei-faith were diuided in to fundamental & not fundamental faith, & the Church could erre in her propositiō of the one & not of the other. And to this I adde that one pro∣pertie of the true Church is holines: but now what sanctitie, integritie, or holines can possible be in the Church if it be in∣fected with errors in faith of what nature soe
euer they bee. For as the scripture affiir∣mes, sine fide (that is true, pure, & intyre faith) impossibile est placere Deo. True faith is the forme, fashiō, & beautie of the Church which is the immaculate sponse of Christ' not hauing spot or wrincle. In soe much that if she be defaced thus with errors she can not possible be the sponse of Christ as in the cided place, & like wise in the Can∣ticles she is described, all faire, or comely, but rather she would be like a leaper, or most deformed creature. Thirdly, I confesse for my parte I could neuer perfectly vnderstand what the No∣uellists truely meane by fundamental & not fundamental points, by reason I finde the matter in none of their workes suffici∣ently explicated, & I veriely cōceiue they purposely anoyde the declaration of it, to the ende the absurditie may lesse appeare. Neuerthelesse it seemes in probabilitie that by fundamentals they meane all those points which according to their owne ex∣position ar contained in scriptures, & the three creedes. And by not fundamentals the points of controuersie betwixt vs & thē: as is the number of Canonical bookes, the infallible rule of interpretation of scriptu∣res, the real presence, transsubstantiation, iustification' &c.
This beīg supposed I argue thus. Either those points which our aduersaries call not fundamentals, ar matters of faith' & to be beleeued by all sortes of Christians accor∣ding to the diuersitie of their tenets, vnder paine of damnation, or not to be beleeued. If they ar thus necessarily to be beleeued by faith, then doubtelesse they ar included in those truthes touching which, (as I haue declared & cōfirmed before by both scrip∣tures & Fathers) Christ promised to his Church the assistance of the diuine Sprit to remaine with it eternally that is till the consummation of the worlde, and conse∣quently the Church can not committe anie error in proposing them to the people as being no lesse fundamental in that respect then anie of the rest of the articles of faith. But if our aduersaries on the contrarie denye them to be necessarily beleeued vn∣der paine of losse of Saluatiō, & hould thē onely as matters of indifferencie, & such as may either be beleeued or not be beleeued without preiudice of faith: or māners vpon this supposition I graunte the Church may erre in proposing thē to her flock, but yet in this case that parte of our aduersaries di∣stinctiō affirming that the Church can erre in not fūdamētal matters of faith is still fal∣se and impertinēt in regarde those particu∣lars
aboue telated in which they teache the Church can erre, ar soe farre from being either fundamentals or not fundamentals in matter of faith, that according to the former supposition they ar not either one way or other with in the circuit of faith: and consequently that parte or member of our aduersaries dinstinction viz that the Church can erre in not fundamentals is both false, nugatorie, and impertinent in which sense soeuer they intend to maintai∣ne it. Fourtly I proue directly that the affir∣matiues euen of those particulars contro∣uerted betwixt vs and the professors of the English Religion, ar fundamental points of faith, and by consequence that if the Church can erre in them that parte of their new distinction is false according to which they auerre the Church can not erre in fundamental points of Religion: which I conuince in this forme of argument. That distinction is false and absurde ac∣cording to which it necessarily followes that the Church can erre in matters the true faith of which is necessarie to salua∣tion. But according to the distinction of fun∣damental, and not fundamental matters
of faith it necessarily followes the Church can erre in matters necessarie to saluation. Ergo The distinction of fundamental, and not fundamental matters of faith, is a false and absurde distinction. The minor in which the total difficul∣tie consists, I proue because according to this distinction, the Church may erre in these propositions. The Church hath the true complete Canon of scripture, The Church hath the true interpretation and sense of scripture. Christs bodie and bloud ar truely, really, substantially, and not by onely faith contained in the sacred Eucha∣rist &c. And yet the faith of these either af∣firmatiuely or negatiuely, is necessarie to saluatiō, as the aduersaries thē selues if they will not be occounted obstinate in a mat∣ter soe cleare and manifest, can not denye. Therfore it is hence concluded by forcible sequele that their distinction of fundamen∣tals, and not fundamentals in matters of faith is false and absurde. Fiftely, I reason in this manner against the same distinction. If the infallibilitie of the Churches authoritie consistes in fun∣damental points of Religion onely, and not in all that the true Church shal at anie tyme declare vnto her members concer∣ning their faith and Religion, then were
not te prouidence of Christ perfect to∣wardes his sponse, but more defectiue then God was towardes the synagog of the Ie∣wes, neither were this anie other then to imagine that Christ in deede did laye a sounde foundation for his Church, but lefte walles and roofe exposed to be deiec∣ted or caste to grounde with euerie puffe of winde which how repugnant to reason & his owne inuiolable promisse this is, the rea∣der may easily consider, and censure. Sixtly, I argue yet more positiuely a∣gainst the distinction related because, our aduersaries frame it either in respect of the greater, or lesser dignitie of the obiects of fundamental and not fundamētal points of faith in them selues, or in respect of the greater or lesse necessitie of them to sal∣uation by reason of the necessitie of faith which the members of the true Church haue of them all and euerie one in parti∣cular, Now if we respect onely the material obiects in them selues, and the necessitie of them to saluation precisely, soe I confesse ther ar some particular matters of faith which much surpasse orhers, and in that respect alsoe the one may not vnaptely be termed fundamental in comparision of the rest which haue not that preheminencie. For example that ther is a God, and that
God is a rewarder of workes quod Deus est, & remunerator sit. That he is one in three persons, that the second person in Trinitie became incarnate or tooke humaine nature vpon him, was borne of the Virgin Marie, suffered death for our dedemption &c. are matters both more noble and dignifiable in them selues, then those: Christ fasted fortie dayes, and fortie nights, an Angel ap∣peared to him in his agonie, Peter denyed Christ, and other such like truthes, Yet this how true soeuer it bee, it is nothing to the purpose which here we treate, nor afordeth anie grounde or foundation for the preno∣minated distinction of our aduersaries, in regarde that althou' ther be neuer soe great difference among those and other points of Religion in the dignitie of the material ob∣iects, by reason of which in some sorte the one may be named fundamental, the other not fundamental: neuerthelesse because the faith of the one is no lesse necessarie to saluatiō then the faith of the other, thēce it is that absolutely the one is as much funda∣mental as the other and consequently ther ar no not fundamentals in matters of faith as the distinction of out aduersaries doth falsely suppose. And hence in like manner it farther in∣sueth, that if the Church should erre but
onely in the definitiō, or proposition euen of those matters of lesse qualitie, the error would be directly against diuine faith, and consequently the Church in this case should truely be said to haue erred eued in funda∣mental points of faith, and in matters ne∣cessarie to saluation, fundamental points, as I haue declared and often repeated, being no other then all those reuailed truethes the faith of which is necessarie in the mem∣bers of the Church for the obtaining of e∣ternal life, not obstanding anie difference which otherwise may apppeare in the na∣ture of the seueral obiects or matters, sup∣posing no one parte but the whole intyre faith of Christ and euerie parte and partiall of those verities which he hath reuailed to his Church, is the foundation of true Chri∣stian, and Catholique Religion, it being as necessarie to saluation for euerie true Chri∣stian to beleeue truely and syncerely if it be proposed vnto him by the Church that the cocke crowed at the tyme of S Peters denyal of Christ, or that a soul∣dier lanced our sauiors side with a spe∣are, as that he dyed vpon the Crosse for our redemption, and risse againe for our iustification. But Finally, If peraduēture our aduersaries should say that within the compasse of true
faith some things be necessarie to saluation and others not necessarie, and that conse∣quently some things be fundamental, but others not. To this instance I replye, it is founded in a manifest equiuocation. For althou' it is true that their be some, things within the compasse of saith which ar not necessarie for euerie member of the Church to kno∣we them expressely, yet is it necessarie to saluation for euerie faithfull Christian thou' neuer soe simple or ignorant, to be∣leeue euerie parte and partiall of those ob∣iects or matters which God hath reuailed, if for such by the Church they be proposed vnto him, otherwise he should incurre the censure of that strict and fearefull sentence of the most iuste and equal iudge Christ our Sauior, qui vero non crediderit condemna∣bitur: and soe the faith euen of all those things which euerie one by reason of his state or condition of life, or for want of vn∣derstanding is not obledged to knowe, is necessarie to saluation, and consequently all kinde of faith of what matter soeuer it be that God hath reuailed, is as much fūda∣mētall as is faith of the greatest matter or mysterie of the whole Christiā beleefe: whē∣ce it is that as S. Gregorie Nazianzen trea∣ting of the vnitie and integritie of faith in
his 39. oratiō aboute the ende declareth by example or similitude that faith is like vn∣to a goulden chaine connected and com∣pounded of diuers linkes, from which if you take anie one away, you loose your saluation as S. Ambrose in the ende of hir sixt kooke vpon the Euangell of S. Luke declares. By which it is manifeste that faith of euerie point or matter within the compasse of faith, is necessarie to saluation and therfore fundamental absolutely, whe∣ther the obiect be great or little, and no faith not fundamētal, as the new distinction of the Nouellists most falsely affirmes: which ther distinction doubtnesse was in∣uented by them to the ende they might ha∣ue a more plausible coulor to accuse the Roman Church of errors comitted in faith, (as alsoe for excuse of ther owne) their ma∣lice and irreligion being so great that like vnconscionable taylers they chose rather to cutte out a Church for Christ of such cor∣rupted stuffe as this, then to liue or dye vnreuenged of the Catholique Roman Church. And for conclusion I adde that since I haue made manifest by these my reasons that the faith euen of those points of Reli∣gion which our aduersaries terme not fun∣damental, is absolutely required to the sal∣uation
of euerie Christian soule, if euen in rhese particulars onely the Church could erre, none could assuredly be persuaded that by makeing them selues members of it, they ar in the certaine & infallible way to the obteining of eternal blessednes, but still should remaine in the like dangerous & desperate state they did before they were in the Church of Christ, & cōsequently by reason of this vncertaintie & perill a gene∣rall neglect of procuring to enter in to the true Church of Christ would be caused in the mindes of men, which inconuenience in regarde it proceedes by inauoiable cōse∣quence from this distinction broached & vsed by our aduersaries, it plainely appee∣res the doctrine of it is in diuers respect most pernicious & damnable as not ten∣ding in anie sorte to the reformatiō of the Church, as is by them pretended, but di∣rectely to the ruine & destruction of it.Deuia. sec. 3. pag. 45. S. Augustin in the 23. chap. of the 13. boo∣ke of his cōfessions affirming that spiritual men must not iudge of the scripture, is cor∣rupted by Sir Hūfrey, for he meaneth not that spiritual men must not in anie case iudge of the true sense of scripture for that were both false, yea & repugnant to the doctrine & practise euen of the pretensiue reformers them selues who as they can
not denye, whether they be spiritual or not spirituall vse to read & interpret scriptures much more comonly then the Romanists doe: yea & giue libertie therin euen to those of the feminine sexe or gender. But the true & obuious sense of that diuine do∣ctor in the cited place onely is, that spiri∣tual men must not iudge anie thing contai∣ned in the scripture (as presently he subioi∣nes) non rite veraciterque dictum esse, that is, not to be ritely & truelly spoken, but submit their vnderstanding, etiamsi quid ibi non lucet altou' some thing be not cleare, or perspi∣cuous in it. This is the pure & syncere sense of S. Augustin as his verie wordes declare, And nowe let the impartial reader decide whether it doth not rather militate or warre against the manner of dealing with scriptures which the Nouelists practise, then againsts the Romanists: how be it I synce∣rely confesse it directly makes neither a∣gainst the one nor the other, but precisely against such as iudge those passages of scrip¦ture to be false, or not ritely deliuered, which they ar not able to vnderstand. Spi∣rituales ergo siue qui presunt, siue qui obtempe∣rant, spiritualiter iudicant: non de spiritualibus cogitationibus quae latent in firmamento. Non enim oportet de sublimi authoritate iudicare, ne∣que etiam de ipso libro tuo: etiam si quid ibi non
lucet quoniam submittimus ei nostrum intellectū: certumque habemus etiam quod clausum est as∣pectibus nostris recte veraciterque dictum esse. Sic enim homo licet iam spiritualis' & renouatus in agnitionem Dei secundum imaginem eius qui cre∣auit eum, factor tamen legis debet esse, non index. These ar the wordes of S. Augustin synce∣rely rehearsed in which as anie vnderstan∣der of latin may easily perceiue, ther is nothing founde in fauor of Sir Humfreys tenet in the place aboue cited, viz that scripiure is the sole iudge of controuersies & interpreter of it selfe: but rather is ther some thing expressely repugnant to an o∣ther position of his congregation defen∣ding that scriptures ar easie to be vnder∣standed or interpreted onely by conferring one place with an other, the contrarie of which neuertelesse, is plainely insinuated by those wordes of S. Augustin, certumque habemus etiam quod clausum est aspectibus nostris &c. And we ar eertaine euen that which is shutte from our eyes, is ritely & truely spo∣ken. And yet our corrupt aduersarie hath corruptedly interrupted them conioyning the first parte to the last & omitting the verie harte of the sentence, & for the latin wordes spiritualibus cogitationibus, putting in English, spiritual knowledge, for spiritual cogitateons: like wise inserting by a parente∣sis
this his owne glosse vpon the worde firma∣ment expounding it of the scriptures them selues I knowe not by what other rule or authorite then by the dictamen of his owne priuate or familiar spirit: all which particulars I remit to the censure of the iudicious reader. And by occasion of this passage I aduer∣tise the reader that wheras the author for the greater credit of his worke, & as it were to limme it with the authoritie of that aureous Doctor S. Augustin hath cy∣ted him in his by-way alone, at the leaste 60. seueral tymes: yet hauing diligently viewed and discussed the places as they stā∣de in the tomes, I indoubtedly assure him that of those 60 sentences there ar not 6. to the purpose for which they ar alledged, and yet those 6. either such as partely by diuers Romanists in their seueral worke, and par∣tely by my selfe in this my censure, haue sundrie tyme receiued their anser: the rest of the total number being some of quyte impertinent others neither for our aduersa∣uersarie nor against the Romanists, others plainely against him, and for the Roma∣nists: especially those which proue the ap∣parent and conspicuous visitabilitie of the Catholique Church; others finally ar not syncerily rehearsed, but mangled, cropt, or
curtald with abuse of the author and rea∣der. S. Chrisostome like wise, and S. Am∣brose haue their meaning detorted by the knight in the same section the one in his 13. homilie vpon Genesis, in his 7. homilie v∣pon the first epistle to the Thesalonians: the other in his 8. sermon vpon the 118. psal. for. S. Chrisostome onely treates in those places of twoe particular cases, to wit in the Genesis he argueth against some whoe denyed the terrestriall Paradise, and vpon the foresaid Epistle of saint Paule, he reprehendes some others who were of opi∣niō that the soule is a particle of the diuine nature. And touching these two particular points S. Chrysostome affirmes that the sa∣cred scripture expondes it selfe, and suffers not the reader to erre, but he said not that the scripture in all other places and in all o∣ther matters doth soe interpret it selfe as Sir Humfrey falsely alledgeth. Now S. Ambrose saying that the dore shall be opened vnto him who diligētly examēs the difficult and obscure passages of scrip∣ture by no other but by the worde of God, he doth not there meane by the worde of God the scriptures them selues, but the di∣uine word that is Christ our sauior the se∣cond person in Trinitie, and therfore he
addes to the wordes cited by Sir Humfrey. de quo legisti in Apocalipsi quod Agnus librum signatam aperuit, of which thou haest read in the Apocalips. that the lambe opened the sealed booke, which laste wordes of S. Am∣brose because the knight perceiued that by their plaine explication of the former, they discouered the whole sentence to be no∣thing for his purpose, he deceitfull smun∣thered and left them vnrehearsed by which his palpable and grosse abuse of these two graue and ancient authors doth euidently appeare.
An much according to this fashion he proceeds with Pope Clement whome he ci∣tes in the same place, and for the same pur∣pose. Whoe neuerthelesse is soe repugnant to the tenet of the nouellists in making the sole scripture interpreter of it selfe in all cases, that he expressely teaches that we must not according to our owne sense but, secundum traditionem patris, according to the tradition of the Father, that is either accor∣ding as the tradition of the Pope him selfe as deliuerer of the sense of scriptures vnto vs, or secundum traditionem Patris, that is ac∣cording to the tradition of the ancient Fa∣thers: and therfore he addes afterwardes. & ideo oportet ab eo intelligentiam discere scrip∣turam qui eum a maioribus secundum veritatem sibi traditam reseruauit vt ipse possit ea quae recte suscepit cempetenter asserere. That is, And ther∣fore we ought to learne the intelligence or vnderstanding of scriptures of him whoe reserued it to him selfe according to the trueth deliuered vnto him by his ancetors to the end he might cōpetently assert tho∣se things which he ritely receiued. But Sir Humfrey conceiled these wordes, as alsoe the greater parte of the period out of which he cited those wordes he alledges, yet ioined vnto them the rest of those which he rehearseth, not obstanding they ar parte of an other clause, alsoe adding the worde seeing which neither is in the authors text, nor agrees with his sense and meaning, which is not that the scripture alone is an intyre and firme rule of faith, but the scrip∣ture expounded according to the sense re∣ceiued from the ancients, as immediately before he affirmed. But vaine Sir Humfrey was soe desirous to seeme to his reader to haue a Pope for an a better of his position, that he chused rather to prostitute his owne honestie in the euill vse he made of his authoritie, then seeme to wāt the testi∣minie of soe renowned a personage. And yet is the knight soe farre from obtaining his purpose, that if the wordes were not soe manie that they can not with conueniencie
be intyrely related, they them selues would make it apparent how much the author of them is abused by the false relater. The supplye of which I remit to the more diligent reader as tyme & leasure shall giue him occasion. But I confesse now I am quite tired with the examen of my aduersaries misal∣ledged testimonies of the authors he produces in fauor of his misremormed doctrine and must needs draw my selfe to a conclusion of my labors, hoping I need not doubte but by these fewe passages the reader will easily persuade him selfe tou∣ching the rest they ar all of the same nature and soe be satisfyed with that implicit or general knowledge he will haue of them by this meanes, and his owne discourse, althou perhaps by his owne industrie and inquisitiō he is not able in particular to dis∣couer the fraudes and come to the true sen∣se and menning of thē in anie more expresse and declared manner. Yet if my aduersarie him selfe will not be satisfyed with this compendious course I haue vsed, but will farther require an cxacte anser to euerie particular allegation, vpon condition he will first iustifye his proceeding in these I haue shewed defectiue, I promisse with Gods
assistance I will be readie both to main∣taine soe much as I haue alreadie done and said, and alsoe to proceed farther in my view and censure of those places which as yet I haue not touched if God be plea∣sed to giue me health and opportunitie of bookes, these being rhe greatest difficul∣ties I haue had im the performance of the worke. To omit the printe which is well knowne what a trouble in is vnto tho∣se of our Religion and nation, and how great an aduātange our aduersaries ha∣ue of vs in these particulars, some of vs being forced to passe the seaes for eue∣rie smale matter we haue to publish, be∣sydes the perill of importing the bookes into the countrie, which is subiect to im∣munerable casualities and daungers of molestation for the same as experience doth testifye, God almightie amend it and restrore vs to our ancient Catholique liber∣tie and Religion. And to returne to thee proceeding of my aduersarie I say for a man some tymes inculpably to erre, or mystake ei∣ther in wordes or sense especially in in∣tricate matters, I doe not admire it, nei∣ther dare I iustifye my selfe in that parti∣cular
(I let passe the faultes of the printer to which euerie one is subiect) but that one should erre soe frequently and gros∣sely as Sir Humfrey hath erred in his ci∣tations of all sortes of authors both an∣cient and moderne in the whole discour∣se of his two bookes, and yet neuer in fauor of his aduersaries, but euer in fa∣uor of his owne cause, this I say is no way excusable, and in my opinion it is such a fortune as chanceth to no crea∣ture excepting him selfe, or some of his illuminate brothers. That which I soe much the more la∣ment and deplore in regarde he hath not onely suffered his owne proper iudge∣ment to be insotted with such inconsi∣derate delusions but likewise, as I per∣ceiue by reporte of others, hath by the same prestigious sleightes deliuered his owne nearest and dearest freind his inge∣nuous ladie, whose otherwise well dis∣posed and once Catholike iudgement, if yet he had conuinced by syncere pro∣ceeding and honest vse of scriptures. Fathers, and other writers, it had ben lesse intolerable, but to winne her with such false wares as these, is an action no way iustifiable either before God or men.
And if I might be admitted to your Counsell Sir Humfrey, I would aduise you to cease writing bookes in this na∣ture, which is neither your profession neither as I conceiue, and am informed, ar you able to performe anie such wor∣ke without the assistance of tutors which must of necessitie be chargeable vnto you. A dozen or sixteene of the Puritan Mini∣strie will quickely make a greate hole in an ordinarie knights estate, especial∣ly if they be assembled in such a place as the wine office, which as the verie soun∣de of the worde denotes, necessarily im∣plyes much good fellowship and conse∣quently great expense. Beware of that black garde, they will haunte your house li∣ke so maine ill spirits, not so much by night as by day: they ar meridian spirits, they assaulte most in the midest of the leight, therby to dasle mens eyes more easily, aboute dinner tyme you shal be sure to haue them most busie aboute you. For as a conceited Protestant reportes. Where the meat is best ther a Puritan confu∣tes most, for (saith hee) his arguing is but the efficacie of his eating, and the Pope he best concludes against in plum broth. This consell proceedes from a freind, wher∣fore
if you please to make vse of it, the profit will be your owne, the thankes due to mee. This is now the third anser your first booke hath receiued by men of three seueral professions, by a mar∣chant, a preist, an a clerke, triplex fu∣nis difficile rumpitur which cordes I hope will tye your iudgement with in the boundes of reason. Fare you well Sir Humfrey in Christ our Sauior, and receiue this as from him who de∣sires nothing more then your moste happie re∣clamation, & sempi∣ternal bles∣sednes. FINIS.
