24919.5 24111356 27191
SVMMARIE AND SHORT MEDITATIONS touching sundry poynts of Christian Religion, gath by T. VV. and now publihd for the edcation an profit of Gos Saints. Lord Iesus begin and make an end. TO cloake sin,Confession of sinnes. seeing it run∣neth vp and downe in eu∣ry mans mouth, that we are all sinfull, is dangerous and damnable: Dangerous, because the ho∣lie Ghost saith, he that hideth his sin, shall ot prosper. And damnable, because it caush men to lie weltring and wal∣lowing in iniquitie, without repen∣tance. But humblie and vnfainedlie to confsse it, is a readie way to obtaine padon, and forgiuenes of the same, at the hands of Almightie God, because
the Scripture telleth vs, that if wee ac∣knowledge and forsake our sinnes, wee shall finde fauour. And againe, If wee confesse our sinnes, God is faithfull and iust, to forgiue vs our sinnes, and the blood of Ie∣su Christ shall purge vs from all iniquitie. Foure witnesses that we are sin∣ners.We haue sundrie true and vnpartiall witnesses, both within vs, and without vs, against our selues, to proue this truth vnto vs, that we are miserable sinners. 1.Our owne conscience.First, the stinging testimonie of our own conscience, which though we ma∣ny times bleere and blot out, yet doth it sundrie times tell vs, yea almost euery day when wee rise vp, and euery night when we lie downe, wee haue done ma∣ny things, that wee ought not to haue done, and haue omitted many things, which we ought to haue done. 2.God himself.Secondly, God himselfe, who beside that in his infinite knowledge, he is able to charge vs with a thousand transgres∣sons, for euery one that wee know by our selues, or others, is also greater, than our heart and conscience, to condemn vs, because he knoweth all things. Yea, this eternall God doth by his
iudgements conuince vs to bee sinners, whether they be generall, or particular. By the generall,3.Gods iuments. his wrath being made manifest from heauen, against all vngodli∣nesse and vnrighteousnesse of all men: and against all the creatures themselues: And by the particular, whilest he mani∣festeth them either against some Na∣tions, as Israel, Iuda, &c. or some Cities, as Sodom, Gomorrah, Ierusalem, &c. or els priuate persons, as Cain, Ham, Iudas, and such like. Beside these iudgements, the Lord our God hath his blessed word,4.Gods vvo vvhich char∣geth vs vvit which is pure and holy as himselfe, to conuince vs of sinne, which straightly chargeth vs, first with the sinne and fall of our first parents Adam and Euah,1.Adams fall as guiltie therof vnto euerlasting condemnation. Secondly,2.Originall s with the sinne wherein we are conceiued and borne, which we call originall sin: which if we had no more vpon vs, and in vs but that, maketh vs the children of Gods wrath and displea∣sure. Thirdly, with the fruites of that ori∣ginall sin,3.Te fruites of originall sin which are all manner of diso∣bediences
inward and outward, against Almightie God and our neighbours. good  to bring  the fee∣ of Gods ements.By al this we may see, that al mouthes and hearts are iustly stopped and shut vp, frō cleering themselues, by thought, word, or otherwise, and that all men are made subiect vnto the condemnation of God: which that wee may the better feele, it shall be good for vs, first, rightly to compare the horrible filthinesse that is in vs, comparing ans filthi∣e and Gods tousnesse. both outward and inward, of bodie and soule, with the wonderfull holinesse that is in God himselfe, and he requireth of vs in his law. The grie∣usnesse of sin mmitted.Then to consider the greatnesse and notoriousnesse of our offences, which may bee iustly aggrauated, by looking into the qualities of the parties offen∣ding, as Magistrates, Ministers, &c. and the parties offended, as Gods most ex∣cellent Maiesty, and our deare brethren, together with sundrie other circum∣stances, of time, place, manner of do∣ing &c. 3.The multi∣tude of trans∣gressions.Thirdly, to thinke vpon the multi∣tude of our iniquities, whic are more in number than the haires of our head, and
being as the sand of the Sea, both for multitude and weight, are become as a burthen ouer heauie for vs to beare. Lastly, to weigh Gods fearfull iudge∣ments,4.Gods he iudgement vvhich ar executed. both temporall and eternall, which our sinnes haue deserued to bee powred forth vpon vs, and for our terri∣fying are set down in his word, and ma∣nifested in the world: which are many indeed, but chiefly these: First,1.Vpon the creatures. his heauie hand lying sore vpon his creatures, for our transgressions, which should so much the more terrifie vs and humble vs indeed, by how much themselues are subiect thereto, not for any sinne of their own, which they haue not, but for our iniuities. Secondly,2.Vpon men this life and are either in∣vvard or outvvard. the aduersities and afflicti∣ons of our life: which are either bodily, as sicknesses; or spirituall, as anguish of soule, and torment of conscience, which also the more heauily they are inflicted vpon vs, the more mightily they sould cast vs downe, and work vnderstanding in vs, least otherwise God should haue iust cause to complaine, that hee hath stricken vs in vaine.
Thirdly, naturall death it selfe, which is the parting asunder of the soule and the bodie for a time, and was laid vpon our first parents, and in them vpon vs, as a part of that iust deserued punishment, that they and we procured to our selues, because we are all standing and falling together with them and in them. ternall con∣nation.And lastly, the curse of the eternall God, pronounced in his law vnto euer∣lasting condemnation both of bodie and soule, without vnfained repentance and heartie turning to the Lord, this most fitly sorting, both for infinitnes and weight, with our infinite and innu∣merable transgressions. n being flt, liefe must be ught.Whosoeuer feleth himselfe in such a miserable case, must of necessitie (as other good men heretofore haue done) (vnlsse hee will wittingly refuse com∣fort, and willingly cast away himselfe) seeke some both sure and spedie re∣medie, least continuing in that lamen∣able estate, they bee swallowed vp of despaire and ouer much heauinesse. If wee seeke to Angels,.Angels. and would worship them, as some haue done here∣tofore,
they cannot stand vs in steed: for howsoeuer they be excellent creatures, yet they haue not that of themselues: yea God should finde imperfection in thē, if they were not maintained by his power: and besides as they were not or∣deined or created for such a purpose: so they are iustly our enemies for sinne (as whose nature is so pure, that they can∣not abide it) and the armed souldiours of the Lord, by his special appointment to our destruction, for our vngodlines. If we would looke to dead Saints,2.Dead Saints. as in time of superstition and Popery wee were taught, and did, as I feare me, ma∣ny men yet doe, they cannot fitte vs any whit at all: as well because the dead know nothing at all: as also for that they themselues haue continually confessed of and against themselues, that they haue alwaies stood in need of a Sauiour, and if thy could not saue themselues, much lesse others. If we cast our eies vpon men vnrege∣nerated,3.Men vnrege∣nerate. and yet liuing, the scripture tel∣leth vs, there is none that doth good, no not one: nay thy are all by nature the chil∣dren
of wrath, and firebrands of con∣demnation, not only vnapt, and vnable to good workes for themselues, but most fitte to all euill, both against them∣selues and others. 4.Men regene∣rate.If to them, in whom regeneration is begun, yea and it may be also much ad∣uanced, and who are in the word: in∣deed called the Saints of God, they ac∣cuse themselues of wonderfull euils and manifold imperfections, saying from a free heart, that all their righteousnes are as filthie and stained clouts, and againe, the good, they shold doe, that they doe not, the euill that they should not doe, that doe they, and therefore are not so much as willing to take such an office vppon them, though wee would a thousand times giue it them. 5.Goods and riches.If we would giue al that we haue vnto the Lord, for a ransome for our own sns or others: yea if wee would giue our first borne for our transgressions, and the fruits of our bodies for the sinne of our soules, as many idolators haue done heretofore, it will not auaile vs, for it is nothing, nay as a polluted thing in his fight: and be∣sides
it hath no power to purge away sinne, or to purifie conscience. If wee would cleaue to outward and feigned holinesse,6.Counterfeite holines. as the Pharisees haue done, and the hypocrites of all ages do, wee must make this account of it, that though it bee neuer so glittering and glorious in mās sight (which is not able to discerne of spiritual colors or things) yet it is abbomination before God, to whom and before whom both wee our selues, and all our actions must stand and fall. If we stand vpon, the perswasion or practise of superstitious and idolatries deuised by man, we must needs fall:7.VVill wor∣shippings, can∣no appease the consince vvounded with the feeling of Gods iudge∣ments and sin. for besides that they are so many corrupti∣ons and defilings of Religion and ser∣uice, that we performe vnto God, which is and ought to bee pure and simple as himselfe, God himselfe also reiecteth them, as things vile and displeasing in his blessed presence. Whither shall we then goe? to Christ onely we must needes come:Christ alone must be our re∣fuge. and why to him. First because, in him dwelleth the ful∣nes
of all goodnes, yea chefulnes of the god∣head bodily: and God hath giuen him to vs, to the end that beleeuing in him wee should not perish, but haue eerlasting life. VVe haue Gods ovvne testimo∣nie for it.How shal we know that? By the Lords own word and voice from heauen, who hath said (and therefore we may, nay we ought to beleeue it) that he is his welbe∣loued sonne, in whom he is well pleased. Secondly, because our Sauiour him∣selfe so graciouslie calleth vs, saying:And Christs owne vvord. Come vnto me all ye that trauaile, be wea∣rie, and are heauy laden, and I will ease you. But when we come, we shall find no∣thing in him. Yes verilie: for through him, apprehended and appropriated to our selues by faith, we shall find eternall peace to Godward, and life and immor∣talitie brought vnto the beleeuers. Christs names full of doctrine and comfort.In this our Christ, let vs for our com∣fort & instructiō cōsider, first the names and titles giuen him, which are not bare or idle, or expresse graces, in and for himselfe onely, but are full of fruit and efficacy, and that for vs and our good, specially for spirituall comfort here, and eternall saluation in the life to come.
He is called Iesus,Iesus. that is to say Saui∣our: because he alone and no other doth and shall saue all his people from their sinnes. He is called Christ,Christ. that is, annointed and sealed by his father, to be our King, Priest and Prophet. By his kingdome establishing his double gouernment,1.Christs king∣dome. one inward in the hearts of his children, by his holy spirit, and the other outward in the Church, by the scepter of his word, and his owne discipline. By his Priesthood,2.Christs priest∣hood. offering himselfe vp once for all, as a full and sufficient sa∣crifice, for all the sinnes of his people. And his Prophecy,3.Christs Pro∣phecie. he being become, the only law-giuer to his Church, so as the godlie now are not to hearken to anie oice, doctrine or spirit, but to him a∣one, and those that speake according o his truth. Secondly let vs consider his person,Christs person. which consisteth of these two natures, he Godhead and the Manhood. As he is GodChrist God. he hath power in him∣elfe, to doe whatsoeuer pleaseth him both
in heauen and earth and all deepe places, yea to ouercome all our enemies, speci∣ally spirituall, which are so manie and mightie, as none can encounter with, much lesse vanquish but God onely, a∣lone belongeth mercie and forgiuenesse of sinnes as the scripture saith. 3.Christ man.And as he is man, hee is both suffici∣ently able, and also very willing, to en∣dure and suffer for vs, whatsoeuer was for our sinnes to be laid vpon him, yea and also willing, to haue compassion on th that are ignorant, and that are out of the way, ng made man like vnto vs, in e∣uery respect, sinne only excepted, and ther∣fore being both compassed with infir∣mity and tempted himselfe, is the better able to pitie and succour them, that are infirme or tempted. 4.Christ: God and man our only Sauiour.So that God manifested in the flesh, iu∣stified i the spirit, seene of Angels, prea∣ched vnto the Gentiles, beleeued on in the world, and receiued vp into glorie, is hee that wee must cleaue to alone, for the peace and comfort of our consciences, and the saluation of our soules, because there is none vnder heauen giuen vnto vs,
whereby wee must bee saued, but onely the same of Iesus. Thirdly,Christ alone takes away sin. let vs earnestly behold what ingular effects he worketh in his chil∣dren, & what wonderful graces he free∣y bestoweth vpon thē. He is the Lambe of God, that alone taketh away the sinnes of the world: he is he alone in whom it hath leased God to reconcile the world vnto himselfe: he is he that is made of God vn∣to vs, wisdome, righteousnesse, sanctificati∣on and redemption. Wisedome,1.Christ is our vvisedome. because he is the eternall wisedome of the Father, from before all beginnings: and because comming out of the bosome of the Father, he hath de∣clared vnto vs all the councels of God, concerning our instruction and comfort and that in far greater both plenty and plainnes, specially plainnes, than the Fa∣thers before his comming had. Righteousnes,2.Christ is our righteousnes. for these respects: first ecause he hath fuy satisfied the iustice of God being wouded for our transgressi∣os, and broken for our iniquities, carrying also the chastisement of our peace vppon him, and healing vs with his stripes, bea∣ring
vpon his backe and shoulders the course of the law, due to vs for our sins, and ouercōming the same in redeeming vs from it: and secondly because that through his obedience and fulfilling of the law, wee haue iustification imputed vnto vs before God, and ichoated in our selues, and before men in the world: and so obtaine at the last, the blessing of the law, which is eternall life. 3.Christ is our holinesse.Sanctification or holines, because it pleased God the Father, in the riches of mercie, to send his owne Sonne, in the simi∣litude of sinfull flesh, and for sinne, condm∣ned sinne in the flesh, and not onely to im∣pute vnto vs his holines, and to cloath vs with the same, but also through the mightie working of his holie Spirit to frame vs to walke in true holinesse and righteousnes before God and men, all the daies of our lif. Redemption, because that by offerig vp himself once vpon the altar of the crosse,4.Christ is our redemption. he hath redeemed vs from sinne, and set vs free from the diuell, and eternall con∣demnation, keeping vs so in his hands, that none shall pull vs out of the same,
vntil the full manifestation of our adop∣tion shall appeare, euen the deliuerance of our bodies from all corruption and sinne, at what time hee shall returne our redeemer rom heauen, and shall change the bodies of our basenes, that they may be made like vnto his glorious bodie. To conclude,5.Christ is all in all. it hath pleased the Father, that in him should bee hidden all the trea∣sures of wisedome and knowledge, and that in him should all fulnes dwell, yea the verie fulnes of his godhead bodilie, and of all o∣ther good things whatsoeuer, that so the Church, which is his bodie, & euery particular sound member thereof might receiue of his abundance, as it is writen: Of his fulnes haue wee all receiued, and grace for grace, that is, grace vpon grace, or as a man would say, graces heaped one vpon another, and that so he should be, the beginning and ending, yea, the ve∣ry yea and Amen of all Gods Promises. To know these things, in such sort as before is declared, yea and in more am∣ple manner, than is here set downe, and not to haue the particular feeling of them in a mans owne conscience, is to
little or no purpose at all, vnlesse it bee more and more to afflict the conscience for want of comfortable feeling of them, and to plung vs into a more great and grieuous iudgment, because he that knoweth the will of his Master and doth it not shall be beaten with many stripes. Wherefore it greatly behooueth vs to striue to attaine the meane, whereby we may lay hold of them: and that meane, yea the only meane is nothing else,Faith and knowede must ge toge∣ther. but a true and liuely faith, for by faith Christ and we are lincked together, he and all his merites being become ours, and we his, whilest he purgeth our hearts by faith, yea delleth in them, and maketh vs fruit∣full o all good workes. This faith sealeth vp in our hearts, for∣giuenes of past sinnes.Notable ffcts of true fath. Freedome from condemnation to come, and assurance of eternall life, pacifying our conscien∣ces towards God, and instructing vs to apply particularly vnto our selues, Christ Iesus and all his merites. 1.Faith vvor∣keth peace in our consin∣ces.And by this faith, it pleaseth almigh∣tie God, to purifie and purge the cor∣ruption of mans heart, and to frame it
and fashion it to new obedience. Yea it is appointed by God to bee a necessarie instrument,2.Faith clen∣seth our heart whereby wee may ouercome the world, and as a shield of steele, by which we may quench all the fie∣ry dartes of the wicked: and in which be∣ing stedfast, we must resist and vanquish the diuell. Other singular effects and fruites of this liuely faith,3.Faith ouer∣commeth the vvorld, the flesh and the diull. are largely reckoned vp in the Epistle to the Hebrues, chap. 11. But this faith is not of all men, that is most true:Faith is the fre git of God. yea wee affirme, that no man hath it by nature, arte, wit, or any such other meane in man, but that it is the onely free and gracious gift of God, to his owne children alone. For the effecting of this precious grace in them,Faith famed in vs two man∣ner of vvaies. the Lord himselfe vseth two effectuall instruments to worke it in their hearts by. The one is inward, and the same most powerfull, namely his most ly and blessed Spirit, speaking for kndge, peace, and all good graces, more effec∣tually to our hearts, than the outward sound doth to the eare.
The other outward, and that is the whole ministerie of truth, whether it be in the Word, Sacraments, Prayer, &c. wee diligently subiecting our selues thereto, carefully receiuing the same, and daily growing in grace thereby, as wee doe in yeeres and strength in the bodie. Spirit of adop∣tion.This Spirit is called the spirit of adop∣tion, because it beareth witnes vnto our spirits, that God hath adopted vs to be his children, and heires of his kingdom, teaching vs also with confidence and boldnes, to crie Abba Father. Spirit, a com∣forter.This Spirit is called the Comforter, because he ministreth vnto the children of God in all their heauinesses and di∣stresses whatsoeuer, either outward or inward, vnspeakable ioyes. Spirit of truth.He is called the Spirit of truth, because he alone doth not only free vs from the errors of the wicked, and the darknesse of our owne hearts, but also inlightneth our vnderstanding, and leadeth vs into all truth. Spirit of san∣ctification.He is called the Spirit of sanctifica∣tion, because he frameth them, in whom
he dwelleth, to sanctification, and holi∣nesse, and fitteth them indeede to all good workes. He maketh vs able to search into,Spirit, together vvith the po∣wers and ef∣fects thereof. and to vnderstand, the deep things of God, yea such deepe and hidden secrets, as the eye hath not seene, the eare hath not heard, neither haue they entred into mans heart. He frameth and fashioneth in vs vn∣fained loue to God, and to his people for his sake, working also in vs a sound minde, in al the duties and seruices that we doe either to God himselfe in hea∣uen, or to men vpon earth. This Spirit helpeth our infirmities, teaching yea inabling vs (who know not what to aske or pray as wee should) to send foorth requests vnto God, with sighes and groanes which cannot be expressed. Also when or wheresoeuer it be be∣stowed, it bringeth with it a most holie and heauenly libertie, because if the Son by his blessed spirit make vs free, we shall be free indeed. Lastly, he is (as it were) the very ear∣nest pen, and assured seale or pledge of the trueth of the gracious promises,
which Almightie God hath made vnto vs in Iesus Christ, generally for all good things, and especially for our eternall election in Christ, before the founda∣tions of the world were laid. Gods vvord generally the grond of faih.Touching the word, I take it in gene∣rall to be the ground and foundation of our faith, and that therefore it is right∣ly called the arme of the Lord, as vpon which onely we must leane. But most speci∣ally the Gospel.But most specially I meane that part, which containeth Gods most louing promises, made vnto vs in Iesus Christ, and is rightly called the Gospell. 1.Gospell what it is.And this Gospell is the glad tidings of great ioy, and the mightie power of God vnto saluation, to euery one that be∣leeueth. 2.The message of peace.Yea it is indeed the message of peace, becaue it offereth quietnes of consci∣ence, through the forgiuenes of sinnes, to those that are farre off, and to those that are nigh. 3.The vvord of grace.It is called the word of grace, as well because it is freely bestowed vpon vs, as also because it offereth vnto vs the grace of God.
It is the word of truth,4.The vvord of truth. because it ma∣nifesteth to vs all truth, both of faith and obedience, and setteth out before vs the truth of God, in the accoplish∣ing of his promises. It is also the word of life,5.The vvord of life. not onely because it offereth life euerlasting, for that it doth to al in the Church, but also because that being rightly and reuerent∣ly receiued, it sealeth vp the same in our hearts, and frameth vs in this life to a new life, worthie our calling, by the which word also our sauiour Christ hath brought life and immortalitie to light,6.A mysterie or secret. which before seemed as it were, to bee hidden: in which respect, it is called in sundry places of the new Testament a mystery or secret, yea such a mystery or se∣cret, as was hidden since the world began. This word must be, first reuerentlie e∣steemed,How the vvord must be recei∣ued, and for what cause. because if wee prize it not as we should, it will grow into contempt. Then faithfullie credited, because o∣therwise our estimation and regard of it will do vs no good. Lastly, carefully re∣ceiued and profitably practised, because these indeed are true testimonies of our
reuerence and beliefe: yea it must be re∣uerenced, credited, and receiued, not as the word of a mortall man, but as it is in∣deed the word of the eternall God. First, because of him that is the au∣thor thereof, which is God onely good, who besides, that hee hath the fulnes of mercie in him, to recompence our la∣bour and loue that way, hath also infinit power, to reuenge the abuse or con∣tempt of it, in what sort soeuer, or in whom soeuer. Secondly, because of the matter, or matters rather, that it propoundeth and setteth out vnto vs, which are faith in the promises, obedience to the precepts, and reconciliation and agreement betweene God and vs, procure for vs, and purchased vnto vs, in th death of his dearely beloued Sonne. Thirdly, because of the persons, who the Lord hath vsed in the publishi and speaking of it, who in times pas were Prophets and holy men of Go yet notwithstanding inspired by the sprit of God.Prophets. Christ Iesus. But in this latter time, he hath deliue∣red
this trueth most fully vnto vs in the mouth of his owne sonne, in whom are all the treasures of wisedome and know∣ledge hid. And since that time by the blessed Apostles and Euangelists,Apostles, Euangelists, Pastors Doctors and Ministers, wha manner of men they ought to be. whom he sent abroad into all the world, to preach the Gospell to all creatures. And now in this last age of the world, by the setled ministerie of ordinarie pa∣stors and teachers. Whom God doth vse, not as though he were not able without them, to work his own wil, both in the sauing of them, whom he hath made heires of life, and in the condemning of the wicked; but that hee might in their labours, haue a more readie entrance, by his word, into mens hearts, hee hauing appointed to season men by them, and to inlighten their darke and ignorant hearts, because they are the salt of the earth, and light of the world, indeede to season mens cor∣upt hearts, and to deliuer them from the power of darknes, and to translate them in∣to the kingdome of his deare Sonne. Who bring also with them the am∣bassage
of peace, and reconciliation, God himselfe, as it were by them, intreating vs to be reconciled vnto his Maiestie. he ends of the holy Ministery.And are indeede the effectuall inments of God, for the gathering together of the Saints, for the worke of the ministe∣rie, and for the edfication of the bodie of Christ, vntill wee all meete together, in the vnitie of faith and knowledge of the Sonne of God, vnto a perfect man, and vnto the measure of the age of the fulnes of Christ, that we hencefoorth be no more children, wauering and carried about, with euerie winde of doctrine, by deceit of men, either others, or our selues, or by the exercised subtilties of our spirituall aduersaries. Ministers and Ministery must be much made of.Wherfore good reason is it, that they that bring vs such glad and acceptable ti∣dings of such good things, taking conti∣nuall care for vs, and watching for our soules, should not onely bee reuerently esteemed, as the ministers of Christ, and disposers of Gods secrets, but also reli∣giously and louingly receiued, because he that receiueth them, receiueth God the Father, and God the Sonne, that hath sent them: whereas on the other side, who∣soeuer
doe contemne them, thrust from them the blessed Godhead, and refuse the meanes that the Lord hath ordai∣ned and sent abroad for their salua∣tion. The doctrine deliuered by these men,1.The doctrin preached, pain∣teth out Christ death and pas∣sion. specially the Gospel preached, is a most liuely painting out of Christ before our eyes, and as it were a visible crucifying of him in our sights, who died for our sinnes, and rose againe for our righteousnes. And though they that perish,2.It sealeth to vs our salua∣tion. count it foolishnes; yet is it that mighty power of God vnto saluation, and the excellent wisedome of the Lord, by which it plea∣seth him through the foolishnes of prea∣ching, to saue them that beleeue. And it is that effectuall instrument,3.It vvorketh our regenera∣tion. whereby the Father of his owne good will begetteth vs againe vnto himselfe, that we should be as the first fruits of his creatures, being borne anew, not of mortall seede, but of immortall by the word of God, which word endreth for euer. At our first receiuing of it,How the word is milke. it is sincere milke, which as new borne babes we should long after, that wee may grow vp thereby
and come vnto Christ, who is the liuing stone, that w our selues also as liuing stones, may be made a spirituall house, and a holy Priesthood to offer vp spirituall sa∣crifices acceptable to God, through Ie∣sus Christ. ow and when he vvord is rong meate.And when wee are passed the age of our infancie in Christ, it is become our ound and stedfast meate, wherewith the Lord continually feedeth vs in his family, vntill that hauing laid downe th our earthly house of this tabernacle, we obtaine the building giuen vs of God, that is an house not made with hands, but eter∣nall in the heauens, whose builder and fra∣mer is God. Gods goodnes. Mans frailtie.The Lord knowing whereof we be made, and remembring that we are but dust, hath not only giuē vs his word, to work faith in our hearts, but hath also lft vs for the more strengthening and confirming of the same, in the truth of his promises, the vse of two holy Sacraments only,The tvvo Sa∣cramnts, aides o our faith. and no more, namely Baptisme, and the Lords Supper, both of them being in∣stituted by him, to whom alone indeede it belongeth to ordaine Sacraments
n his Church, because hee alone hath power to giue and worke the grace that is meant, signified, or set ou thereby. Baptisme witnesseth and pledgeth vnto vs diuers things,1.Baptisme seleth our ingrating into the Church. as first that we are ingrafted into the bodie of Christs Church, wherof Christ is the head, from whom alone the bodie receiueth increase, vnto the building vp of it selfe in holy loue. Then that regeneration is begun in vs,2.Our regene∣ration. and wee become as it were new borne abes vnto God, our heauenly Father, the Lord sauing vs according to his mercie, by the washing of the new birth, and the re∣newing of the holy Ghost. It sealeth also vnto vs,3.Remission of sinnes. the forgiuenes and washing away of our sinnes, in the sacrifice of Christs death, water no more effectuallie taking away the spotts and filth of our flesh, than Christs blood doth the guilt, power, and punishment of our sinnes. And it pledgeth this vnto vs,4.Our adop∣tion. that wee are the sonnes of God by faith in Christ Ie∣sus, because al that are baptised into Christ haue put on Christ, euen to this end, that so they might become sonnes, yea heires of
God, and fellow heires with our Sauiour himselfe. 5.Our spiritu∣ll vnitie.It teacheth vs also, that we should in∣deuour, to keepe the vnitie of the Spirit, in the bond of peace, hauing the same loue, be∣ing of one accord, and of one iudgement, no man seeking his owne, but euery man one anothers wealth, seeing that we are one bo∣die in Christ and euerie one, one anothers members, as we are all by one sacrament of baptisme, coupled vnto one head which is Christ, and ioyned together too in one ody, which is his Church. 6.Our mortifi∣cation, and san∣ctification in Christs death and resur∣rection.It representeth vnto vs also thus much, that we being baptised into Christs death, shall by the power thereof die vnto sinne, and that by the vertue of his rising againe, we should walke in newnes of life. 7.Our resur∣rection.Lastly that wee shall be raysed vp at the last day out of the dust of the earth, and meete the Lord in the ayre, and dwell with him for euer and euer. 1.The supper pledgeth our eternall life.The Lords supper sealeth vnto our consciences, that Christ is that liuing bread which came downe from heauen, of which whosoeuer truely eateth shall liue for euer, because he doth not nourish vs to
death, for that is contrarie to his nature, nor for a time, because he liueth for euer and cannot die (and such are the effects that flowe from him) but vnto euerla∣sting life. Also it setteth out vnto vs,2.Christs death and passion. Christs death and passion, with the benefits we reape therby, and namely the remission and forgiuenes of our sinnes, because as he neuer did any thing in vaine, so much lesse died fruitlessely, but that hee might purchase for vs, eternal peace with God, through the worke of our reconciliati∣on with him. Further it preacheth vnto vs that Ie∣sus Christ himselfe God and man,3.Our spiritu∣all nourish∣ment in and by him. with all his spirituall and heauenly treasures, is fully and wholie giuen vs by the Fa∣ther, that in him and through him, taken hold of by faith, we may bee fully nou∣rished in the inward and outward man, to the hope of euerlasting life. It doth also confirme vnto vs,4.The vnion betvvixt Christ and his church. the my∣stical vnion which is betwixt Christ and his Church, hee dwelling in our hearts by faith, and we thereby made members of his bodie, of his flesh, and of his bones.
5.The vnitie a∣mongst the members of the Church.Lastly, it teacheth vs what vnitie and loue ought to be amongst vs, because that thereby wee that are many, are one bread and one bodie, in as much as wee are all partakers of one bread.Examination before the Supper. Tvvo parts of it, aith and r∣pentance to∣vvards God, and sincere loue towards men.To the worthy receiuing of this sa∣crament, there is necessarilie required an earnest examination and true tryall of our selues, which chiefely consisteth, as I take it, in effectuall stedfast faith, and hartie repentance towards God, and vn∣fained loue towards men. Faith vvhat it is.Faith is a certaine perswasion, and stedfast assurance, which euery true chri∣stian man ought to haue, that God the Father loueth him, for Iesus Christ his Sonnes sake, hee by the meanes of that faith, particularly applying vnto him∣selfe all Gods promises, specially those that concerne forgiuenes of sinnes, and eternall saluation, made vnto vs in the same his sonne Iesus Christ, in whom all his promises, are yea and amen. Repentance what it is.Repentance is an earnest hatred of all manner of sinne, inward, outward, past, present or to come, all proceeding from a right and reuerent feare of Gods e∣ternall
Maiestie, which worketh so farre in vs, that it maketh vs to forsake our selues, and to striue to the mortification of our corruption, to the ende wee may wholy giue ouer our selues to bee alto∣gether gouerned by the holy Spirit of God, in the seruice of his Maiestie. Loue containeth in it,Loue, and what it comprehen∣deth. not onely a sound affection to our brethren and friends, but also the vnfained reconci∣liation of our selues vnto those whom wee haue offended, and a readie forgi∣uing of others the offences they haue cōmitted against vs, euen as willingly, gladly, & freely, as we would the Lord should forgiue vs, for his Christs sake. That faith that is outwardly wrought in vs by Gods word,True faith is not fruitlesse. and confirmed by the partaking of the holy Sacraments, is not an idle, vaine, or dead faith, but sted∣fast, vnfained, and working by loue, yeel∣ding foorth the fruites of blessed obe∣dience, not according to the darknesse and corruption of our owne will,1.Naturall corruption. lusts, and affections; for they euermore rebell against God. Neither according to mens manners and examples,2.Other mens manners. because they
are no sufficient warrants for our con∣uersation:3.And the fa∣shions of this world, no rules to rame our liues by. nor yet after the customes and fashions of this present euill world, for we are forbidden to fashion our selues thereby:4.But Gods wor onely. but according to that good, per∣fect and acceptable will of God, set foorth and commaunded vnto vs in his law, which is and must be alwaies a light vn∣to our feete, and a lanterne vnto our paths, and is indeed the onely, true, sufficient, ad right rule of all righteousnesse and well doing. This large volume of Gods will, plen∣tifully and plainly reuealed in the Cano∣nicall Scriptures of the old and new Te∣stament, God the Father hath in great mercie for our weaknesse sake, abridged into two tables, containing ten Com∣mandements. Two tables, ten commaunde∣ments. VVe must flie rom euill, and doe good.Wherein wee are specially to marke these two things: First, that it is the minde of the Law-giuer, in comman∣ding good things, to forbid the contra∣rie euils: and in forbidding euill things, to commaund the contrarie good, the Almightie therein meeting with mans corruption and the frowardnes of his
heart, who supposeth that if hee doe no euill, though he lead an idle and vnpro∣fitable life from goodnesse, thinketh notwithstanding that hee hath perfor∣med his dutie. Secondly, that the Lord by his law mindeth to teach vs to bridle and sub∣due, not onely the act of sinne,1.Act of sinne. as the Pharisies imagined;2.Consent to the same. nor the consent to the same in our hearts and affections a∣lone, as the Sorbonists, and Popish schoole Diuines dreame a this day, but also the least lust and motion that may prick vs thereto,3.Yea, lust or motion must be auoided. or rise vp in our minde against the same. We must know further that this law of God is obserued and broken,1.Gods law is obserued or broken after tvvo sorts. in∣wardly and outwardly: for the inward breaking or obseruing thereof, because o man knoweth what is within man, but he spirit of God and the spirit of man him∣elfe, euery man must be left vnto him∣elfe: and yet all are bound both by the ertue of Gods holy Commandement, nd also by that excellent profession, ter which they are named, not onely eeply to enter into the consideration
of themselues, but also to know that they walke in his presence, before whose eyes all things are naked and plaine. Outvvard breach.Touching the outward breaking o obseruing thereof wee must know, that the breach of it is then done, when any thing forbidden by that law is commit∣ted, or any thing commanded by that law is left vndone: and on the other side that obedience is then yeelded, when any thing commanded by that law is performed, or any thing forbid∣den by that law,Inward and outward obe∣dience. is left vnaccomplished. For good reason is it (whatsoeuer mans witte can cunningly dispute, or say a∣gainst the same) that these onely should bee allowed and done as good workes, which hee himselfe hath commaunded, and those fled from as euill, which hee himselfe hath forbidden, because hee hath al light and soundnes of true iudg∣ment in himselfe, and is not carried a∣way with partialitie of affection, to pro∣nounce a wrong sentence, a matter very common amongst all men. Things forbid∣den by the first commaunde∣ment.Wherefore no good or godly Chri∣stian should allow, vse, or defend any
Idolatrie, Soothsaying, Coniuring, Sor∣cerie, Witchcraft, Charming, false doc∣trine, feare, loue, or estimation, of any whatsoeuer creature, aboue God or e∣qually with him, or the persons which shall vse such things. None must make, or cause to be made,By the second. either allow of, vse or defend any Ima∣ges to expresse or counterfeit God by, or to seeke him or worship him in the same, or any other manner of supersti∣tion whatsoeuer, abstaining altogether in his holy seruice, from our own inuen∣tions, blind deuotions, mens doctrines, and other mens examples or rules. None ought to vse or abuse the name of God,By the third. either in vaine or rash swearing, be the oathes as men account them ne∣uer so small, or in blasphemie, sorcerie or witchcraft, or in cursing, forswearing and such like: yea none should talke or speake or thinke of God, his word, his workes, or whatsoeuer else hee is made knowne vnto vs by, without some vr∣gent and weightie cause, and that with great reuerence and feare of his Maie∣stie.
By the fourth.None should abuse the Lords day, or any other day in doing of their owne wils, or in any wicked and vngodly ex∣ercise whatsoeuer, as dauncing, dicing, carding, table-playing, Tauerne or Ale∣house haunting, resorting to the behol∣ding of Enterludes, Beare-baitings, and such like. By the fifth.None should rebell against, disobey, or speake euill of Magistrates, Ministers, Masters, Mistresses, fathers and mothers, or any other person, whom the Lord in his wisedom and goodnesse hath made their superiours, either by age, authori∣tie, wealth, office, or any other manner of way whatsoeuer. By the sixth.Al hatred, malice and enuie; al braul∣ling, chiding, quarrelling, fighting, bloodshed, murther and such like, yea al manner of desire to do hurt or reuenge, must be auoided. By the seuenth.All whoredome, fornication, adulte∣rie, together with bawdie and filthie talke, loue-songs, tickings and toyings, and all other wanton and light beha∣uiour, and other vnseemely gestures, in bodie or countenance (which indeede
are nothing else, but violent prouoca∣tions to filthinesse and euill) yea and all vncleannes both of bodie and minde must be auoided. All theft & stealing,By the eighth. either openly or secretly, either by force, fraud, or other∣wise, together with all deceiuable buy∣ing or selling, all vsurie, all extortion, all briberie, all vncharitable getting, and keeping of other mens goods, and to conclude, all manner of false dealings whatsoeuer, by cousenage, weight, mea∣sure, &c. ought to be shunned. Not only manifest periurie,By the ninth. and brea∣king of lawfull othes and promises, but also all lying, slandring, backbiting, flat∣terie, and dissembling, together with all euill speaking against others, either in words or writing, proceeding from the malice, corruption, and naughtinesse of mans heart, must be auoided. The very pricks and motions to sinne in mans minde (which the holy Scrip∣ture sometimes calleth the lusts and con∣cupiscences of our cursed nature) must so farre foorth,By the tenth. as God shall inable vs, bee subdued, and that in their first assault,
least otherwise temptation further pre∣uailing vpon vs with delight, we be car∣ried on forward by the subtiltie of sinne, both to consent vnto the euill, and to striue for the attempting and accom∣plishment thereof. Vnlavvfull vvishes.And here, because vnlawfull wishes be dependents of this sinne of lust and coueting, men must learne to bridle and master the same, and not to haue them so often and common in their mouthes, as, I would I had this, I would I had that, &c. On the other side, because the life of a true Christian is not an idle life, and wee are commaunded by Gods holie word not onely to flie from euill,Things com∣maunded by the first pre∣cept. but to do that which is good, euery godly faithfull man must earnestly striue, according to the power that the Lord hath giuen him, to render vnto him his due honour and seruice, that is, to obey him in all things, and aboue all, to worship him onely, to put their whole trust in him onely, in all feare and dangers to flie vn∣to him, and to call vpon him onely, ac∣knowledging him to bee the Creator,
preseruer, and gouernour of all things, in heauen and earth. To giue vnto him that manner of worship and seruice onely,By the second. which hee himselfe in his word requireth, without adding thereto, or taking from it, and withdrawing themselues from al super∣stitious and carnall imaginations. To take an oath (but yet vsing there∣in with great reuerence the fearfull and glorious name of our God only,By the third. and of no creature whatsoeuer) when there is iust occasion, as to affirme or maintaine a trueth (specially if the Magistrate re∣quire or commaund it,Three ends of an oath. to set foorth the glorie of God, and to preserue mutuall agreement and brotherly charitie a∣mong men. To spend the Sabbath,By the fourth. as in ceasing from the honest labours of their lawfull callings, so in frequenting of godly ex∣ercises, in ioyning themselues to pub∣like assemblies, reuerently and quietly there to behaue themselues in diligent hearing of the word read and preached, in prayer and singing of Psalmes, and as occasion shall serue, and is offered, in
communicating in the holy Sacramēts, and afterward to bestow the rest of the time in priuate reading of Gods word and meditating therein, and in the ear∣nest consideration of his most noble and wonderfull workes. By the fifth.And because all authoritie, either of Magistrates, officers, Ministers, Masters, Mistresses, Fathers, Mothers, and others, is of God, and that there is a like consi∣deration of them al in that respect, eue∣rie one must vse humble obedience to∣wards them, bearing a reuerent minde to them, being readie to relieue, assist, and aide them, and willing to doe after their commandements, in all things in the Lord, and for the Lord, according to their dutie. By the sixth.Vnfained loue, patience, humilitie, humanitie, keeping & making of peace, sauing and helping all such as bee in danger, gentle words, soft answeres, and all duties of compassion, must conti∣nually be exercised. By the seuenth.And because they are the temples of the holy Ghost, all purenes and chastitie, not onely as touching the act, but also
in heart, word and behauiour, must bee profesed and practised. There must be put in vre all true and faithfull dealing,By the eight. due paiment of debts, diligent seruice, together with all care∣full and friendly sauing and deliuering of other mens goods. All must witnesse, iudge, and speake the truth,By the ninth. yea the whole truth, and no∣thing els but the truth (as occasion shall be offered) without any respect touch∣ing all men, and matters whatsoeuer. Lastly,By the tenth. when the Lord putteth good motions into their minds, men must di∣ligently take heede, that they doe not suffer them to die in them, or to bee quenched, through the corruption and naughtinesse of their owne hearts, but must carefully striue by al holy meanes, and the diligent and often vse of the same, with earnestnes to pursue them, and to bring them to good effect. But we cannot performe these holie duties. That is true indeede,Our vvant of abilitie is sup∣plied by earnest prayer to God. for we are not sufficient of our selues, as of our selues to thinke a good thought, much lesse to doe any good deede, but all our sufficiencie is
from God, to whom alone we must haue recourse by earnest supplications and heartie prayers, that by him we may be made able not onely to know, what that good, holy, and acceptable will of his is: but also be strengthened from him (from whom alone commeth euery good and per∣fect gift) to accomplish and performe the same. Spurs to prayer specially foure.And because wee are very dull and sluggish to performe this, as all other holie duties,1.Gods com∣mandement. the Lord hath ot onely giuen vs certaine sharpe spurres to pro∣uoke vs thereto (as his holy commande∣ment, which wee ought carefully to o∣bey;2.Gods pro∣mises. his comfortable promises, which wee ought stedfastly to beleeue; the pledge of his blessed spirit,3.The assured pledge of the pirit. which assureth our spirits that wee are his children, and stirreth vp in vs those groanings, that no tongue is able to expresse; a true taste and feeling of our owne miseries and wants,4.Our ovvne vvants. and of the miseries and wants of our brethren, both in respect of our bo∣dies, and of our soules) but also hath taught vs such a short, and yet notwith∣standing so sufficient a forme of prayer,
as doth briefly comprehend in it, al such points and matters as be meet and law∣full for vs to demaund: therefore wee should continually labour, rightly to vnderstand it, and carefully to put it in practise, all the daies of our liues. But before wee enter into this,Seuen poynts to be marked before we pray. or any other prayer, it shall bee good for vs to consider some circumstances, and to obserue certaine rules, to the end that we, and our prayers, may by that means be foūd more acceptable in Gods ight. As first,1.Our wret∣chednesse. how great and wonderfull our wretchednes, miserie and pouertie is, without the which as wee may easily be puffed vp with pride in our selues, so cannot our prayers be piercing, because a full belly despiseth a hoy combe, as the holy Ghost saith. Also what is the excellencie, maiestie,2.Gods great∣nesse. power and goodnes of Almighty God, to whom we pray: for if that be not set∣led in our hearts, we shall without ree∣rence, yea in a certaine kinde of hypo∣criticall and superstitious boldnes, rush into his maiesticall presence, as the horse doth into battell.
od will, an ods great power mut not be sundered in prayer.The earnt and deepe weighing of both which points, may work in vs true and vnfained humbling of our selues in his presence, and also a certaine assu∣rance that our prayers and requests shal be granted (so farre foorth as shall bee expedient for his glorie and our com∣fort) because wee come to him that hath the fulnes of all will and power in him∣selfe to performe any thing that we shal demaund, according to the same. 3.That God onely must be called vpon.Besides, wee must know and beleeue that wee must pray vnto this alsufficient God onely, as well because hee alone knoweth the things wee stand in neede of, as also because he alone can help vs, and yeeld reliefe and supplie, when and as best pleaseth himselfe. 4.I the name of his onne Christ onely.And that our prayers must bee made vnto him in the name of his dearely be∣loued Sonne Iesus Christ onely, because it pleased the Father by him alone, to re∣concile all things to himselfe, both which are in heauen and in earth, and to ap∣point him to be the onely Mediatour be∣tweene God and vs. 5.Good things onely must e asked.Also that wee must aske good things
onely: for it is vnreasonable, yea irreli∣gious, to make the most good and holie God, a slaue to satisfie our corrupt affe∣ctions, now wee haue said before, that nothing is good, but that hee alloweth and liketh of, by his will reuealed in his word. And we must aske these good things to good and holy vses onely,6.And that to good ends only. as the ad∣uancement of his glorie, the helpe and comfort of our brethren, and our owne good, and not to consume them on our lusts; as wantonnes, gluttonie, drunken∣nes, enuie, abominable idolatrie, and such like. And lastly,7.Mouth and heart must be ioyned toge∣ther. that we must not pray on∣ly with our mouth and lips, after the manner of hypocrites, but must yeeld consent to the same in our vnderstan∣dings, hauing indeede the summe of e∣uery petition in our hearts, as we readily haue the words thereof in our mouthes, otherwise all that we do in this behalfe, will be but lip-labour, yea lost labour. For outward behauiour in our pray∣ers,Outvvard be∣hauiour in prayer must plainely preach reuerence of Gods maiestie. it is seemely and meete that wee should order our selues reuerently and
religiously, in humble kneeling vpon our knees, in stedfast holding vp of our hands, and earnest lifting vp of our eyes to heauen ward, and in disposing euery part and member both of our bodies and of our mindes, in such sort that wee our selues may feele, and others that be present with vs, may sensibly perceiue that wee reuerence his Maiestie, before whom we appeare, and rightly vse that exercise that hee hath enioyned vs, as a special peece of his seruice, euen for our owne health and welfare, as well s for his glorie. Men may not be tied of ne∣cessitie to tht or any forme of praier, or to any sort of gesture therein.Vnderstand me as I meane. My pur∣pose is not to tie men to that forme of prayer alone, or to te hem to vse on∣ly those gestures aboue prescribed: for that were to limit the Spirit, and to re∣presse occasions and prouocations gi∣uen vs from God, and felt in our selues, to holy prayer, but that euery one shuld striue (because of that rebellion that is in our harts) as much and as effectually, both in word and deede, to humble our selues before God, as possibly wee can, least otherwise God resist vs (for he resi∣steth
the proud) and reiect our prayers. Now let vs come to a short opening of that prayer, which the Lord himselfe hath taught vs. The preface or begin∣ning thereof is this.The preface to the Lords pray∣er expounded. O our Father which art in heauen. Out of which words wee may learne many things,1.Earnest in prayer. as first in this word O, the earnest affection that ought to bee in them that pray, who must bring with them mindes, not onely farre remoued from earthly and carnall things, but so stedastly set vpon those heauenly and spirituall graces, that at that present they demaund, that they minde nothing but those alone. Secondly, in  word, our, the vnfai∣ned loue and feeling that ought to bee amongst Christian brethren,2.Vnfained loue. no man praying for himselfe onely, but praying as carefullie for others as for them∣selues. Thirdly, in this word, Father, his fa∣therly prouidence and assured fauour and good will,3.Gods proui∣dence, and our obedience. towards his children in Christ, on the one side, and their sincere loue and hearty obedience towards him
on the other side, according to that of the Prophet: If I be your Lord, where is my honour, and if I be your father, where is my loue? 4.Gods povver.Fourthly, in these words, which art in heauen, the exceeding Maiestie, power and glorie of God, aboue all things: which if wee respect not in prayer, and feele in our selues to appertaine to vs, the fruites of our lips will fall downe, as water spilt on the earth. The first peti∣tion, vvhat we pray for.The first petition is: Hallowed be thy name: wherein wee pray for the know∣ledge and reuerence of God, so to be in our hearts, that all our thoughts, words and deedes, may in all godlinesse onely so shine before men, that God our hea∣uenly Father may thereby be glorified. VVhat vve pray against.And on the other side, wee pray a∣gainst ignorance and contempt of God, and of all these meanes whereby hee hath made himselfe knowne vnto vs, as his word, workes, &c. Also wee pray a∣gainst all loose life and vngodly beha∣uiour whatsoeuer. The second pe∣tition, vvhat vve pray for.The second petition is: Thy kingdom come: wherein we pray for the effectuall
feeling and working of Gods blessed spirit, and all his gifts in vs, as righteous∣nes, peace, comfort, &c: also for the sin∣cere preaching, reuerent hearing, and right receiuing of Gods holy word and discipline. We pray for Magistrates and Common-wealths, and for the Church of Christ wheresoeuer dispersed, and we pray for the glorious appearing of our Lord Iesus Christ, either particularly to visite euery one of vs, or generally to iudge the quicke and the dead, with wonderfull glorie and maiestie, in that great and last day. On the other side we pray against all the illusions,VVhat vve pray against. suggestions and assaults, either of Sathan, or of our owne corrup∣tion; wee pray against the bondage of sinne, the kingdome of Antichrist, and the contempt and forgetfulnes of Gods either particular, or general iudgement. The third petition is,The third peti∣tion, vvhat we pray for. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heauen: wherein wee py for wisedome, will, power, and grace, that we may yeeld our selues, our soules and our bodies, with euery part
and member, both of the inward and outward man, and that all other things also together with vs, may bee made conformable here vpon earth, vnto the obedience of Gods will declared by his word, as his Angels, which bee his heauenly creatures, studie nothing but to please him, without any motion to the contrarie. VVhat vve ray against.On the other side, wee pray against presumption, wilfulnes, ignorance, re∣bellion, muttering, grudging, or repi∣ning against his good will and plea∣sure, together with all such inordinate and fleshly desires resting in vs, as are contrarie to his blessed will and ordi∣nance. The fourth pe∣tition, vvhat vve pray for.The fourth petition is, Giue vs this day our daily bread: wherein wee pray for meate, drink, apparel, health, wealth, libertie, peace, good order, and all other good things whatsoeuer, that God knoweth to bee meete for vs in this world, to sustaine, keep and defend our bodies and lies by. On the other side, wee pray against
hunger, nakednesse, scarsitie, pestilence,VVhat vve pray against. icknes, pouertie, bondage, warres, dis∣order, and all manner of euils whatsoe∣uer, tending to the hurt of our bodies and liues. And let vs marke the words,1.Merits ouer∣throvvne. with which we vtter this petition. We rather say giue, than pay, because wee cannot require bodily things (much lesse spiri∣tuall things) for any desert that is in vs, but for Gods ree and gratious good∣nesse onely. And wee say, Giue vs,2.Selfe-loue euill. rather than me, to teach vs, that in charitable loue wee are bound, both to pray and labour for others, and not of selfe-loue onely for our selues, as worldlings doe. And wee require rather this day daily bread,3.Gods proui∣dence, our only stay. than euery day daintie fare, be∣cause wee should learne rather to stay our selues vpon, and to content our elues with Gods continual prouidence, inistring vnto vs alwaies sufficient, for resent necessitie, than to incomber our lues with worldly care and carking to et by indirect meanes, or to keepe any perfluitie.
pray for.The fift petition is  trespasses, as we forgiue  against : wherein wee pray  feeling of Gods , purhaed ∣to vs by Christ, an is obedience only, to put away all our sinnes we py al∣so for peace and ioy of conscience,  for vnfained loue and broherly rcociliation amongst men, which is an as∣sured pledge of the fre ardon and full orgiuenes of all our iniquities be∣fore God. VVhat vve pray against.On the other side, wee pray against wrath, vengeance, despaire, and many strong illusions, that may bee and are raised vp in vs vnto condemnation in sinne: also against hatred and hard har∣tednes towards men. The sixth peti∣tion, vv at vve pay for.The sixt petition is: And leade v not into temptation, but deliue vs fro euill: wherein we pray for Christian pa∣tience, strength, and continuance a∣gainst all temptation, and suggestions whatsoeuer, to sinne: also for contemp of the world, mortifying of the  and quickning of Gods holie Spirit
