3326.5 99855651 21153
¶ A boke of prayers called ye or¦dynary fasshyon of good lyurnge. Mathewe .vi. ¶ Seke fyrste the kyngdome of god: And than all thynges shall be layde before you. ¶ He that wyl lyue wel (sayth saynt Hierome) muste pray at nyght and in ye mornyng at the lest. ¶ CVM PRIVILE¦gio ad imprimendum solum.
THIS lytell treatye is made for the erudicion of the simple, and yonge babes of god. And yet nat to be dispised of the great clerk{is}, & myghty ydel loubers: ye lyue here in earth lyke as hogges do ī wodes: whiche goeth vnder ye crabbe trees, and eate vp the crabbes ye lye vpō ye grounde, & neuer loke vp to the tre from whens they fel but wander on, sekyng vpō ye groūde for mo, euyn so do these ydel lobers, ye deuoure ye gyftes of god, & do receyue innumerable rewardes & benefites at his handes: and yet neuer loke vp to gyue him thankes: but lyue here in earth ydelly, & wretchedly (as I may say(. This lytell boke therfore shal. be to put them in mynde of a peace of theyr dutye. And to exhorte thē to vse an ordinary fassyon of prayenge by∣cause they shal nat forget theyr dutye vse therfore prayer at nyght & in the mornynge all busynes layde a syde.
¶ The exhortacyon to the reder. MOst crysten reder I wyll exhorte the to thre thynges (that is) pray se god, feare god, and loue god, auoyde synne, and folowe vertue, auoyde I saye all synnes and the occasyons of thē. And specially those abhomynable synnes which aske for vengeauns be fore god, as abhomynable Sweryng and blasphymynge the name of god: deceyuynge the infaunt, the wydowe and the pore man wylfull periury or procuremente of any mannes deathe wrongfully: also synne agaynste na∣ture called the dumme synne: or wyl∣lyngely to procede and contynue in synne contrarye to the inspyracyon of god: these be to abhomynable to be spokē of: vse therfore vertu & meanes to attayne grace (which be these.) ☞ Repentaunce, prayer, restitucyon, reconsylemente, almes and fastynge,
and specially to exersyce that vertue which is contrary to the synne where∣in ye are moste corrupted (as shalbe declared here after) but nowe to re∣tourne to my purpose of praysynge god & fearynge him: Let vs consyder the cause of oure creacyon howe that god hath created vs lyke to his owne Image and hathe gyuen vs a soule wyte, reason, & vnderstandynge more then he hathe done to other beastes. And why hathe he created man thus verely nat bycause he shuld only eate and drynke and slepe, and take his pleasure in this worlde lyke a swyny or a best, or that he shulde gather the goodes of this worlde togyther: and stryue with his neyghbour for ye gift{is} and benefytes that god hath sent: thē lyke as dogg{is} dothe fyght for a bone whiche theyr mayster hath cast them: or that he shulde onely folow, or occu¦pye his crafte & scyence what so euer
it be (be it neuer so lawful) and do no∣thyng els: nay god ordayned nat him therfore: but he gaue him wytte and reason because he shulde prayse hys lorde god (as the angels do) and gyue him thankes for all hys benefyces: And therfore he gaue vs this cōmaū∣dement: Remember to kepe holy thy Saboth daye: as who shulde saye thou shalt honour me: I made the therfore this is the cōmaūdemēt of god which yf we marke wel we may perceyue the cause of our creacion. Let vs therfore prayse and magnyfye oure lorde god as our dutye is: and lyue in the feare of him, let vs feare him (I say) for he is the lorde of power: whiche vtterly abhorreth synne. As it appereth in yt he banished Adam from the ioyes of paradyse bycause he agreed to ye sinne of Eue. Also he caused almost ye hole worlde to be drowned at Noyes floud for sine. And at another tyme he cau∣sed
fyre & brymstone to rayne downe from heuen vpō the cytyes of Sodo∣ma and Gomore for theyr wykednes. And so the people ther were brente & the cytye sanke into the see: yea truly god hated synne so muche, that when chryst beynge in the bosomme of his father dyd praye hym to be fauorable and to forgyue the synne of the world yet he wolde nat be intreated, but cau¦sed his onely sōne chryst to come dow¦ne into the worlde: and to take mans shape vpon hym. And to suffre dethe (he beynge without faute or synne) for to redeme vs wretched synners: so straytely dothe god loke vpon syne therfore let vs feare hym & loue hym: Let vs loue hym (I saye) because he made vs and created vs lyke to his owne Image, & spared nat his onely sonne chryst for our sakes, but sende hym downe for to make vs fre and to redeme vs: whē as our synnes coulde
nat be taken away by any other mea∣nes: but onely by hym yt was without sinne. And let vs loue him also becau¦se he taketh vs nat awaye at ye worste out of this presēt lyfe: but suffreth vs to liue that we myght repente. and ler ne to knowe him: it is he also ye preser¦ueth vs. And dayly gyueth vs meate and drynke & al thynges necessary to our lyuyng: when we be synners & do nothyng deserue it, yet dothe he preser ue vs then & holdeth his holy hande ouer vs: or els the deuyl myght teare vs in peces as we go, or we inyght syncke into the earthe for our synnes (as we be wel worthy) but onely that god is more mercyfull to vs then we do deserue, let vs therfore prayse him & loue hi for his great fauour & mer∣cy shewed to vs so many waies. As in yt he hath redemed vs by his onely sō ne Jesu chryst. And also hath apoyn∣ted yt ye selfe same chryst our mercyful
lorde (which suffred death for vs (shal be our iudge at the great daye of iud∣gemente (here is comforte) who can dispayre, or what herte wyll nat be in flamed nowe to loue god. And to mag¦nyfye him and thanke him for all his benefytes. And to kepe his lawe euen for very pure loue, consyderynge hys greate mercy and loue towarde vs so many wayes, or who wyll nat feare him consyderynge the thynges before rehersed: therfore yf thou haste eyther eyes to rede this, or eares to here it and vnderstandynge for to perceyue it, then consyder who hath gyuen the these giftes. And who may punisshe y• sodaynly, and take thē away agayne consyder therfore the goodnes of god and cause of thy treacion. And prayse him contynually. And folowe the ex∣ample of holy men, as Dauyd Iob. Danyell, & dyuers other whiche vsed customably to make their prayers vn¦to
god at dyuers tymes bothe in the daye and in the nyght, bycause they wolde nat forget theyr dutye towarde hym. As Dauyd sayth Psal. 42. My herte was troubled at mydnyght, and I called vpon the lorde, and watred my bedde with ye teares of myne eyes (Also he sayth) Psal. 54. I wyll crye to god. And my lorde wyl saue me, at nyght and in the mornynge & at myd∣day shal I pray hertely vnto him that he maye here my voyce. Lo here Da∣uyd doth prescrybe thre solempne ty∣mes whan a man ought to praye: As at nyght whā he goeth to bedde, in ye mornynge when he ryseth, & at myd∣day when he goeth to meate. Danyell also the prophete vsed to pray thre ty¦mes in the day, at whose example the churche dyd ordayne the thre houres which be songe or sayd at this present daye in the churche after pryme. And therof the thre houres toke theyre be∣gynnyg
with diuers other examples which were to long to reherse: but let vs take an example at thē for to serue god in prayer twyse a day at ye least, ye is at euenyng & mornyng (al busynes layde a syde) accordyng as I haue ex¦horted you before. And it were conue¦nyent that we shulde also gyue than∣kes vnto hym at our meale tymes, tor who wyll gyue a man his dyner. And wyl nat loke to be thanked of him for it, or who wyl gyue a chylde but an∣apple, and loke nat to haue thankes for it, muche more arre we bounde to thanke and magnyfie our lorde god that fedeth vs dayly, and asketh none of our goodes for it, who dar therfore sytte downe at his table. (excepte he be worse then a best) and eate of the meate that god hath sente, & nat giue him thankes for it? or who dare ryse in the mornynge and loke vpon the bryght sone whiche god hath created
for to gyue lyght vnto vs, & wyll nat thanke hym for it? or who darre go a∣brode in the worlde amongest his ene¦myes, and amonge the temptacyons of the deuyl? And wyl nat call fyrste vpō god for helpe: or who dare go to bedde at nyght (lyke a beast) without thankes gyuynge to god, for suche be nefytes as he hath receyued that day and for suche dangers as he hath es∣caped? yea and also knoweth nat, whe¦ther he shall lyue tyl the next morowe or no, let vs therfore repēt euery hou∣re & call vpon god for mercy, & truste onely in hym. And let vs take an ex∣ample at these holy fathers to vse an ordynary fasshyon of prayeng becau¦se we shall nat forget our dutye. And chefely, let vs folowe the example of our mayster chryst: VVhiche prayed vnto god his father dyuers tymes in the mounte olyuete, and also when he made he last soper, & dyd institute ye sa∣cramente
of his moste blessed body he bothe prayed and gaue thankes to his father in heuen. And also he com∣maunded his discyples and apostels to pray contynually lest they shuld be led into temptacion let vs therfore to lowe both his example & cōmaunde∣mentes, yf we wyl be called his discy∣ples or crysten men. And let vs nat leade oure lyfe lyke beastes, but lyke men and remember (as I sayde fyrst) the cause of our creacyon: and vse an ordynary fasshyon of prayenge. And although that I haue appointed thre tymes in the day for prayer: as in the mornynge: at mydday: and at nyghte as tymes most cōuenyent, and appro¦bated by Dauyd & other holy fathers yet wolde I that euery man shulde pray as ofte as he is moued in spryte & nat to deferre it to these thre tymes onely: nor agayne I wolde nat that any man shulde thynke that I wolde
bynde him of necessyte to these thre ty∣mes a day: as to a thynge which may nat be lefte vndone, vpō payne of vt∣ter damnacyon (nay truely I wolde nat haue any man so scrupulous) but yet I wolde nat haue them leaue it vndone, specyally at nyght and in the mornynge. And although yt I oughte nat to teache other mē: but haue more nede to lerne my selfe: yet I maye ex∣horte them as one cristen man shulde do an other: for as this ordynary fas∣shyon of prayenge. And suche other: trustynge that by my exortacyon they wyl nat do ye worse: but rather amēde and procede by lytel and lytel to most parfyte perfeccyō: to which he brynge vs all: that lyueth & reygneth worlde without ende. Amen. ¶ In the mornynge blesse the and say thus.
BLessed be the name of the father, the sōue, & ye holy gost nowe & for euer more And blessed be the father of heuen that made me: & blessed be his sonne Jesu Chryst that redemed me, and blessed be the holy gost that preserueth me: to thē thre as to one god and one power, which is my lorde and god, in whom I truste be all honor and prayse, worlde with∣out ende Amen. Our father whiche arte in heuen. &c. ¶ And then saye this prayer folowynge. O Lorde I thanke the for all thy benefites: & for that thou haste preserued me alyue this nyght and brought me forthe to the begynnyng of this day: beholde therfore lorde I enter into it, all thynges to do accor∣dynge
to thy wyll & pleasure: kepe me lorde and defēde me, and sēde downe thy holy spryte for to istructe me that I may lyue this day in thy seruyce. ¶ An other prayer for. mornynge. O Lorde my god most mighti and mercyfull haue mercy on me wreched liner, lorde I say which art the most hiest power, to whome al po¦were be subiecte bothe in heuen and in earth, and knoweth the secretes of our hertes, to the O lorde do I cal v∣pon for helpe, dsyrynge ye to strenght me this day, agaynst al ye teptacions and assaultes of the deuyll and the worlde, and to confyrme me with thy pryncypal spryte, that I may cōtinue thys day in thy seruice: gyue me ther¦fore lorde these gyftes. Gyue me the herte that may repente: the wyll and
desyre to haue knowlege of thy lawe and cōmaundementes, the eares that wyl be redy to here the, & nat the worl¦de: the eyes that shall beholde ryght∣wysenes and regarde the poore man: the handes (I say) that shal worke no euyl, the mouth in which shalbe foūde no deceyte, ye tonge yt maye euer shewe forth thy prayse, to whō be all honour and glory by the mouthes of all men: worlde withoute ende. Amen. ¶ Also say this prayer. LOrde behold me yt am thy handy worke, & put forth thy helpynge hande vnto me. ❧ And when ye haue sayd thus, thē go aboute youre wordly busynes, re∣membrynge alwayes this great and special cōmaūdmēt of god (which is) ☞ Thou shalte nat do nor go about to do ye thyng to an other, which thou
woldest nat haue done to thy selfe. ❧ Remember this well, yf thou de∣syre to be saued. ¶ At nyght say these prayer folowynge. AT nyght knele downe on thy kneys & make thy confession to god: and aske hym mercy, and repent truly in thy herte. ¶ Repentaunce. TRue repētaūce is to lament & be sory for thy synnes, & vtterly to forsake thē, & neuer to vse thē agayne ☞ But to vse and practyse yt vertue which is contrary to the vyce wherin ye arre most corrupted. ☞ As cōtrary to couetousnes, make restitucyon agayne out of hāde wher as ye haue done wronge, & dispose the resydue of your gooddes lyberaly to the pore.
☞ Contrary to swerynge, vse rather scilens & lerne to vse sobernes and pa cyens. Contrary to malyce & wrathe, vse pacyens & shewe loue & gentylnes bothe in worde & dede & forgyue, re∣mēbrynge yt chryst dyd forgyue & suf∣fered pacyently the wordes of the Je∣wes: yea he suffred death wrongful∣ly amonge them. ❧ And thus in euery degre of synne, vse and practyse yt vertu whiche is cō trary to ye synne wherin ye arre moste corruptdd. And so by vertue ye shall ouercome vyce & synne: for it is the best meanes that can be deuysed to brynge a man to perfyte lyuynge. ¶ Here folowith a prayer to be sayde at nyght after confession made and true xepentaun∣ce had. ❧ The prayer of the penytent
O Heuenly father yt creatour and maker of all thynges to whom bothe heuen & earth is obedient. And to whom the algels do seruyce & do synge with a contynuall voyce, Holy holy, & most holy lorde god of power callynge the euyn so, for thy great po¦wer & almyghtynes whose excellente maiestye no thought nor tongue of men or angels cā expresse. Now whē I haue sinned agaynst the, & do remē¦ber with my selfe, what a lorde of po∣wer I do offende, with my great and innumerable synnes: then I abhorre mine owne folisshenes. And also whē I consyder howe gentyll & louynge a father I haue forsaken. I vtterly dis pyse my madnes, & great vnkyndnes And whan I beholde & se frō what & howe blessed a lyberte my spryte is banysshed from (which is the ioy yt I was wonte to haue. In the my lorde god) and nowe in what a myserabte
case & bondage of sinne & the deuyll I haue wrapped my selfe in: then am I al togyther myscontented wt my selfe and sore troubled in my cōsciens. And haue nothynge els before myne eyes but hell, & desperacyon: for then my cōscyence trembeleth & feareth much the greate Justice of god (whiche in deade is ineuitable) and no man can escape it. But yet cōtrary wyse on the other side: when I beholde lorde thy vnmesurable loue & goodnes toward mākynde. And thy mercy wherin (as the {pro}phet{is} do testifie) thou dost passe & excelle. Which sadyst, I wyll nat the deathe of a synner: but rather that he shulde lyue & be conuerted. I therfore remēbryng thy greate kyndenes (al∣wayes shewed vnto vs) and these thy most gentyl wordes: do saye vnto my selfe. A wreche (that I am) why haue I offended so mercyfull a lorde: and therat I am halfe astoned agayne &
discūforte i my selfe. But thē cōmeth into my mynde a nother swete saynge of thy mouth (which saydest) That in what houre so euer the synner dothe re∣pente: I wyll no more remember hys vnkyndnes. And therwith I am so muche conforted agayne: that I am compelled euen to meruayle and lay with my selfe. O the wonderfull loue of god towarde vs for his mercy is without ende. And then I saye vnto my selfe: why shulde I be in dispayre to haue remyssyone of my synnes at his handes: whiche in the tyme of my noughty lyuynge hathe preserued me that I myght lyue & lerne to knowe him. And nowe of his owne mere mo∣cyon calleth me to repētance bycause he delyteth in me and wolde haue me saued: sor truly he hathe great delyte and comforth. In a repentant synner that cōmeth vnto hym as he hath de∣clared vnto vs, by manye parables:
As in the .x. Chapter of Luke by the parable of the woman hauynge ten gro¦ses whiche yf she lose one: then she lygh tethe a candell and swepethe the house and sekethe dylygently tyll she haue founde it. And when she hathe founde it she calleth in her neyhgbours and lo, uers: saynge my frendes reioce with me For I haue foūde the grote agayne that I lost, euen so lykewyse more ioye and reioysynge shalbe in heuen ouer one synner yt repēteth: then ouer nynety & nyne iuste psons yt haue nat offēded. And sykewyse it is let furth in the pa∣rable of the hundereth shepe yt were lette vpō the hyll for to go to seke one shepe yt was lost: with dyuers other parables: but it is most expresly sette forthe in the parable of the prodygall ionne whose Image I vtterly recog∣nyce & konwlege in my selfe for vn∣happely lefte I So louynge a father buthryftely myspēding his substaūce
and gyftes. And whyles I do folowe styll the carnall desyres of my owne wyll: vtterly forgetyng, lorde thy pre ceptes. I do tomble my selfe all to gy ther in the seruytude of vyce: And so I beyng blynde & voyde of all bertu brought to extreme pouerte can nat se whether to fle. But vnto hi agayne that I dyd forsake for he is the lorde of power & father of mercye. Yes tru∣ly I am vnworthy lorde to be recey∣ued of the. Or to lyfte vp myne eyes vnto the: or yt I shulde call the by the name of a father: but I most humbly beleche the to loke gently towardes me with the eye of thy mercy: for thy gentyl loke & the inspyracyon of thy spryte is of suche strength yt it reuy∣ueth a synner beyng deade. And it re∣storeth a sike mā to his helth againe: For truly in yt I am dyspleased nowe with my selfe and do perceyue myne owne faute. I must nedes referre it
vnto the: for it cōmeth of the grace. And nat of my selfe for I beyng long blynde & wanderynge farre out of the ryght way: thou hast wytsafe to loke towardes me and to restore me my ryght agayne: that I may se nowe & {per}ceyue in what case I am. And what daūger I have escaped: And wt what myscheffes, & trobles. I was laden & cūbred withal: I therfore lord beyng an vnthryfty seruant and worthy of muche punysshement. Am nothynge worthy to be honored & regarded lyke a sonne, nor I wyl nat desyre it, but it shalbe suffycyent for me. Yf it wolde please the of thy goodnes but to ad∣mytte me into thy seruyce. And to ac∣cepte me amongest the sympleste and lowest sore of thy seruauntes: that I may attayne to Saluacyon through thy mercy: for in thy holy place there be many mencyon places or seates. And it shallbe suffycyent for me yf I
may but syt at the feete of thy blessed seruaūtes: haue merci therfore on me my lorde and father, for I do vtterly abhorre myne olde corrupte lyfe. And am come nowe for to dwell with the. And wyll neuer forsake the agayne: But wyll contynue in thy seruyce all the dayes of my lyfe. And I wyl for∣sake all the pompes and pleasures of this worlde & a the desceytful wayes that I haue vsed. And wyl nat be af∣shamed here in this worlde to liue as∣ter a pore sorte: and to be acumpted a mongest ye most abiecte & symplew: so that I may wynne euerlastynge ho∣nour with the to whom be al prayse & glory nowe & foreuer more. Amen ¶ The prayer of Salomon. O Lorde great ryches: or extreme pouerte gyue me nat: but {pro}uyde for me in the meane: accordinge to thy
wyl & pleasure for by hauyng the one I shall forget the, & by hauynge the other I shalbe dryuen to forsake the. ¶ Prayers to be sayde at messe tyme in the begynnynge say thus at coufiteor. O Lorde I am nat worthy to enter and come into this noble house of thyne whiche is ye house of prayer: but lorde beholde I come as a penyēt synner I do saye with the publycane Lorde be mercyfull to me a synner: for I haue offended the many wayes and am nat worthy to lyfte vp myne eyes into the: not to lyue vpon the earthe but lorde be thou mercyfull vnto me a synner accordynge to the greate mercy and I wyll confesse my synnes vntd ye which yf I wolde I can nat hyde frō the: for thou arte ye lorde of power yu knoweste the secretes of our hertes: haue mercy therfore on me, O Lorde
accordinge to thy great mercy and let me nat cast awaye y• thynge throught my wrechednes: which thy almyghty goodnes hath created & redemed: but forgyue me lorde and sende thy holy spryte into me: that I may kepe thy lawe and commaundementes. ¶ A prayer to be sayd at the sacramēt of messe. BLessed & praysed be the father of heuen yt sēt downe his onely sōne Chryst for to redeme vs. And blessed be our lorde Jesus chryst yt shede his blode for our sakes. And hath lefte his body here amonge vs in fourme of breade & wyne. As a pledge for to witnesse vnto vs: yt he hathe bene all redy here in the worlde & hath shedde his blode plenteously for our redemp¦cyon. Therfore O father of heuen I praye the accept his deathe as a sufficēt
oblacion and satystactyon for my syn∣nes. And set his passyon betwene thy iudgemente and my soule. And loke nat vpon my synnes: but haue mercy on me for his sake, and sende thy holy spirite into me: that I may kepe thy lawes & commaundementes. Amen. ¶ When ye do kysse ye pax say thus to your selfe O Lorde gyue me grace to forgyue myne aduerlaryes frely for thy sake: yt I may kysse worthely togither wt my neyghbours in ye holy kysse of charyte accordīg to thy cōmaūdemēt. ¶ When ye take holy breade say thus to your selfe. LYke as ther be many graynes of corne in th{is} brede: euyn so be we al mēbres of one bodi ī our lord Jes{us} chryst: in whō there was neuer maly∣ce nor cōtrauersyfoūd: let vs therfore agre togyther as the members of one
body. And so take brede louingly to∣gyther. Amen. ¶ When ye take holy water say thus. BLessed and praysed be our lorde Jesus chryst wich hath wasshed away our sinnes in his blode: And is mercyfull to vs for euer. ❧ The holy water also is a token of our Baptyme. ¶ Grace to be sayd be fore meate. LEt vs eate in the name of ye lorde and satysfye our body temporaly with suche meate as he hath sente. ¶ The answere. ANd let vs desyre hym lyke wese to satysfy our soule with y• gyfte of good lyuynge that we may be euer
as redy to all good workes: as we be nowe to our meate. Grace to be sayde after meate. THankes be to our lord god: that hathe sente vs thus. ☞ The answere. ANd let vs prayse hym that cau∣seth bothe fisshes to swymme in the water. And beastes to lyue on the earth for our sustenaunce: to hym be prayse and glory for euermore. Amen ❧ A prayer to be sayd of a syke man at the poynte.  ath O Lorde I thanke the: for yt thou hast preserued me from al soden death. And hast gyuen me nowe this syckenes and knolege of my death & ende: that I myght repente & beleue
and trust in the my lorde god: which art mercyfull and dost all thynges for the best: for I knowe that thou louest them: whom thou dost chastyse. And I thāked the yt yu hast gyuen me know lege and faithe in thy sone lesu chryst by whom I knowe that I shall be saued euyn aswell as the thefe was, or Mary Magedelyne: or any other creature whiche were synners aswell as I am. I wyll therfore lorde synge furth thy prayse: come forth nowe all people & say with me: let vs reioyce in the lorde our sauynge helth: and lette vs prayse him in psalmes and cantycles. ☞ For he is the great lorde: And is aboue all goddes and wyll nat caste away his people. ❀ For he hath loked from his hyght holy place aboue: yea he hathe loked from heuen into earth. {fleur-de-lys} That he myhht here the greuous syghes of the penitēt: and yt he myght
saue and delyuer the chyldren of thē that were lost. ¶ Let vs therfore prayse the lorde: And saye that he is good vnto vs: for his mercy is without ende. ❀ He hath nat done vnto vs accor∣dynge to our synnes: nor he hath nat rewarded vs accordynge to our wyc∣kednes: but as the father shuld haue mercy ouer his chyldren: euen so hath the lorde taken mercy vpon vs that loue hym and here hym. ☞ For loke how far dystaunce there is bytwene ye East & the west. And so farre hath ye lorde set our sines frō vs ❧ Let vs therfore praise hi cōtinual ly: yt was borne of the virgyn Mary. {fleur-de-lys} And suffred death for vs so mercy fully: and ascended vp into heuen so glorously. ¶ To prepare a waye for vs and to be our medyatour: contynually be∣fore god the father.
❧ And wyll be our iudge at ye great daye of Judgemente: to iudge vs in mercy is his intente. ❧ Into his handes therfore I com∣mytte my soule: trustyng onely in the father the sonne and the holy gost: to whom be all prayse and glorye nowe and for euer more. Amen. ¶ Here after foloweth rules of wysdome & vertue .xx. i nōber. MAke thy prayer to god, twyse in a day at the leaste. 2 ¶ Auoyde ydelnes, & be alwayes occupyed in sōme honest busynes or studye. 3 ☞ Be obedyēt to kynges & prin∣ces: and to theyr offycers. 4 ❧ Here muche but be nat rasshe thy selfe in spekynge. 5 ❀ Use sobrenes & humylyte, and thou shalt be called wyse. 6 {fleur-de-lys} Rebuke lyght & wanton {per}sōs and specyally swerers.
7 ❧ Shewe good example of ver¦tuous lyuynge to the people, 8 ❀ Order thy housholde quietly, & instructe them in goddes wordes. 9 {fleur-de-lys} Yf thou be called to promocion mynyster Justyce: without brybes or false dissymulacyon. 10 ☞ Gyue faire language to all people: and specyally to pore folkes. 11 ❧ Be nat percial for fauour or lucre: nor agre nat to wronge doers. 12 ¶ Get thy goodes truly: and spende them acordynge to thy degre mesurably. 13 ¶ In {pro}speryte beware of pryde remember thy olde estate: and lyue in the feare of god. 14 ☞ Desyre some frende of thyne to tell the of thy fautes, and so shalte thou lyue suerly. 15 {fleur-de-lys} Here thy frende in wysedome and mystrust euer thyne owne iudge∣mente.
16 ¶ In matters of wayght: be nat hasty in answerynge: but take re∣spyte. 17 ☞ For of hasty answeryng par aduēture repentaunce myght folowe but in proces of tyme commethe wys∣dome and knolege. 18 ❀ In aduersite forgyue and be pacyent and trust to goddes helpe. 19 {fleur-de-lys} Studye alwayes howe to be stowe thy tyme here: in this worlde to goddes pleasure. 20 ❧ Remēber well thy last daye: and thynke often vpon death. ❧ FINIS.
¶ Imprynted at London in Fletestrete at the sygne of the George nexte to saynt Dunstons churche by Wyllyam Myddylton. printer's or publisher's device
