6436 99845083 9959
TOBACCO TORTVRED, OR, THE FILTHIE FVME OF TOBACCO REFINED: Shewing all sorts of Subiects, that the inward taking of Tobacco fumes, is very pernicious vnto their bodies; too too profluuious for many of their purses; and most pestife∣rous to the publike State. Exemplified appa∣rently by most fearefull effects: More especially, from their treacherous proiects about the Gun-powder Treason; From their rebellious attempts of late, about their preposterous disparking of certaine Inclosures: as also, from sundry other their prodigious practises. Prov. 27.9. If sweete oyntments and perfumes do vndoubtedly reioyce the heart of a man: then surely, all noysome sauours, and poysonsome smels (such as is the filthie fume of Tobacco) inwardly taken, must necessarily disquiet, and driue the same into a dangerous condition. Dignitatis  Deus. LONDON, Printed by RICHARD FIELD dwelling in Great Woodstreete. 1616.
TO THE MOST POTENT, LEARNED, AND RELIGIOVS PRINCE, IAMES (by the grace of God) King of great Brittaine, France and Ireland, &c. be multiplied the abundance of spirituall sinceritie, of earthly prosperitie, and of eternall felicitie in Iesus Christ, Amen. RENOWMED SOVERAIGNE, THe Almightie Iehouah (being in very deed) the God of 1 Cor. 14.31. order, hath created all things in so ex∣cellent and absolute an order, re∣specting Wisd. 11.17. number, weight, and measure, as no one man liuing on earth may iustly challenge any one of his works, for being (in any their seuerall orders) the one either Eccles. 3.11. better, or worse then another: if we exactly consi∣der the exquisite order obserued among any his different o∣perations in heauen, or in earth. For if we first consider what an absolute order he hath obserued in any the superior crea∣tures (more especially in the firmament it selfe, with other the Celestiall orbes) we may find the same (by Mathemati∣call demonstrations) made apparently manifest to vs. Then
next, if we obserue (in like sort) the like most admirable, and absolute order among all other the inferiour creatures (more especially in Man whom he hath purposely made a , I meane, an abstract epitome, or a liuely repre∣sent of all the rest (as by Physicall obseruations and sundry Methodicall proportions may be made apparent vnto vs) I doubt not at all but that the truth of this point will more plainly appeare then the Sun-shine at mid-day: so as the simplest on earth may soundly conceiue the same in that one speciall creature, if (besides his admirable creation) they will likewise consider how the vniuersall societies of mankind here on earth, are (by the Almightie his most absolute wise∣dome) very proportionably reduced into a fourefold corpo∣rall condition. Namely, first into a meere naturall bodie:  meane a corporall substance consisting ioyntly in an health∣full estate of sundry particular members sympathically com∣bined in one. Then next, into an Oeconomicall bodie, I meane a domesticall, or well ordered houshold condition pro∣portionably plotted together. Then next, into a meere Politi∣ticall bodie, I meane the publike estate of kingdomes, and countries collaterally compact in one mutuall consort. And then fourthly, into an Ecclesiasticall bodie: I meane, into that holy and blessed communion of Saints which religiously con∣sisteth vpon the mutuall and ioynt societie of a Nationall Church, disciplinated and gouerned in a most solemne and sanctified order. As this fourefold order of bodies doth comprehend, and vphold to the full, the seuerall conditions of men here on earth: so surely, the second and the last of these foure seuerall estates I do purposely pretermit for the present, as hauing heretofore in In a Treatise of household gouernment couertly con∣uayed from me, and set orth in the name o R. C. some part, and also intending hereafter (if God say amen) to bend my cogitations more fully that way.
hang downe the head, but all the other states else (by a com∣mon consent) they do collaterally become very crazie and weake, concerning any the dutifull discharge of their pecu∣liar designements. As for example, the said stomacke it selfe, namely, the poore husbandmen, they are fearefully subiected to an intol∣lerable feeblenesse concerning the timely performance of any their appointed functions; to offensiue yelkings, and vomitings forth of sundrie discontentments against the whole State; to an immoderate thirsting after other mens places; to many most bitter heart-burnings, gripings, and gnawings; to sodaine, and vnappeaseable inflammations of furie; to an vtter loathing of their appointed ordinary la∣bours; to a dog-like appetite after other mens profites; to an insatiable hunger concerning the speedie supply of their sundrie vnsufferable wants; to a very bad digestion tou∣ching their present oppressions; to many windie sufflations, and proud puffings vp; to angrie belchings, to cholericke passions, to an vnnaturall fluxe of the purse, by meanes of too many their immoderate and superfluous dispendings; to inward heart-gripings; with sundry such other like feare∣full occurrents as do finally disable their persons from the orderly collecting, and proportionable dispersing of publike maintenance to any one of the other estates in that selfe same Politicall body. Yea, and not onely the said stomacke it selfe (I meane the poore husbandmen,) but all other estates besides are likewise (by a common consent as it were) collaterally sub∣iected to sundry most dangerous distempers: whether we consider the superiour, or any the inferiour parts of that Po∣liticall body. For first, (concerning the superiour parts) who may not
easily see and perceiue how the head it selfe will forthwith begin to be fearefully tainted with capitall paines about the disordered State; with want of due rest, by reason of sundry occurring cares; with idle vertigoes, and many terrible turne-about thoughts; with sundrie implacable furies, with most secure and fearefull Lethargies, dreames, and drowsie securities; with crasinesse of memorie concer∣ning their duties to God and man; yea, and (which more is) with such sodaine congealed Catalepsies, violent conuul∣sions, and spiituall benummings, as if all conscionable sense and mouing (in and about their designed imploy∣ments) were vtterly lost, or quite forgot, at the least. And then next, for the Shoulders and Armes (the No∣bilitie, and Gentrie I meane) who may not likewise per∣ceiue, how that (when the poore husband-mans state, which did vsually aford their Politicall maintenance, begin∣neth to fag) they do eftsoones begin to fall forthwith into fearefull Apoplexies, I meane, to an vtter decay of all spi∣rituall mouing and sense; into quaking Palsies and trem∣bling of heart, vpon euery crossing occurrent; into dange∣rous Epilepsies, and deadly downefallings to euill; into vio∣lent Conuulsions, with a sodaine shrinking vp of the sinewes of loue; into fearefull oppressing Ephialteis, and intollerable burdens of sinne, each houre surcharging their sorrowfull soules; into choking Squinancies, I meane, a mercilesse throatling of all their Inferiours; into sundrie most deadly Pleurisies, through the abundant spilling of innocent bloud; into many quarkening Peripneumonies, and suffocating Ptisickes, I meane, into a difficult brea∣thing forth of any gracious decrees concerning the pre∣sent good of the poore; yea and (which more is) into very many such impostumating Empiemaes, and most fearefull
exulcerations of conscience (with other outragious enormi∣ties) as bring an vtter consumption and waste to the whole Politicall bodie. And as the superiour, so likewise the inferiour mem∣bers of that selfe same Politicall bodie, feeling once a de∣fect in the stomacke (I meane in the poore husbandmans state) they do eftsoones decline to an vnnaturall weakenesse and distemperature of the Liuer and Splene (I meane, to a fearefull decay of Christian loue, for the timely discharge of any their Christian duties; to sundrie inflammations, obstructions, coldnesse, and hardnesse of heart against the whole State; to most filthie deforming Iaundeis, through an vnnaturall dispersing of cholericke pangs, and melan∣cholicke passions ouer all the Politicall bodie; to many most languishing Cachexies, I meane, to an inordinate consu∣ming and wasting of politicke nutriment, by reason of some euill disposition in their proper estates; to such dangerous Dropsies, and disordered cariages, as do either procure a dissolute loosenesse throughout their peculiar societies, or an vnnaturall swelling at least, against the peaceable, and prosperous state of the whole Politicall bodie; to dead∣ly Stranguries, and dangerous difficulties about the timely dispatch of their publike designements; to deadly benum∣ming Sciaticaes, and griefes in the huckle-bones, so oft as they are to vndergo the obsequious dispatch of their seuerall duties; yea and (which more is) into many preposterous Po∣dagraes, and intollerable paine in their feete and ioynts, so oft especially as they are made to support and beare vp the necessarie burdens belonging to that Politicall body whereof they are made the vnited members. So as your most excellent Highnesse may here againe be pleased to perceiue very plainly, that (by the onely
distempers of the stomacke it selfe in either of both these bodies) the whole bodies of both are most fearefully brought into such a languishing condition and state, as neither those stomackes themselues, nor the head, nor the shoulders, nor the armes, neither yet the legs, nor the feete are sufficient∣ly able to dispatch their proper designements: by eanes whereof, euen those selfe same bodies (with all their seue∣rall parts) must needs remaine in a languishing state. And therefore, as the good estate of the stomacke it selfe must be carefully continued, especially, if we desire to vphold the happie condition of the whole bodie it selfe: so surely I do verily suppose there may no better meanes be deuised about that good estate of the stomacke, then to become very carefull first, for the ordinary supply of whatsoeuer good meanes may be helpefull vnto it: and then next, for the powerfull and speedie suppressing of whatsoeuer occurrent may be hurtfull vnto it in any respect. Now then, these foure succeeding faculties are espe∣cially helpefull to the good estate of the stomacke it selfe, if they be rightly had, and ioyntly continued: Namely, Appetite, Retention, Digestion, with an orderly Distri∣bution. For sith it is the proper office of euery particular sto∣macke, very orderly to concoct the whole sustenance re∣ceiued therein, that so, the said sustenance may forth∣with become good naturall nutriment for the whole bodie it selfe: who seeth not therefore but that (in the stomacke) there must first be procured an able and ab∣solute appetite towards that the former receiued suste∣nance? And because it is to very small purpose though the forenamed Appetite be singular good, vnlesse the Reten∣tiue
facultie be also euery way fitted for the firme retai∣ning, and orderly holding of whatsoeuer solide sustenance so soundly affected before: who seeth not now, but that se∣condly a sound Retention must necessarily be wrought in that selfe same stomacke? And because the Appetite, and Retention both, will ve∣ry little auaile to the good estate of the stomacke, vnlesse the said stomacke be throughly able withall, most soundly to digest whatsoeuer good sustenance so orderly affected, and so firmely retained before: who seeth not therefore, but that a very strong and absolute Digestion must third∣ly be kindled, and firmely continued in that selfe same stomacke? And because both Appetite, Retention, and Digestion al∣so, are to very small purpose for the good estate of the sto∣macke, vnlesse the said sustenance so affected, so retained, and so digested, be likewise as proportionably dispersed throughout the whole bodie for naturall nutriment to the seuerall members thereof: therefore, who seeth not fourth∣ly, but that the said stomacke it selfe must be aptly dispo∣sed towards the proportionable Distribution of that selfe same concocted nutriment to each seuerall part of the whole body it selfe? Now then, all those the forenamed faculties so fitly and so proportionably concurring toge∣ther about the orderly accomplishment of that the recei∣ued nutriment, this stomacke it selfe may not properly be said to feele any want at all, for the timely dispatch of it owne imployments about any his designed functions. These fourefold faculties must (in like manner) all ioyntly concurre about the happie and prosperous estate of those our Politicall stomackes: if especially, we would haue them profitably imployed in the orderly collecting, and
frugall disposing of publike maintenance, for the conuenient supportation of the whole Politicall body, in all and singular the seuerall parts thereof. And therefore, a principall care concerning the poore husbandmens happie condition, must first be made knowne to the world, by an orderly procuring of good Appetites in euery of them towards their seuerall husbandries: that so, they may chearefully, comfortably, and profitably both affect, and effect the fruitfull managing thereof in euery respect. Whereby it is apparently euident, that those their said Appetites must not be killed by vnreasonable Fines, by excessiue Rents, by ouer heauie Impositions, or any such o∣ther importable burdens. And then next, there must likewise be cherished in euery of them, a powerfull Retention, an enabled facultie (I meane) to retaine, vphold, and continue their seuerall hus∣bandries, for those the former publike respects. So as there∣fore, a like prouident care must be further had, that by no meanes they may be discouraged from their said husban∣dries by any mercilesse, vncharitable, or cut-throate dea∣lings: neither yet compelled (by any causlesse, and cruell oppressions) to cassier themselues from their former callings, and so (in a malcontentednesse) forthwith to cast their ploughs in the ditch. And then thirdly, they must yet further be furthered this way, by a strong & speedie Digestion, with such warme and cherishing comforts (I meane) as may enable them all to the orderly maintaining, the husbandly managing, and the wholsome digesting of those their said husbandries for publike good. And lastly, there must very carefully be wrought in eue∣ry of them (by the ministeriall operation of the word and
praier) a sympathicall disposition, in and about the timely Distribution of that their former collected maintenance, for the publike good of the Prince, the Peares, the No∣bles, the Gentrie, the whole Communaltie, and euery par∣ticular member of that selfe same Politicall bodie. These things accordingly effected, who seeth not now, but that the naturall and Politicall stomacks both, are sufficiently furnished with whatsoeuer supplies may any way be helpe∣full to either of them both for publike good? And not onely things helpefull must so be supplied, but things hurtfull likewise must forthwith be suppressed, for feare of enfeebling or weakening the forenamed faculties. But there may not any thing be possibly found more hurtfull to the happie estate of those the forenamed stomacks, then superfluous excesse, or pining wants. For, as by superfluous excesse, the good state of those the said stomacks is feareful∣ly ouerwhelmed and tumbled headlong into most dange∣rous surfeits and deadly distempers: so surely, by oppres∣sing and pining wants, they are fearefully enfeebled, and finally disabled from the timely performance of their proper designements for publike good. First therefore (for the timely suppressing of whatsoe∣uer superfluous excesse annoying the healthfull estate of both these stomacks) a prouident care must forthwith be had, that not onely all carowsing and quaffing, all gulling and gormandizing, all excessiue and riotous banquetting: but also that all superfluous buildings, all needlesse braueries, all extrauagant sports, and all other profluuious dispendings be heedfully auoyded in euery state, more especially in those the forenamed stomacks themselues. For these onely respects, I haue here euen purposely (al∣though yet synecdochically) censured all those the former most
foule and shamefull disorders vnder the onely name of Tobacco fumes; putting downe a part for the whole: and naming that one vice especially, as a most liuely represent of those other the smokelike vanishing vapours; and as the very principall annoyance to both the stomacks: and so conse∣quently to the flourishing estate of the naturall, and Politi∣call bodies themselues. And not onely all such superfluous excesse, but (which more is by much) all those oppressing and pining wants whatsoeuer, which may (in any sort) surprize the good estate of those stomacks, must forthwith be warily suppressed. Namely, the want of competent tillage for corne; the want of conuenient pasturing for beeues, for oxen, for milch-kine, for sheepe, with such other conuenient meanes to manure, mannage, enable, and strengthen their seuerall tillages and pasture grounds, for such a conuenient increase as may fully suffice from time to time, about the necessarie supportation of their owne, and the publike good. The want (in like manner) of politicke, of peaceable, and publike good orders, about the orderly and quiet collecting of such singular blessings as the Lord (in much mercie) be∣stoweth vpon any their ordinarie labours for publike good, must be heedfully respected and timely redressed by publike authoritie. So as your excellent Highnesse may herein againe be plea∣sed to see the great conueniencie of all those good penall sta∣tutes (were they but carefully executed) which do necessa∣rily concerne the orderly vpholding of husbandrie in it owne proper nature, or do purposely tend to the timely sup∣pressing of whatsoeuer riots, routs, and vnlawfull assem∣blies that might respectiuely ouerlay the poore husband∣mens labours, and peaceable proiects concerning any their
peculiar professions for publike good. In consideration whereof, I haue here purposely, and largely laid open the vrgent necessitie for the timely sup∣pressing of that late disordered and vnlawfull attempt of lawlesse persons, in and about the vnorderly and tumultu∣ous disparking of pastures and seuerall grounds, vnder an idle pretence of the necessarie (though needlesse) augmen∣tation of tillage: demonstrating most plainly, that their falsely supposed defect of tillage is no such an oppressing want, as doth presently hurt the poore husbandmans happy estate (all other things else proportionably and euenly re∣spected:) and that therefore there needed no such disordered and headie attempts, for the timely supply of that their falsly supposed want. Hauing hitherto anatomized the whole purport of this my purposed proiect for publike good, I am now, not vn∣willing the same should be soundly peized with those the ap∣proued weights of the Sanctuary which will not deceiue. Especially, if our learned Physitions be made the indifferent cyzers and censurers concerning all Physicall questions: as also, if those our experimented Politicians and Poli∣ticke States-men may become the prouident weigh-masters of what points soeuer appertaining to matters of po∣licie. More respectiuely (most dread Soueraigne) I do here ve∣ry freely, and submissiuely put ouer the whole to your Ma∣iesties approued consideration and view, as vnto the most competent Iudge of publike regard; very humbly intrea∣ting your excellent Highnesse, that (from out of your long experimented Physicall skill) you would first of all be pleased, very soundly to censure that former part of this present Discourse, which more especially concernes those exceeding
great hurts that do vnperceiueably surprise the bodies of men, by meanes of their inward taking of Tobacco fumes. And then next (with no lesse humble submission) I hum∣bly intreate, that your vnmatchable wisedome for publike good, would likewise be pleased (from out of your long set∣led iudgement, and experimented practise about the order∣ly suppressing of whatsoeuer shamefull disorders adiudged pestiferous to the publike good of our countrey) to priuiledge with the approued stampe of your authenticall approbation, that other part of this present Discourse, which more re∣spectiuely relateth the purses profluuitie about the superflu∣ous charges of filthie Tobacco fumes, and the pestiferous poysoning of the long setled peace of our publike State: so farre forth especially, as the truth it selfe, and present occa∣sions do instantly craue from time to time. Very submissiuely intreating moreouer, that the whole Treatise it selfe may find at your Maiesties hands, that fauourable entertain∣ment which your gracious wisedome shall thinke good to grace it withall: and thereupon also, may publikely and boldly march vnder the martiall ensigne of your kingly care for publike good, against all the fiery encounters of whatsoe∣uer fuming Tobacconists. So shall the almightie Iehouah his absolute wisedome be Math. 11.19. freely iustified of all her children; so shall your kingly re∣putation be iustly eternized among all posterities; so shall the publike State of our countrey be much more bettered, and more soundly conserued in a solide condition; so shall the almightie Law-maker be more largely magnified for his manifold mercies bestowed among vs; so shall the poore husbandmens hearts (as it were with kingly cordials) be forthwith reuiued; so shall our disordered Tobacconists be presently daunted, and for euer hereafter discouraged:
yea and so shall my poore selfe be more securely protected from whatsoeuer the fierie Ier. 18.18. strokes of venimous tongues, to my better emboldning, and further encouragement in such other like future attempts for publike good. And euen so, I most humbly surceasse my purposed suite for the present good of our publike State: beseeching the almightie Ieho∣uah to blesse your excellent Highnesse in bodie and soule, and to enrich you in both with a principall spirit, correspon¦dent to your Princely place; to the publike good of our coun∣trey, and your owne euerlasting comfort in Iesus Christ. Euen so Lord Iesus, Amen. . Your Maiesties most humble, and most dutifull Subiect, IOHN DEACON.
TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, grace in Christ, with an holy discerning spirit. So be it. GEntle Reader, if thou wilt more seriously bend thy best thoughts awhile towards some serious consideration concerning thine accustomed inward taking of filthie Tobacco fumes, it may be thy good hap (by the mer∣ciful goodnesse of our gracious God) to haue thereby thy fantasticall mind enlightened about a foule fog∣gie error; thy crazie corps disburdened of many pestiferous humours, and thy prodigall purse more mightly priuiled∣ged from those sundry proflunious expences, wherewith (by tampering too boldly with filthie Tobacco fumes, as also, by conuersing too commonly with carousing companions, and other like chargeable courses attending hourely thereon) the same hath eftsoones bene shrewdly surprised, and (in a man∣ner) most clearely euacuated. The true and timely apprehension of these three such pre∣cious and present auailes, succeeding these Paganish and hea∣thenish practises, may make thee in time (by the great good∣nesse of God) to veile thy bonnet for publike good: and herein withall, to become forthwith a Merchant Venturer, by aduenturing boldly vpon the seasonable venting forth of this late inuention, for the publike aduantage of whatsoeuer our trifling Tobacconists; vnlesse haply, those their vapouring euacuations (very chymically extracted from the fennish fumes of their filthie Tobacco) haue now too too fearefully ouerwhelmed their blindfold braines with such foggie fore∣stalling mists, as do dangerously suppresse the senses them∣selues,
and too too sottishly surprise the sway of sound reason. Although notwithstanding, I am in no doubt at all, but that thou thine owne selfe (hauing once in an approued ex∣perience, very sensibly apprehended the exceeding great ef∣ficacy of this present Discourse for publike good) wilt forth∣with hold for an infallible Axiome, that Bonum quo communius, e meliu. A publike good, the more common it is, the better it is. And thereupon, as my selfe haue eftsoones bene moued by others, and now resol∣ued in my selfe, to communicate these my priuate thoughts to each particular person for publike good: so thou thine owne selfe, and all the rest of that reasonable sort (participa∣ting all ioyntly together with the publike profite thereof,) will all ioyntly together extoll the infallible wisdome of that onely approued Physition for bodie and soule, who hath e∣uery way made vs so sufficiently and so Christianly wise con∣cerning the vndoubted safetie of body and soule: and there∣withall, will ioyntly and heartily pray for the healthfull pre∣seruation of such, and so many as seeke (by any their sacred skils) to cause euery of vs so foundly to conceiue (though somewhat too late) the vnsoundnesse of al those the vnsound and sottish conceipts which haue hitherto haled men head∣long an end, to the vntimely taking of filthie Tobacco fumes. If thy mind be still in a mammering doubt▪ whether the venimous condition of these poysonsome fumes be so pesti∣ferous as this present Discourse doth seeme to purport, then turne thy present thoughts (I pray thee) towards the vntime∣ly deaths of sundry such excellent personages as (tampering too much therewith) haue (euen now of late) not onely bene sodainly surprised by an vnnaturall death, but (which more is) their dead bodies being opened, had all their entrails as blacke as a coale, and the very fat in their bodies resem∣bling (in all outward appearance) the perfect colour of ru∣stie, or reesed bacon: whose names notwithstanding, I do here purposely conceale, for the very reuerence it selfe
which I formerly bare to their persons and places. If notwithstanding all this, thou wilt not (as yet) bee brought vnto a present dislike of those the said fumes them∣selues, then turne thy serious and timely considerations to those fearefull effects, which (not long since) afforded their vntimely and terrible attendance towards those our disor∣dered and turbulent Tobacconists of former times. Who (for very loue of their Tobacco trafficke, and other disordered courses) neither spared their persons, nor purses, but wilful∣ly spoyled and consumed them both: to the manifest wron∣ging of many other besides, the publike contempt of good positiues lawes, the wilfull breach of his Maiesties peace, the rebellious resisting of his martiall power, with the feare∣full spilling of their owne, and other mens bloud. Let no partiall affections (good Christian Reader) so far forth miscarrie, nor so violently inueagle thine vnsetled and wauering mind, as that thou shouldest once dare to applaud the disordered courses, and intemperate actions of any such barbarous Cannibals as do causelesly conspire, and preposte∣rously pretend to bring in a confused paritie throughout the whole State. With very base and most beastly degenerate minds are those monstrous Minotaures bewitched, no doubt, who may (by no meanes) be brought to endure, or to broke the renowmed estates of the Nobilitie, or Gentrie in any their countrey coasts: neither yet to like long of any his Ma∣iesties fauourites, whom the Almightie himselfe (for the ra∣ritie of sundrie their singular vertues) aduanceth to a timely honour. Howbeit, very true is the saying it selfe, and the truth thereof made too too apparent in such disordered per∣sons: namely, that Res. rationis expers est ipsa improbitas. Dishonestie it selfe is a thing euen vtter∣ly destitute of all sense and reason. Well (whatsoeuer may be the successe with some others) I doubt not at all, but that these my poore labours for pub∣like good, will (from henceforth) make me as deepely in∣teressed in some other mens labours of like interchangeable trafficke: more especially, of those well minded persons who
now begin to perceiue what present profite may eftsoones arise from this my lately erected new Mart for publike good. On the other side, if any idle, or odly conceited companions (at the vnexpected pitching vp of these my approued booth∣stakes for publike good) do ouer pecuishly fall into sustian fumes, because these their filthie Tobacco fumes are thus so∣dainly enforced to render a most filthie redolent smell in the very nostrils of such & so many as are but competently furni∣shed with a sound and setled iudgment: yet vndoubtedly, the integritie and vprightnesse of mine honest plaine heart here∣in, will be sufficiently able (I hope) to mannage most stoutly mine authenticall intent for publike good, against all the fi∣erie thunder-cracks of those our fuming Tobacconists, whose trifling courses do nothing else but breede the publike bane of our peace and prosperitie. And howsoeuer some malcon∣tented Tobacconists, (of a very malicious spite) may couertly endeauour to kindle their fierie tongues (as it were with Psal. 120.4. Iu∣niper coales) against either my person, or published Treatise, I doubt not yet, but as the integritie of mine honest intent for publike good, may sufficiently shelter my person for dea∣ling herein: so am I strongly perswaded, that, that selfe same publike authoritie which so frankly affordeth free passage (with priuiledge) to this my published Discourse for like pub∣like good, at the very first sparkling forth of those our Tobac∣conists fire-flashes (how fierce, and how flaming soeuer) will be authentically able, either to cause their turbulent rage to recoyle forthwith vpon their owne pates; or to besmeare their persons at least, with that odde satyricall Adage which termeth those our testie Tobacconists . Thericleiou philos, that is in English, A fantasticall fauourite and follower of cup∣companions. Howsoeuer, the better sort (I am sure) will rea∣dily entertaine my good meaning herein, with that honest affection and Christian mind which is euermore accustomed to construe such a subiect as this, in the best and honestest sense: and therefore (leauing the successe whatsoeuer to the orderly disposing of the onely wise God) I will now
shew thee forthwith my whole purpose and order herein. First, I haue propounded (as thou seest) the whole in Dia∣logue manner, for the plainer demonstration of the matter it selfe, making Capnistus, and Hydrophorus the onely speakers therein. The first (that is Capnistus, signifying a fierie perfu∣med fellow) resembleth our smokie and fumish Tobacconists: the other (Hydrophorus I meane, betokening a water-bearer) correspondently represents all such sound hearted subiects as are very well able (by the sway of sound reason, as it were with cold water) to quench the intemperate fierie flames of all our fuming Tobacconists. Hauing thus acquainted thee with my whole purpose and order herein, let vs now forth∣with proceede to the orderly prosecution thereof. Besee∣ching the almightie Iehouah to bestow that blessing vpon it, which may tend to the euerlasting glory of his most glorious name; the good of our Church and the common wealth; and our owne eternall comforts in Iesus Christ: So be it, euen so, Amen. Dignitatis  Deus. Thine in the Lord, and the Lord his vnworthiest on earth, IOHN DEACON.
A Ware-lash for wood-braines. THe sluggish sort, who snorting sleepe, and liue like lazie louts, False frauds will frame to mate each man; yet firke them with their flouts. The Serpent slie, the subtile Snake, will fawne vpon each Feare; And coldly crewle till they be crept into the bosome deare, Of them that pitie their complaints, and waylings well do way: But (if in breast they once be borne) to sting they neuer stay. The Caterpillers carping crew, with these I may bring in; Who liue o'th labours of good men: yet passe they not one pin, What cold, what irkesome wearie nights, what tedious tasks, what toyle; Nor yet, how many meatlesse meales men haue, nor what turmoile. Yet, Deacon deare (not dreading darts of furious franticke fooles) Hath wouen a web, and wrought a worke most meete for stately Schooles. He feares no force of Vipers boode, nor Caterpillers crew; But frankly of his owne accord puts it to publike view. In it he toucheth no mans state, of high or low degree: Surmounting sinnes he would suppresse, as soothly men may see. Each vice put downe in open Booke, I might in order name, Had not the Author to our hands, so soundly shew'd the same. And sith the man gapes not for gaine, nor praise from men pretends: Afford him thanks for his great paine, and so you make amends. This guerdon iust if you grudge at, I should accompt you wurse Then Iudas he, (that treacherous wretch) who bare about the purse. But, hope I haue, you will accept thereof by due desart, And it applaud: and so (deare frends) adieu with all my heart. Laudum suarum praeco insufficiens, S. T. Què sara, sara.
To the beneuolent and honestly affected Reader. IF handi-crafts-men haue great praise for wor∣king well, (With toyling trade) the trifling wares which they for money sell: Then why should Deacon doubt to purchase praise of men, To whom he frankly giues the gift of this his learned pen? If he his busied brow hath beat for our auaile, And for our profit taken paines: why should his guerdon faile? No greedie golden fee, no gem, no Iewel braue; But of the Reader, good report this Writer longs to haue. No man of meanest wit, no beast of slender braine: Who thinkes that such a worke as this, was penn'd with little paine. The worke it selfe portends what toyle he vndertooke, Or er'e his curious file could frame this passing pleasant Booke. If pleasure thou possesse, or profit thereby take: He hath the depth of his desire, who penn'd it for thy sake. But, though thou feele some want of that thou wish at furst: Reade once againe with good aduice, before thou iudge the wurst. Lay loue and hate aside, affection put to flight: So shalt thou iudge as Iustice wils, so shall thy doome be right. Remember, Midas eares were framed like an Asse: Because he said that Pan in skill, Apollo farre did passe. So, if thou shalt preferre some trifle more then truth, Thou shalt deserue (as Midas did) the Asses eares with ruth. For, learned is the man that did this Treatise frame: And, learned is the wight, to whom he dedicates the same.
And, learned is the worke, and honest eke the fact: And honest men will honestly allow each honest act. But, those that needes will storme, and wot not well wherefore, Must needs haue part of that reward which Midas reap't before. Which, if thou wilt auoid (as I would wish to shun) Do deeme with good aduised drift, this deede by Deacon done. So, I that made this verse, will thinke no worse of thee, Then Deacons worke doth well deserue, accompted of to be. But, if thou barke at Moone (like Bandog void of feares) All men may deeme thee for an Asse, by those thine Asse like eares. Virescit vulnere virtus. Thine, to pleasure, and to profit thee, B. G.
THE FVME OF TO∣BACCO TAKEN INWARD, IS VERY PERNICIOVS VNTO THE BODY. Capnistus, the Speakers. Hydrophorus, the Speakers. Capnistus. WHat Hydrophorus, mine ancient Antagonist? adieu: farewell for a season. Come, haste my mates: away. Haue ouer, haue ouer. Hydrophorus. Cauallero Capnistus, what haste I pray thee? Whither away man, that thou callest so earnestly for the Marriners to haue thee ouer? Capn. What haste (quoth you) Sir? Who euer expected such a friuolous demand from so famous a Doctor? Hast thou vtterly forgotten the ordinarie prouerbe, which telleth vs plainly, that Time and Tide attends vpon no mans becke? And I haue vndertaken a dangerous aduenture to∣wards the vttermost parts of West India with spéed: from whence also I intend to trafficke Tobacco into this our English Iland. Hydr. A dangerous, sayest thou? yea rather, a most des∣perate aduenture. Especially, when the voyage must be vn∣dergone by a stripling so tender of yeares: and for a trafficke moreouer, so vntoothsome in taste. Capn. I am sir (I assure you) of a contrary opinion. For (my selfe being now in my most flourishing age) you should déeme me so much more able to beare, and abide by
the bickering, how bitter soeuer. And as for Tobacco (how vntoothsome soeuer it séemeth in taste) being found most wholesome by plaine experience, & a trafficke moreouer in so great regard with one and other, I do not presently per∣ceiue what one commoditie may be shipped from thence, more fit for publicke good, nor any way more méete for my priuate auailes. But, adieu for the present. Come, haue ouer, haue ouer. Hydr. What man? pause (I pray thee) a little. For as soft fire maketh sweete mault: so, the hastie man (we see) doth seldome want woe. And (without question) thine vnexperi∣enced age, as also this thy preposterous purpose concerning that thine intended trafficke, they do both of thē, argue more haste then heed; more will then wit; more hurt then health; more poyson then profit; and (which more is) a great deale more woe then welfare: if the same be not heedfully fore∣seene, and timely preuented. Capn. Why so, I beséech you, Sir? Hydr. Dost thou aske me, why so? Come hither I pray thee, sit close by my sides for a while: and I will tell thee why so. Capn. Content. But, of all loues, then be as briefe as you may: for feare of foreslowing my purposed voyage. Go to now, tell me what one reason you haue, to be hardly conceited, concerning either my tender young yeares, or the long tried trafficke of this my intended aduenture? Hydr. With very good will. And this so much the rather, for that the consideration of both ioyntly together, do euen forcibly carrie my thoughts to that selfesame amazednesse, which formerly affected Iulius Caesar that mightie Monarch and Conquerour of the whole world, concerning the tried effects of that fearefull conflict which he eftsoones had with the Almains and Sweuians in Germanie, the Swissers and Tournayans in France. Capn. What strange amazednesse might that be, I be∣séech you?
Hydr. Certainely, euen such, and so exceedingly strange, as did (for the present) most fearefully daunt the very vigour and force of his vitall spirits. For, finding in that sort of peo∣ple (aboue other nations) a wonderfull couragious mind, with exceeding great strength of body to beare out the hot∣test brunt of the battaile; and hauing also at length obtained of them a very laborious and tedious victorie, with excee∣ding much toyle, and very great bloudshed: by the often consideration thereof, he was sundrie times drawne into this deepe and serious cogitation: Namely, how it might possibly come to passe, that he should so experiment in euery of them, such a rare and couragious spirit, and so resolute a will, with sufficient strength accordingly, to vndergo any imminent danger; whereas, in others he found nothing at all but an effeminate life, with a mind of curiositie, in withdrawing themselues from all dangerous and deadly occurrents. Capn. And what? was he caried so farre into this end∣lesse labyrinth, as he wotted not well which way to winde himselfe out, but with leading himselfe backward by the onely conduct of a labyrinthian clew? Hydr. Nothing lesse. For (hauing searched all the cor∣ners of his diuine wit, to find forth some reason in nature concerning this matter) at length (with exceeding great iudgement, and singular wisedome) he espied two speciall causes hereof; Namely, their abstinence from wine: and, their want of trafficke with other nations. Capn. What benefits could come vnto them by either of both these courses? Hydr. Surely, exceeding great benefits. For, by the first (namely, by their abstinence from wine) they reaped this certaine commoditie; I meane, they continued the state of their bodily humours in a sound and setled temperature: and, by the other (that is, by their vtter want of vsuall trafficke with other nations) they kept entire their ancient customes and manners, and held them continually absolute, and vn∣corrupted with the venimous vices of forreine countries. As
also (by the ordinary meanes of both) they receiued this singular benefite, that they preserued from time to time, the vigour, as well of their minds as their bodies, substantially sound and liuely, and euery way pregnant and readie, both for peace, and for warres. Capn. How hath this odde cogitation of his distracted your mind? Hydr. In very deed, exceedingly much. For, hauing eft∣soones somwhat seriously pondered this his approued iudg∣ment, and comparing it euen now, with the present occasions of this our licencious age, as also, with their childish & fond resolution concerning such forreine aduentures: I do find too too many important and weightie causes, very earnestly perswading me to be iumpe of Iulius Caesars opinion concer∣ning such a purposed proiect. Capn. And why so? Hydr. Dost thou aske me why so? Do but euenly compare the one age with the other, and thou shalt plainly perceiue the reasons thy selfe. For, what made them (in those dayes) such able men of their bodies and minds, and so apt for e∣uery difficult enterprise, but euen that their ordinarie absti∣nence from wine and strong drinkes? And what causeth vs now to become such cauallering Carpet Knights, such fanta∣sticall effeminate fellowes, and so vtterly vnfit for martiall affaires, but our continuall carousing of cup after cup; our insatiable tippling vp of Tobacco fumes, and our contagi∣ous conuersing with the vicious customes of forreine coun∣tries? Capn. I can (as yet) conceiue no one inconuenience from either of both. Hydr. Let vs then consider them seuerally: for, so shall wee the sooner perceiue the pernicious occurrents procee∣ding from either. Obserue therefore I pray thee, what mon∣strous diseases are daily bred in mens bodies, as also, how many and diuerse corruptions are couched close in their minds, by reason of an immoderate swilling vp of wine, of
ale, and of beere. For, from whence proceedeth superfluous moistures ouerspreading each solide part of the body? From whence cometh Catarres, Coughs, Rheumes, distillations of the braine, Comaes, Apoplexies, Palsies, Dropsies, Peripneumonies, Im∣postumations of the Lungs, Lethargies, Ephialties, Tremblings, Cataracts, Ophthalmies, Crudities, Iliaca passions, Cachexies, Surfets, vnnaturall Vomitings, Ioynt sicknesses, Goutes, and sun∣dry such other; besides the manifold corruptions of the mind it selfe: from whence (I say) do all and euery of these take primarie being, but from an immoderate quassing? Would to God, this preposterous age of ours did not so pregnantly purport and witnesse the same, without any my record herein. Capn. Indéede I must fréely acknowledge, that such sundrie and strange diseases are growne too too rife and ripe in this our decrepite age, and those also very feareful∣ly affecting both yong and old: but do all those diseases you speake of, directly procéede from an immoderate gulling in of hote wines, and other strong drinkes? Hydr. Vndoubtedly, they do take their primarie sprout from those pernicious fountaines, either immediatly, or, by a mutuall consent in their sundrie and diuerse gradations at least: as thou thine owne selfe (by some sober conference with graue and skilfull Physitions) maist more sensibly and more soundly be made to perceiue. Capn. Well Sir, I vnderstand (by the purport of your spéech) what fearefull inconueniences may successiuely fol∣low vpon such an immoderate swilling: and therefore I do herein accord with your selfe and Iulius Caesar, that, a moderate abstinence from wine and other strong drinks, is a singular good meanes to support the sound estate of mens naturall humours, and (thereby) the better to enable their bodies and mindes for euery notable exploite. How∣beit, I cannot (as yet) conceiue, how this our entercourse of trafficke with forreiners should any way preiudice the persons of men; or procure annoyance to the publicke good
of our English Iland. And therefore, tell me without far∣ther delay, whether you do absolutely deny vs all trafficke with strangers? Hydr. Nothing lesse. For, so should I be sure, not onely to crosse the singular good purpose of God, in the mutuall conseruation of people and nations dispersed abroad: but also, euen vtterly ouerthrow an excellent good course for the orderly increase of mutuall concord betwixt kingdome and kingdome, while the pining wants of the one, are plen∣tifully supplied by the others abundance. Concerning there∣fore the timely entercourse of trafficke with strangers, though I hold the same simply lawfull, nor flatly to be for∣bidden by any; if especially, a prouident care and a due re∣gard be first had of the traueller his age and yeares, as also, of the religious and honest estate of those countries them∣selues, whereunto the trauellers bend their purposed desig∣nements for such traffice intended: Although yet, notwith∣standing (I know not well how) this I am certainely sure of, that, whilest such an inconsiderate recourse to and fro from sundrie nations and kingdomes farre remote, lyeth carelesly open for whosoeuer will first giue the onset vpon it, wee leaue our ancient simplicitie eftsoones in a forreine ayre: and (in stead thereof) do too greedily sucke vp from forreiners, not their vertues, but vices, and monstrous corruptions, as well in religion and manners, as also, in framing the whole course of our life (both for apparell, diet, and all other things) euery way correspondent and currant to such a contagious, and most pernitious president. Capni. By your leaue Sir a little, before you procéed in your spéech. Hydr. With all my heart: propound what you please. Capn. This then is the summe of my purpose. Séeing the holy Scriptures do teach vs directly, that Rom. 7.25. it is the law in our members which leadeth vs captiues to sinne, and that Iam. 1.14. euery man is inticed and drawne vnto euill by his owne con∣cupiscence: how dare you ascribe the corruptions either
of our mindes or bodies, concerning religion and man∣ners, vnto any our entercourse of traffike with forreine nations? Hydr. Very true as thou sayest. It is the law of our mem∣bers which leadeth vs captiues to sinne; and that euery man is inticed and drawne vnto euil by his proper concupiscence. But yet, marke thus much withall, that the Scripture doth not there make the mindes of men meere agents, but pati∣ents rather in the perpetrating of any vngodly actions; be∣cause, those their minds, are said to be enticed and led, which necessarily importeth thus much at the least: Namely, (sith those their minds are said to be inticed, and led) necessarily there must (in euery such sinfull action) be some other prima∣rie agent (besides their said mindes themselues) which so inticeth, and leadeth men captiues: as also, a conuenient meanes with some proportionall obiect, whereby they may so be inticed and led vnto euil. Now then (to speake proper∣ly and pertinently) the diuell himselfe is that primarie agent: who, by sundrie externall occurrents (as it were by most apt and conuenient meanes thereunto) doth accidentally in∣tangle mens minds: that so (their said minds being former∣ly captiuated by their proper concupiscence) he might the more easily intice, and leade them captiues to all manner of euill. For so Iames speaks plainly in the forenamed Scripture, thus: Let no man say (when he is tempted) I am tempted of God, for God tempteth no man: but euery man is tempted, when he is drawne away by his proper concupiscence. Where ye Apostle(yousee)spea∣keth purposely of three concurring together in euery tempta∣tion. Namely, the primary tempter, I meane ye diuel; the party tempted, that is, mans mind; & the outward obiect, as  con∣uenient meanes whereby the temptation it selfe is throughly effected: namely yt in-bred concupiscence which couertly lur¦keth in euery mans nature, as it were a quicke sparke vnder ashes. Which said cōcupiscence (hauing apt matter outward∣ly offered vnto it) will quickly be kindled, especially, if ye di∣uel with his bellowes but blow vp the same. A most liuely re∣presentation
presentation here of we may haue in the first fall of mankind wherein Gen. 3.1. Wisd. 1.24. 2 Cor. 11.3. the diuell himselfe was the primarie tempter,Gen. 3.1. 1 Tim. 2.14. our Grandmother Eue she was the partie tempted; and her Gen. 3.6. in∣herent concupiscence, the very meanes whereby the temp∣tation it selfe was effected. Which her concupiscence (how∣soeuer the same was Gen. 1.27. Eph. 4.24. absolutely vpright and sound before,) yet then (hauing a proportionall obiect outwardly and con∣ueniently applied vnto it, (the Gen. 3.4.5.6. apple I meane which was good for meate, and pleasant in sight) her said concupiscence (being eftsoones blowne vpGen. 3.1.4.5 by the bewitching bellowes of Satans inticing blast) was quickly inflamed and kindled in euill. And therefore (the premisses rightly respected) I both dare, and may as boldly asscribe the pollutions of our minds and bodies (concerning religion and manners) to such care∣lesse entercourse of trafficking with the corruptions and cu∣stomes of forreine countries; as I formerly auouched the im∣moderate swilling in of hote wines, with other strong drinks, to be the very procuring cause of many pernicious diseases in the bodies of men. Capn. Which waies Sir, I beséech you? Hydr. Dost thou aske me which waies, or by what means such carelesse entercourse of trafficke with forreine nations, might be any occasion of polluting both bodie and minde? If I should likewise demand of thee now, which way, or by what meanes the wise King Salomon became such a wicked idolater: wouldest thou not tell me straight way, that it vn∣doubtedly came so to passe, by his conuersing and wedding with wicked idolatrous nations? Capn. That would I presently do, and you may not de∣nie it your selfe: because the word of our God 1 King. 11.1.2.3 4.5.6.7.8. auoucheth so much. Hydr. And doth not the same word of God tell thee in like sort, that Eccle. 13.1. all such as handle pitch shall be defiled with pitch? And therefore the good people of God are precise∣ly charged Ier. 51.8.9. Reue. 14.8.9. and 18.3.4. to go out forthwith from Babylons beastly so∣cietie, for feare of partaking with Babylons beastly sinnes.
If good mens timely departure from Babylons beastly socie∣tie, be deemed a very good meanes to deliuer their bodies and soules from Babylons beastly sinnes: who seeth not then, but that their vntimely and carelesse conuersing with Baby∣lons societie, must needs be some vrgent occasion of a con∣tagious communicating with Babylons beastly coruptions? Yea and this so much the rather, by how much the feeble na∣ture of sinfull man, is more wilfully prone to perpetrate whatsoeuer noysome pollutions, then warily prest to parti∣cipate with holy and wholsome preseruations. Capn. Illustrate this one point (I beséech you) with some apparent and plaine demonstrations of truth. Hydr. With all my heart. But first, let me here aske thee, whether thou thy selfe dost not very plainly perceiue (in thy proper experience) too too many of our English mens minds most fearefully estranged from the Apostolike primi∣tiue sinceritie: and their bodies withall, very monstrously transformed from their former ancient simplicity? Capn. Yes vndoubtedly. I haue eftsoones experimen∣ted the truth hereof, in a daily, and due obseruation of their present estates: and withall, I haue wondred greatly there∣at, considering the sincere and plentifull preaching of the gracious Gospell among vs. Hydr. No maruell hereof at all. For howsoeuer the sa∣cred word of our God hath a glorious passage among vs, that it might be 2. Cor. 2.16. A sauour of life vnto life in such as beleeue, or a sa∣uour of death vnto death in so many as perish, and is also 2. Cor. 2.14.15. in ei∣ther of both a sweete sauour to God: yet surely (such is the waywardnesse of mens wicked nature) we commonly do take a much more delight in an apish inuention of mens wic∣ked actionsEsa. 3.16. then in an holy meditation of wholsome admo∣nitions. And therefore, like as lewd words 1. Cor. 15.33 Iere. 44.16.17. are a most mis∣chieuous meanes to corrupt good manners: so likewise, li∣centious manners, they are very contagious occasions to Psal. 106.34 35. contaminate the minds of men with all manner of outragi∣ous maladies. Whereupon the Apostle precisely commands
men 1. Thes. 5 22. to abstaine from all appearance of euill. Capn. All this I fréely confesse: but what inferre you hereof? Hydr. This I inferre: namely, the very maine reason it selfe, confuting that their former most friuolous wondering at the contagious corruption of mens minds and bodies: especially in this age of ours, wherein the glorious Gospel is so sincerely and so freely preached among vs. For (preter∣mitting herein the vnsearchable purpose of God, who vseth eftsoones to punish one sinne with another) what other more pregnant reason may be rendred for this, then our care∣lesse entercourse of trafficking with the contagious corrup∣tions, and customes of forreine nations? And (to explane my speech in more particular manner) from whence cometh it now to passe, that so many of our English-mens minds are thus terriblie Turkished with Mahometan trumperies; thus rufully Romanized with superstitious relickes; thus trea∣cherously Italianized with sundry antichristian toyes; thus spitefully Spanished with superfluous pride; thus fearefully Frenchized with filthy prostitutions; thus fantastically Flan∣derized with flaring net-works to catch English fooles; thus huffingly Hollandized with ruffian-like loome-workes, and other like Ladified fooleries; thus greedily Germandized with a most gluttenous manner of gormandizing; thus des∣perately Danished with a swine-like swilling and quaffing; thus sculkingly Scotized with Machiauillian proiects; thus inconstantly Englished with euery new fantasticall foolerie; thus industriously Indianized with the intoxicating filthie fumes of Tobacco, and what not besides? From whence (I pray thee) do all these, and sundry such other prodigious pol∣lutions of mind and bodie proceede, but from an inconside∣rate conuersing with the contagious corruptions, and cu∣stomes of those the forenamed countries? According to the Italian prouerbe which pourtrayeth forth an English-man, thus: Englese Italienato, e v diabolo icarnato: An English man Italienate, is a very diuell incarnate.
Capn. And doth their onely conuersing with those the forenamed forreine countries, procure such filthie polluti∣ons of bodie and mind? Hydr. It is not simply their conuersing with any those forreine countries themselues: but their communicating ra∣ther with the in-bred corruptions, and contagious customes of those seuerall countries, tha poysoneth both, with such filthy pollutions. Capn. You conclude then, that our countrie men may safely conuerse with those countries themselues, all the while they be carefully circumspect of their owne proper cariage, and resolutely purposed not to participate (in any respect) with the contagious corruptions of those selfesame countries. Hydr. Very true. But how difficult a matter it is for mans nature (so vniuersally polluted) to escape the pollutions themselues, each one may perceiue in his proper experience, and find it most apparently demonstrated by this ordinarie experiment: Namely, let a sweete christall streame but haue it accustomed course through the midst of a foule filthie channell, and then tell me how long that streame it selfe will soundly retaine his inherent sweetnesse or clearenesse. Now then, mans corrupted nature (being neither inherently sweet, nor essentially cleare in it selfe) if it be carelesly permitted (hand ouer head) to haue an ordinarie entercourse of traffic∣king with corrupt and contagious countries, as it were in a foule filthie channell, the very mind it selfe will be as vnable to withstand the pernicious customes of those contagious countries, as the very bodie of man (accustomably conuer∣sing in pestilentiall places) is vnfit to resist the pestilentiall infections of those selfesame places. For a further proofe of this point, let other Christian policie; or the King his prero∣gatiue royall; or the force of feare and bloudie massacres, but once proclaime a finall restraint, or perpetually forestall the accustomed course and recourse for trafficke to any the fore∣named Babels of beastly confusions, and thou shalt plainely
perceiue by the very sequele therof, how farre forth the con∣tagion it selfe hath hitherto possessed those passengers minds. For the Merchants of the earth (making erst their ordinary trafficke, in the bowels and bellie of those beastly Babels) will eftsoones beginne very greeuously to bemoane them∣selues, by reason of such a finall restraint from those their be∣loued Babels of beastly confusions; because no man may now Reuel▪ 18.11.12.13.14.15.16.17.18.19. buy of their wares any more: Their glittring wares (I meane) of gold, of siluer, of precious stones, and pearles: their wares of fine linnen, of purple, of silke, of scarlet, and all manner of Thyne wood; their wares of all vessels of yuorie, and of all vessels of precious wood; their wares of brasse, of yron, and of marble; their wares of cinamon of odours, of oyntments, of frankensence, of wine, of oyle, of fine floure, and of wheate; their wares of beasts, of sheepe, of horses, of chariots, of seruants▪ of the very soules of men: yea and of the apples (I meane, the filthie Tobacco fumes) which their very soules and minds so earnestly affected, and lusted after. All these are departed from them; and all other things else which were fat and excellent are quite departed from them, so as they can find them no more. The Merchants of these (I say) which were made (by such trafficke) exceedingly rich, will stand afarre off and crie: Alas, alas, that great Babel of beastly confusions, which was formerly apparelled in fine linnen and purple, and scarlet; and gilded with great and glo∣rious riches; as of gold, of precious stones▪ and of pearles; is now come to a wofull and sodaine desolation. And euerie ship-maister, and all the people that occupie ships, and ship∣men, and whosoeuer do vsually trauaile vpon the Seas, shall stand afar off & crie out, saying: What Citie was euer like to this our beloued great Babel for trafficke? Yea, they will e∣uen cast dust on their heads, and with weeping and wayling will crie out and say: Alas▪ alas for this our beloued Babel, wherein were made rich all such as had ships on the Sea, by meanes of her costly trafficke: for (by that former finall re∣straint) shee is now in one houre, made vtterly desolate. Now
then, all these (with sundrie such other their horrible out-cries, arising vpon that former finall restraint for trafficking any further with forreine countries) do very plainly purport to the world, that both bodies and minds haue heretofore bene filthily polluted with the contagious corruptions and customes of those forreine countries. Capn. They pretend (I confesse) very probable pre∣sumptions. But what? is there none other remedie else for the timely redresse of this mischiefe, but the onely perpe∣tuall, and finall restraint of trafficking with them any fur∣ther? Hydr. God forbid the case should consist of such a despe∣rate condition. Capn. What then (as you your selfe conceiue of the mat∣ter) may be the safest course to be taken herein? Hydr. Attend with patience, and I will tell thee my pro∣per thoughts. Capn. I do Sir: and therefore, I pray you procéede. Hydr. This then it is. When I had somewhat more seri∣ously bethought me hereof (though somewhat too late) and with great griefe of heart obserued these matters, as well concerning our Church, as Commonwealth, euen thereupon I met with (as I verily imagined) a very fit meanes for the timely forestalling of all those the forenamed mischiefes: the which also I will here propound to the serious consideration of thy selfe, and all other besides. Not because I do once i∣magine, that either thou or they may possibly be ignorant of it, being a point so frequent and popular in publike policy: but rather, that you all may ioyntly record, and mutually re∣cognize with me that selfesame thing which cannot possibly become vnpleasant to any; being (in very truth) approued of all, and vniuersally conuenient for the good estate of our Church and Countrey. Capn. Declare the same then, without any further de∣lay. Hydr. I will. Aristotle that diuine Philosopher, a man in
all his inuentions very excellent, especially, in framing a Commonweale, most admirable: he deemeth young men vt∣terly vnmeete to bee ouertimely instructed (much lesse im∣ployed) in matters of ciuill policie. And moreouer, for so much as (by reason of their tender yeares) the humours of yong men are too too turbulent and headie, and their af∣fections ouer easily caried away, he alloweth them no con∣uersaion at all with seruants, much lese with strangers, of whom (for the slendernesse of their present iudgements) they might rather learne that which may fearefully corrupt both nature and manners, then what would any way better their minds in either of both. Capn. To what purpose propound you this opinion of Aristotle? Hydr. To a very good purpose. For by this one precept of his, we may clearely collect, what course (in this case) is most conuenient to be taken with Youths, more especially with such as are Students, as also with so many besides, as (by reason of their worthes) should seriously giue ouer them∣selues to the studie of learning for publicke good. Capn. What course, I beséech you? Hydr. Euen this which here followeth now: Namely, that no forreine recourse be permitted to any (especially the younger sort) before they be fully come to their ripe, and well stayed yeares. Capn. And why so, I pray you? Hydr. Because then (their humours being formerly set∣led) the stayednesse of those their said humours will cause the perturbations of the mind to be calmed: so as (from the orderly asswaging of both) there must necessarily proceed a maturitie, and ripenesse in iudgement. Because then they can more easily discerne what is sound in opinion, as also what is honest and meete in manners: being then also the better enabled (with a more constant resolution) to pursue, and to follow especially that which is good. Capn. If this caution were carefully obserued in the
ordinarie education of Youths, what publicke commoditie would follow thereof? Hydr. Very admirable and sundry commodities would grow from the same. For by this meanes, it would vndoub∣tedly come to passe, that neither our Church would be dila∣cerated and disquieted with so many hereticall opinions; our Weale publicke deformed with so great and grieuous cor∣ruptions, nor the profession of Physicke so amazed (as eft∣soones it is) at the often beholding of such hideous monsters (to vse Auerroes his words) in many diseases. Capn. What Sir? will you now play the Puritane, in presuming thus proudly to propound new platformes concerning Ecclesiasticall and Ciuill policie? Hydr. That was and is the furthest end of my thought. For seeing as well heresies in Religion, as corruptions in manners are authentically referred to the seueral Magistrates of Church and Commonweale, by them to be plucked vp by the rootes; and seeing moreouer (so much as lieth in them) they haue hitherto very well and warily weeded them out in either of both: it neuer was, nor is now my meaning so po∣lypragmatically to thrust forth my sickle into those their sin∣cerely designed haruests, nor to entermeddle at all with any their lawfully propounded proiects. Onely (as a well-willer to either of both) I do here purpose (for the present) to put downe and declare what dangerous discommodities in Phy∣sicke, as also, what pernicious occurrents to our physicall me∣thods of curing diseases, are too too perniciously brought home and procured from forreine trauell: while we haue o∣uercarelesly entertained a strange kind of curing, together with many strange and vncooth medicines neuer heard of before; yea and those not so sorcible to helpe the diseased, as to infeeble and throw downe the sound constitutions: and which also we do vse so greedily (I will not say want only) quite contrary to our countries climate, the naturall consti∣tution of our country bodies, the ineuitable rules of all phy∣sicall reason, and the long approued custome of all our wise Ancestors.
Capn. Pretermitting (for the present) your physicall methods for curing, our naturall constitutions, our Coun∣tries climate, your physicall rules, as also our Ancestors long approued customes, as matters beyond mine element: do tell mee (I pray you) what one kinde of hurtfull traf∣ficke you are able to name, that is so carelesly transported from forreine countries? Hydr. What one, sayest thou? Alas man, what sundry sorts of poysonsome drugs could I not soundly challenge that way, if time would permit, and such an vnwonted chal∣lenge might possibly preuaile against the setled conceipts of headstrong people? Howbeit, among many things, which (without either profite, or due regard) are needlesly (yet daily) brought home by certaine vicious and wilde disposi∣tions from the farthest India, surely nothing (in my conceipt) could be deuised more apt, and more fit to ouerthrow quite the solide strength of our bodies, nor more prompt and more readie to obscure and to darken the faculties of our minds, then this filthie fume of Tobacco, whereof I purpose here chiefly to speke. In drinking also whereof, too too many do leade a smokie life, breathing nought foorth but smoking fumes: vntill (by vntimely deaths) they do fearefully fore∣stall the timely establishment of an honourable and anci∣ent age. Capn. . Haec Helna pro qua digla∣diabantur. vide Iliad. 3.This then (I perceiue) is the onely faire Helena for whose swéete sake now, a most bloudy bickering must be bladed betwéene vs. But yet heare good Sir, I beséech you. This vnderhand particularizing of mens proper per∣sons, as also, this so couert a singling forth of one particu∣lar commoditie from all the rest, they are plaine demon∣strations, that your preposterous splene doth more dispite∣fully swell against my tender young yeares and purposed trafficke, then desirously séeke to asswage any soundly sup∣posed corruptions from forreine countries. Hydr. And why so, I pray thee Capnistus? Capn. First, because you so boldly auouch some such
vainly imagined venime, to be ouercarelesly conuayed from out of the farthest India into this our English Iland, by vicious and wilde dispositions. Secondly (for that a∣mong those your manifold supposed corruptions) you touch onely Tobacco by name, as that onely Troian horse-bellie from whence all forreine filthinesse (as your selfe very soundly surmize) doth too too infectiously ouerflow this Iland of ours. Hydr. I may safely sweare for hauing a thought or pur∣pose, either to point at any mans person, or once to pursue his particular trafficke: but onely to insist vpon matters for pub∣licke good. Howbeit, seeing this thy particular applica∣tion, enforceth here some further explication, I will there∣fore deliuer my mind in plainer termes touching either of both. For the first, who knoweth not of old, that this thy inten∣ded Tobacco, was primarily posted ouer from West India to England, by a vicious, a vaine, and a wilde disposition? that I say no more. And who seeth not likewise, that the same now (for the most part) is very vainly entertained in England, by as vicious, as vaine, and wilder dispositions, if wilder may be? For tell me (I pray thee) what more vicious disposition then that, which so excessiuely taketh Tobacco, of very pur∣pose to inflame his excessiue and vicious affections? Or what more vaine disposition then that, which so insatiably swallo∣weth the filthie fume of Tobacco, as an ordinarie shooing∣horne, to pull on more insatiably, an aboundance of wine, and strong drinke? Briefly what more vicious, more vaine, or more wilde dispositions may possibly be then those our carousing companions, who so viciously, so vainely, and so wildly do vse the inward taking of filthie Tobacco fumes, as an intoxicating poyson to make themselues, and other their swaggering associates most dangerously wilde and mad with the venimous and deadly contagion thereof? Lo (Capni∣stus) these onely considerations (not thy particular person) did make me so peremptorily to terme those our carelesse
Tobacco triflers, with that proportionable title of vicious, vaine, and wild dispositions. So as none but such as cannot distinguish betweene the men and the matter it selfe, may iustly be offended therewith. Neither did I precisely or purposely ayme at any one par∣ticular trafficke, appertayning more properly vnto thine owne selfe: but (intending onely to propound and declare what dangerous discommodities in physicke are forcibly of∣fred to our orderly method of Curing, through an vnorder∣ly transporting of sundry pernicious drugs into this poore I∣land of ours from forreine countries) I made (for further proofe of this point) a speciall choyce to intreate of Tobacco alone in stead of the rest: of very purpose to bridle our vn∣bridled and bewitched Tobacconists from tampring any fur∣ther therewith. Whose wilfull errours and vicious customes, though (as I could heartily wish) I cannot throughly re∣claime and correct; yet giue me leaue (at this present I pray thee) to lay them wide open to the view of the world: that so our Tobacconists themselues may perceiue (if the blind obscu∣ritie of their braines, procured from their filthie Tobacco fume will giue them leaue) how perniciously they dispose of their owne proper health, while they so insatiably sucke in (by the conduite of their tippling Tobacco pipe) a venimous matter enemie to mans nature, and so inconsiderately enter∣taine that filthie noysome fume into the treasurie of their temporall life. Capn. If you intend to maintaine this idle talke, for an absolute truth: you may be sure to haue moe fists then your owne about your pate. Hydr. Yea Capnistus, I do looke for many gaine sayers herein, and some peraduenture of the learneder sort. How∣beit, I leaue all men that way to their owne proper iudge∣ment, all the while they worke no preiudice to this my opi∣nion; and so long as mine owne selfe may with the same good leaue dissent from them, by the which leaue they hold and maintaine a contrarie conceipt from me, I will not say
from the truth it selfe. Capn. But Sir, howsoeuer you séeme to pretend ma∣ny plausible pretences in open spéech, men may yet suspect that you harbour some other shrewd purpose in your secret heart. Hydr. Men (if they please) may imagine many curious castles beyond the Moone, without either matter or forme at all. Howbeit I protest, not to speake purposely to the pre∣iudice of any mans person: but let euery man enioy his pro∣per opinion for me. Neither yet is this my speech herein vn∣dertaken for the priuate respect of painefull Physitions; (which wicked imagination, some Christopher of all con∣ceipts may peraduenture very viciously vent foorth against my good meaning:) but rather that I might more freely, and more ingeniously expresse my whole mind in this matter, and shew thee more plainly how I am perswaded in consci∣ence concerning the same. Capn. Well then, this your pretended purpose being soundly performed, I doubt not but each man may reape a singular profite thereby. Hydr. It were (in very deede) to be wished so: although yet I can hardly be perswaded it will be so. For Plato (in his booke Plat. in Gorg intituled Gorgias) doth say there are two holes in mens minds, by meanes whereof they cannot soundly con∣taine the knowledge of good things; to wit, forgetfulnesse, and misbeleefe. Capn. How do those two holes hinder their apprehen∣sion of good things? Hydr. After a very pestiferous manner; if thou obserue it well. For by the first (I meane by forgetfulnesse) the noble vertue experience (locked vp long since in our memorie) is eftsoones lost: and by the other (namely by misbeleefe) that stedfast perswasion whereby we should firmely resolue our selues vpon the authenticall authority and faith of our teachers, is confusedly scattered. Both of these hurtfull holes, I would haue surely shut vp in thy selfe, and so many besides
as desire to reape any benefite by this my present discourse. Capn. Let other men deale as they list; I (for mine owne part) will carefully sée them most soundly shut vp in my selfe: and therefore procéede and spare not to speake what you please, concerning the smoke of Tobacco. Hydr. With very good will: wherein also I purpose to propound, and prosecute this following order. First (being now to speake generally of the nature of smoke) I will briefly and plainly shew thee what smoke is: and how the same is distinguished from vapour and exhalation. Secondly, how many kinds of smoke there are: and from what kinde of matter each one is drawne. And lastly, I will shew thee what inconuenience and hurt the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, doth dangerously effect in the bodies of men. Hydr. A most excellent order, no doubt: procéede there∣fore (I beséech you) first, in shewing me generally what smoke is. Hydr. Content. Wherein, marke this well, that almost all kinds of combustible matter, do send foorth either smoke, vapour, or exhalation extracted from thence by the heate of the fire. The which three kinds of matters are also distin∣guished one from another, in respect either of their efficient; or of their matter; or of their effect at least. For the better vn∣derstanding whereof, I thinke it best (in this place) to define them all seuerally, appointing to euery of them his owne particular limits and bounds. Capn. Go to then, without any further delay. Hydr. Aristotle (in the booke of his Meteors) doth Arist. in Meter. lib. 4. ap. 1. di∣stinguish them all in this sort. First, he defineth smoke to be the generall and common extraction of drinesse and moi∣stures together, being wrought by the heate of a more vehe∣ment fier: which notwithstanding, doth neither moisten, nor bedeaw, but rather infecteth with a blacke colour such things as are smoked. In which definition, smoke (thou maist see) respecting the matter thereof, is said to be a com∣mon extraction of drought and of moisture together. In
respect of the efficient, it is said to be drawne out by a more vehement fire. And in regard of the effect, it is said to be died with a blacke colour, but yet not to moisten it at all. Capn. Sir, by that which is hitherto spoken, I do plain∣ly perceiue what smoke is; but how distinguish you the same from vapour and exhalation? Hydr. Euen by those three former respects; namely, by the efficient, the matter, and the effect: as the comparison of smoake it selfe with those other two, will make more ma∣nifest. Capn. Why, what thing is vapour I pray you? Hydr. Aristotle (in his Arist. in Meter. lib. 4. cap. 1. forenamed booke) defineth va∣pour to be a separation extracted (by a vehement heate) from water, and turned into aire and spirit: which can make moist, but giue no colour at all. Capn. And what is exhalation? Hydr. The said Aristotle defineth exhalation or breath, to be a separation of moisture alone, wrought by a small heate, which (in continuance of time) doth draw it forth: and which also is turned into aire, and not into a spirit; neither yet doth it giue any colour or moisture. Capn. Hauing succinctly shewed me what smoke, va∣pour, and exhalation is: now tell me (I pray you) wherein they accord, and how they do differ. Hydr. I will. First therefore, smoke and vapour they ioyntly accord (thou maist see) in their proper efficient cause, for both of them are wrought by a vehement heate, whereas exhalation is effected by a very small heate. Againe (in re∣spect of their matter) smoke doth differ from vapour, and exhalation both: for so much as smoke is the extraction of moisture and drought together, whereas vapour and exha∣lation they are onely but the extraction of moisture. Againe (in regard of the effect) smoke altogether varieth from va∣pour, because smoke is neither resolued into aire, not yet into spirit, neither doth it moisten at all; both which are ef∣fected by vapour. Againe, smoke and exhalation (in their
effect) do partly differ; for that smoke coloureth, which the other doth not: and partly they accord in this, that neither of them both doth moisten. Againe, vapour (concerning the ef∣fect) seemeth both to differ from exhalation, and to accord with the same. For, in that vapour turneth vnto a spirit, and moisteneth also, therein it differeth: but whereas it is some∣times turned to aire, therein it accordeth with exhalation. By all the premisses then thou maist plainly perceiue wherein smoke accordeth with vapour and exhalation: and wherein also it differeth from either of both. Capn. Very true as you say, if men may confidently credite Philosophie. Hydr. Why not credite the same? Especially, it being so consideratly determined by that prince of Philosophers, who both had a principall illumination this way from the heauen∣ly Philosopher himselfe; and withall, the ioynt approbation of all succeeding Philosophers: as may very plainly appeare by the approued consonancie which this his opinion hldeth with the originall words put downe in the sacred Scripture. Capn. Shew me succinctly this your supposed conso∣nancie. Hydr. With very good will. Hebr. , id est, fumanit, infumauit, fu∣mu emisit. Graec. . id est, fumus, ex furuo colore sic dictus. First therefore (concerning the first word, viz. smoke) the Hebrewes they vse the word gnaschan, arising from the radicall verbe gnaschan: which sig∣nifieth to fume, to vapour, or send forth smoke. The Greci∣ans, they haue the word capnos, that is, a fume, a vapour, or smoke. The Latines haue famus, which we commonly call smoke: that is to say, a blacke vapour extracted from fire, taking it owne name from a fornace colour, and besmearing whatsoeuer it fumeth vpon. And as this is the very true Etymon of the word smoke it selfe, so surely the sacred Scriptures, they do accordingly ob∣serue the same. As for example: When the Lord had assured Abraham of the Amorites countrey in the fourth generation following: the holy Ghost there affirmeth, that, when the Sunne went downe there was a fearefull darkenesse. Gene. 15.17. For (saith
the Hebrew) vehine thannur gnaschan; the Septuagint saith,. Et ecce fuman∣tem furnum. clibanos capnizomenos; the Latine saith, & ecce fumantem fur∣num: that is (saith the English) and, behold a smoking fornace. This place (thou maist see) is directly plaine for our matter propounded. Againe, when the Lord in mount Sinai, gaue the Law to his people, it is there said, that mount Sinai was all on a smoke, because the Lord came downe vpon it in fire.Exod. 19.18. . Et ascendebat fumus eius. And (saith the He∣brew) Vaiagnal gneschano; saith the Septuagint, Hosei capnos ca∣minou: saith the Latine, & ascendebat fumus eius; that is (saith our English) and lo, the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a fierie fornace. In this place likewise thou seest an appro∣ued consonancie concerning this point in question. In like manner, when Ioshuah had set the Citie of Hai on fire, It is said, that the men of Hai looked backe and saw it: Iosh. 8.20. . Et ascenderet fumus ciuita∣tis. He∣brew, Vehine gnalah gnaschan; ye Septuagint, et heoroun tòn capnón; the Latine hath, & ascenderet fumus ciuitatis: that is (saith our English) and lo, the smoke of the Citie ascended vp vnto hea∣uen. In all these, and Psal. 74.1. and 75.5. and 104.5. and 144.5. sundrie such other places besides, the holy Ghost (thou maist see) doth not onely obserue the very Etymon of the word (smoke) but (which more is) he accor∣deth clearely with that which Aristotle hath set downe before concerning the very true nature of smoke: namely, that it is an extraction of drinesse and moistnesse together from some fierie combustible matter, through the heate of a vehe∣ment fire; that it is of a darke or sootie aspect; and that it be∣smeareth with a blacke or duskish colour, whatsoeuer is fu∣med therewith. Hereunto also accordeth the ioynt approbation of all the succeeding Philosophers, holding smoke to be hot and drie▪ and answerable in all things to that which was formerly spo∣ken concerning the same. For (saith Ouid. Meta. Ouid.) — Calidóque inuoluitur vndique fumo. Also Virgil saith thus, Virg. Ae∣neid. 2. Mistóque vn∣dantem puluere fumum. In like manner saith Cicero thus,Cic. in Piso∣nem. Pau∣lisper stetimus in illo ganearum tuarum nidore, atque fumo: and so all the rest. Seeing therefore we haue thus, not only the ioynt
approbation and mutuall consent of all succeeding Philoso∣phers; but (which more is) the authenticall consonancie of sacred Scriptures concurring fully with that which Aristotle putteth downe in his Meteors, concerning the efficient, the matter, and the effect of smoke: Let this fully suffice for thy full satisfaction that way. Capn. It giueth me (Sir, I assure you) sufficient con∣tent, and therefore procéede now to the word vapour, I pray you. Hydr. With very good will. And therefore, herein ob∣serue (in like manner) that (for that which we call vapour) the Hebrewes they haue  Cognationem habet cum . i. aurae, vapor. edh, that is, a vapour or very thinne fume. It hath a marullous affinitie with another word called udh: that is, a fire-brand, an adustion, or burning, a peece of wood made blacke by adustion. The Grecians they haue Gen. 2.6. . atmòs, that is, a vapour or aire. The Latines they haue vapour: that is to say in our English tongue, a waterie or earthy humour, exte∣nuated or thinned: the breath or vapour of the seas, or the earth. Or, It is a very thinne humour ascending vp by adu∣stion, and resolued into a waterie cloud, being (by nature) moist and cold. According to that in Genesis saying, Gen. 2.6. . Hebr. veidh; Septuagint; pêgê, Lat. vapour: that is in English, And a vapour ascended vp from the earth, and watered all the earth. A∣gaine, it is said in Iob, Iob. 36.27. . ad vaporem cius. that when God restraineth the drops of water, the raine poureth downe. Hebr. leidho, Graec. eis nephe∣leen, Lat. ad vaporem: that is in English, by the vapour thereof. In these two places, the holy Ghost (thou seest) doth not onely obserue the very true Etymon of the word vapour it selfe, but doth likewise very fitly accord to that definition thereof which was formerly put downe by Aristotle; name∣ly, that vapour is a separation extracted (by a vehement heate) from water, and so turned into aire or spirit; which also can moisten, but giue no colour at all, being (by nature) cold and moist. Neither is the said vapour Iohan. Velcu∣rio. in Cōment. lib. 3. cap. 5. any inflammable impression as exhalation is: because (being but a moist and waterie meteor) it cannot possibly be set on fire, nor caried
beyond the middle region of the aire: although notwith∣standing (being so eleuated) it may be thickened and made constringent. And hereunto also, we haue the ioynt approbation of all the succeeding Philosophers. For saith Ouid, Ouid. Meta∣mor lib. 1. Vapor humidus omnes, —Res creat, & discors concordi foetibus apta est. How∣beit this word, vapour, is sometime put downe for heate, as witnesseth Columella saying, Colum. lib. 5. cap. 10. Minus{que} vaporis aestate per angu∣stum os penetret. And so likewise saith Virgil, Virg. Ae∣neid. lib. 5. Lentusque cari∣nas — est vapor, & toto descendit copore pestis. And so like∣wise the rest of that sort. Seeing therefore we haue thus, not onely the ioynt approbation of all succeeding Philosophers, but (which more is by much) the authenticall consent of the sacred Scriptures, euen mutually concurring with that which Aristotle himselfe hath formerly put downe concerning the word, vapour, let this therefore (for the present) suffice for that point. Capn. It fully sufficeth, and therefore procéed now (in like manner) to the word exhalation I pray you. Hydr. With all my heart. Wherein obserue (as before) that (for that which we call exhalation) the Hebrewes they haue the  ex.  word mappach, that is, a sufflation, an aire, or a breath. It comes of the radicall verbe, naphach, which properly sig∣nifieth to blow, to breathe, to send forth an aire from out of the mouth. It hath a maruellous affinitie also with poach,Cognationem habet cum  that is, to breathe againe, to breathe forth: and is properly spoken of the aire of the day. The Grecians, they call it . apophora, that is, an exhalation, or an expiration. The Latines they haue exhalatio, that is, a breathing, or drawing forth of breath. By all which it is apparently euident, that exhalation is a cer∣taine thinne terrestriall spirit, which (by reason of a vehe∣ment heate) is exhaled, and drawne from out of the earth, and caried about in the aire; being (by nature) hot and drie: and therefore very apt to be kindled or set on fire; a thing quite contrarie to vapour, as I told thee euen now. Whereunto accordeth that in Iob, who saith, that the hope
of the wicked shall faile, their refuge shall perish: and their hope is  mappach naphesh. Graec.. apóleia, Latine, exhalatio, vel expira∣tio animae, that is, as the exhalation, or the expiration of life: I meane, a very vaine hope, or an exceeding sorrow of mind. Thus then thou maist here plainly perceiue the currant con∣sent of sacred Scriptures concerning the Etymon also of this word exhalation. Neither is there wanting herein the ioynt approbation of all the succeeding Philosophers: according to that which Pli∣nie speakes of it thus, Plin. lib. 31. cap. 3. Certior multò nebulosa exhalatio est. A∣gaine Cicero accordeth thereunto Cicer. 1. Tuscul. saying thus. Quod & hu∣midum, & caliginosum est, propter exhalationes terrae. And so likewise the rest. Seeing therefore we haue herein, not onely the authenticall consent of all succeeding Philosophers, but likewise the full approbation of sacred Scriptures concer∣ning the true Etymon, the nature, the efficient, the matter, as also the seueral effects of these three different words, I meane, of smoke, of vapour, and of exhalation: thou maist now more apparently perceiue then euer before, wherein smoke accordeth with vapour and exhalation, and wherein also it differeth from either of both. Capn. Very true as you say, but I pray you procéed. Hydr. These things then being thus briefly determined, and set downe (as thou seest) by their seuerall names and dif∣ferences: let vs here now put vapour and exhalation apart for the present, as nothing appertaining to our purpose in∣tended; and consider (in like sort) of the seuerall kinds of smoke; that (by the meanes thereof) we may haue a readie accesse to the rest. Capn. Why Sir, how many kinds of smoke are there? Hydr. Aristotle (in that Arist. Mete. lib. 4. cap. 1. his forenamed booke and Chapter) deuideth smoke into three seuerall kinds: and di∣stinguisheth them moreouer, in an especiall respect of those seuerall matters from whence they are drawne. Namely, in∣to fume, fulîgo, and Nidor.
Capn. What saith he first of fume? Hydr. He defineth fume, to be a terrestriall exhalation extenuated;. which the Hebrewes call nasi, the Grecians atmós: that is, a vapour or fume of the earth. The Frenchmen they call it vapeur, exhalation, & fumée montant de la terre en haut: that is, a vapour, exhalation, or fume arising from some terrestriall or earthie substance. More especially (saith Aristo∣tle) from some wooddie matter: whereunto also he referreth bones, haires, hearbes, and such like. All which said seue∣rall matters, notwithstanding they haue no one name com∣mon to euerie of them, yet are they ioyntly ranked in one and the selfesame kind, as witnesseth Empedocles, saying thus. Empedocles. Of same kind are both leaues, and haires, and pens of fethered Fowle; with scales of fishes, wherewith their strong bodies are couered. Capn. Empedocles (by your patience Sir) he had not chiefly a respect vnto any their supposed resemblance in matter, but vnto that rather which consisteth in the finall cause of those the forenamed seuerall things. Namely, that looke what end & vse there is of haires in creatures liuing vpon the drie land: the selfesame vse there is also of leaues in plants, of feathers in fowles, and of scales in fishes; be∣cause vnto euery of the forenamed creatures hath nature allotted those selfesame supplies, for their timely preserua∣tion and proper defence. Hydr. Very true as thou sayest. And yet (notwithstanding all this) it is not to be doubted but that Empedocles withall, doth euen secretly seeme (as it were) to point also at the earthie constitution of euery of these: which their said con∣stitution is an effectuall and a speciall furtherer of such con∣seruation. Capn. Well Sir, procéed to the other kinds of smoke, I beséech you. Hydr. The second kind of smoke he calleth fulîgo, that is, a vapouring earthie fume extracted by heate: and making
blacke the very beames of mens houses. Whereupon Quin∣tilian (describing a Student rethorically) doth tell vs directly, that Quintilian. vnto such a one, fuligo lucubrationum bibenda est, the ve∣ry smoke of the candle or lampe must be sucked vp: mea∣ning thereby, that a good Student must abide by his booke, and spend light after light for the timely attainment of lear∣ning. In like manner, Aulus Gellius (alluding directly to the besmearing nature of fuligo) very liuely setteth forth (by the same) the deceiptfull speeches of a subtile man, saying thus, Aulus Gel∣lius. Verborum, & argutiarum fuliginem ob oculos audientium fa∣cit: that is, He casteth a mist of words before the eies of his hearers. And as the witnesse of these men is a pregnant proofe for this point; so surely, the Hebrewes they haue a word very consonant thereunto. For that which we name fuligo, they call .fuligo. kitor. The Septuagint they terme it athrachia; the La∣tines, fuligo: that is, a vapouring fume, or subfumigation extracted from Frankinsence, Mirrhe, Aloes, or some such other aromaticall spices, or hearbes, being cast in the fire, as Exod. 30.1.39. Numb. 4.16. sal. 66.15. may plainly appeare by sundry places of Scripture. Wherein thou maist plainly perceiue, that Aristotle (in his former booke) doth fully accord with the infallible truth of God, by telling vs confidently, that fuligo is some such vapou∣ring exhalation as proceedeth from matter of fatty substance, especially from Frankinsence, Pitch, and such other like sub∣iects that are of a more fattie and pitchie nature. Capn. And what is the third kind of smoke? Hydr. .odor.The third kind of smoake (named Nidor) is that which the Hebrewes call riach, id est, odoratus est, olfecit; the Grecians call it osmein; the Latines odor, as appeareth euidently by Cant. 2.13. and 4.10. Ier. 48.11. sundrie places of Scripture put downe in the margent. All which do plainly approue vnto vs, that Nidor is the fume or sauour of any thing burned or broyled: according to the French-mens opinion, who call it Galica. L'odeur & flair de quelque chose qui est au feu, ou bruslé. The Italian he tearmes it Italica. odor di cosa arostica. The Germans they name it,Germanica.ein geschmunerezeren.
Againe, ein gescmack eines gebratnem oder geroesteren dings. And the Spaniard intitles it,Hispanica. odor suave del maniar. Whereun∣to also accordeth Virgil, saying, Virg. 12. Aeneid. Illi ingens barba reluxit, Nido∣rémque arbusta dedit. Properly it signifieth some smell of oylie-meates either boyled or broyled: according to that of Martiall, saying, Mar. lib. 1. Pasceris, & nigrae solo nidore culinae. By the premisses then it is very apparent, that Aristotle he was not deceiued at all, in defining Nidor to be such a vapouring fume as is vsually sent forth from some vnctuous and oylie matter. Capn. But Sir, you séeme herein (by your leaue) to confound fuligo and nidor, and so to make of them both but one kind of smoke: For, what difference (I pray you) be∣twéene a fattie and an oylie matter? Hydr. How a fattie and oylie matter do differ one from another, the said Aristotle (in the former place) very plainly declareth, Arist. Mete. lib. 4. cap. 1. affirming fatte to be more drie, and oyle more moist. Yea, and Galen in his booke Galen. in li∣bro Simplic. of Simples, as also Aristo∣tle in the forenamed Treatise, do ioyntly affirme the fattie fume called fuligo, to be more drie then that oylie exhalation which is commonly called nidor: for that it consisteth of an earthie substance, and retaineth withall some strength or force of the fier. Capn. Well then, let it be so as you say: but what do you obserue from this your thréefold difference of smoke it selfe? Hydr. Surely a very fit introduction to this our intended businesse. For, seeing fume is drawne (by the operation of heate) from those selfesame materiall substances, which (be∣ing by nature more earthie) will not, nor cannot be made to melt, but by reason of their drinesse (which is the nature of flame in an only losse of their coldnesse) are turned estsoones into fire: and seeing flame it selfe is nothing else but aire, or smoke set on fire and kindled, it must necessarily follow (thou seest) that therefore, fume, it hath a farre greater force to heate and drie, then either fuligo, or nidor hath.
Capn. The consequence I fréely acknowledge, but what inferre you hereof? Hydr. A very pregnant gradation to this our purposed discourse concerning the fierie pernicious fume of filthie To∣bacco. For these things being thus orderly set downe and de∣termined, according to the vndoubted truth of that naturall Philosophie which holdeth so apt a consonancie with the sa∣cred Scriptures themselues, how can it possibly seeme strange to any man liuing, that I should thus confidently affirme the fume of Tobacco (inwardly taken) to be very pernicious to the bodies of men? For, seeing all kind of smoke doth not onely drie vp the humors of the body, and inflame the inward parts, but also doth scorch and burne them vp, yea and con∣sume those radicall humours which should vphold and nou∣rish the spirits, and euen feedeth (as it were) vpon the heate both naturall, and externall, or accidentall: how should not the smoke of Tobacco (being a more forcible fume then ma∣ny of the rest) be much more able to drie vp the humours, to inflame the intrals, to scorch and consume the radicall hu∣mors, and so vtterly to extinguish the naturall heate it selfe? whereupon must necessarily ensue, not onely a most fearefull extraction of that the said naturall heate, but also of those the vitall spirits wherein are contained the vigor and power of the whole life it selfe. Capn. I perceiue no such necessary consequent (Sir) as your selfe would here séeme to conclude from the fume of Tobacco. Besides that, howsoeuersome nimble and exquisite wits (by such a voluntarie discourse as this of yours is) are sufficiently able to set a Vermilion die vpon whatsoe∣uer subiect or matter they please: yet (being at any time drawne to a more deliberate and succinct dispute) then a man may easily espie the manifold imperfections which co∣uertly lurke in their extrauagant and rouing collations. And therefore procéede now more syllogistically (I beséech you) in the orderly prosecution of this your intended dis∣course, without any such soaring aloft in the aire.
Hydr. With very good will. And therefore (to shut vp this my wide open hand a firme closed fist, and to reduce my succeeding discourse into the ordinarie limites of an artifi∣ciall argument) I may thus propound my first reason fyllo∣gistically: which also (being absolutely grounded vpon the premisses, as vpon a firme foundation and infallible ground) may (by no cunning opposition or crafie engine) be possibly ouerthrowne. Capn. Go to then, propound it (I pray you) whatsoe∣uer it be. Hydr. Attend then vnto it, for this it is.The first argu∣ment. That which consumeth the naturall heate, is very pernici∣ous to the bodies of men. But the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, consumeth the naturall heate. Therefore the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, is very pernicious to the bodies of men. Capn. Your maior proposition séemeth something ob∣scure in my apprehension: and therefore, shew me more plainly, how that which consumeth the naturall heate, is very pernicious to the bodies of men. Hydr. That may easily be proued by this following argu∣ment. That which causeth putrifaction and corruption both, is very pernicious vnto the bodie. But that which consumeth the naturall heate, causeth pu∣trifaction and corruption both. Therefore that which consumeth the naturall heate, is ve∣ry pernicious vnto the bodie. Capn. This argument (I must néeds confesse) is very probable, but what authoritie haue you (besides your selfe) for further confirmation thereof? Hydr. Why man, both Propositions (as thou heardest euen now) are firmly protected by the authoritie of Aristo∣tle, in that Arìst. Me. lib. 4. cap. 1. the forenamed booke and chapter. Where he a∣uoucheth confidently, that all kind of smoke doth drie vp
the humours, inflame the intrals; burne, scorch and consume those radicall humours which are the vpholders and nou∣rishers of the vitall parts; and extinguisheth their heate, both naturall, and externall, or accidentall: and therefore perni∣cious vnto the bodie. Capn. But how are you able to maintaine the Minor or second Proposition of your former Argument: namely, that the smoke of Tobacco consumeth the naturall heate? Hydr. If any make question thereof, the same may thus be performed. That which extinguisheth the naturall and radicall moi∣sture, consumeth the naturall heate. But the smoke of Tobacco extinguisheth the naturall and radicall moisture, and that in a very short time. Therefore, the smoke of Tobacco consumeth the naturall heate. Capn. How proue you the Proposition first: namely, that that which extinguisheth the naturall, and radicall moisture, consumeth the naturall heate? Hydr. I proue it very substantially and soundly, thus. That which consumeth the subiect, fountaine, and main∣tainer of the naturall heate, the same doth extinguish the naturall heate. But that which feedeth vpon the naturall and radicall moi∣sture, consumeth the subiect, fountaine, and maintai∣ner of the naturall heate. Therefore, that which feedeth vpon the naturall and radi∣call moisture, extinguisheth the naturall heate. Capn. Sir, I cannot contradict you in this: the proofe thereof is so pregnant. Notwithstanding, I do flatly deny the Assumption put downe in your former argument: namely, that the smoke of Tobacco extinguisheth the natu∣rall and radicall moisture, and that also in a very short time. Hydr. I confirme it more fully, by this syllogisme or rea∣son succeeding.
That which scorcheth and burneth the naturall or radicall moisture, that extinguisheth the naturall or radicall moisture. But all kind of smoake drawne immediatly from a matter hot and drie, scorcheth and burneth the naturall or ra∣dicall moisture. Therefore, all such kind of smoke (and so consequently the smoke of Tobacco drawne inwardly) extinguish∣eth the naturall, and radicall moisture. Capn. I cannot as yet conceiue the soundnesse of this your syllogisme. Hydr. Why man, the soundnesse of both propositions is apparently euident by that which was spoken before from Aristotle. Namely, hat Arist. in Meteor. lib. 4. cap. 1. all kind of smoke doth drie vp the humours, inflame the intrals, burne vp, scorch and con∣sume the naturall and radicall humours; feedeth vpon those the said humours which are the vpholders, maintainers, and nourishers of the vitall parts; yea and extinguisheth their heae both naturall, and accidentall. If all kind of smoke (drawne inwardly from a matter hote and drie doth worke such fearefull effects: then surely, the smoke of Tobacco (it being drawne inwardly from a matter more hote and die then many of the rest) doth much more effectually, and more speedily procure such fearefull effects. And so consequently, the fume of Tobacco taken inward, is very pernicious to the bodies of men: according to the ineuitable force of this our first artificiall argument. Capn. Stay Sir I beséech you: insult not so brauely before the finall successe. For as one Swallow makes not a sommer: so surely, this your first conflict against the fume of Tobacco, it concludes no absolute conquest ouer Tobacco. And howsoeuer this your primarie assault may haply be thought very fierce and forcible, yet full féeble is the re∣fuge of that resistance, which (for one onely receiued wound) forsaketh the field. Hydr. Why man, one onely receiued wound (being both
mortall and deadly) is no lesse dangerous to the life it selfe, then tenne hundred concurring together. Howbeit, because the conquest it selfe will be so much more glorious, by how much the aduerse part is made to appeare more ignominious: it shall not be greatly amisse to vndertake efsoones, some deadly encounter herein. To the end therefore, that this smokie contagious fume (receiuing the deadly wound a∣fresh) may concludently, and clearely be chased from out of our coasts, I will now muster forth some fresh supply from those other our sound harted arguments, which (for manna∣ging the fore-front of this our set battel) do here so frankly offer their seruice in the open field. Capn. Discharge your vttermost force against the fume of Tobacco, and spare not. Hydr. Take this then that followeth, for a second mur∣dering Canon. The second ar∣gument.Whatsoeuer dissolueth the naturall proportion of the E∣lements in bodies compounded and mixt, that same is very pernicious vnto the bodie. But the smoke of Tobacco dissolueth the naturall propor∣tion of the Elements in bodies compounded and mixt. Therefore, the smoke of Tobacco, is very pernicious vnto the bodie. Capn. Sir, I am something suspicious of the first pro∣position: namely, that that which dissolueth the naturall proportion of the Elements in bodies compounded and mixt, is very pernicious vnto the body. Hydr. The same may be made more apparently manifest, by this following proofe. Whatsoeuer doth corrupt things naturally compounded, and so bring them to destruction, that same is very pernicious vnto the body. But that which vndoeth the naturall proportion of the E∣lements in bodies mixt, doth corrupt and destroy things naturally compounded.
Therefore, that which vndoeth the naturall proportion of the Elements in bodies mixt, is very pernicious vnto the bodie. Capn. Explane your proposition, I pray you. Hydr. Why man? the proposition needeth no explana∣tion at all, it is of it selfe so apparently manifest. For Ioh Velcurio in vniuersam Arist. Physic. lib. 2. cap. 14. is not the essentiall being of a man, a bodie naturally compoun∣ded? And is not corruption, the mutation, and amission ei∣ther of the substantiall forme, the quantitie, or qualitie of such a compounded bodie? That thing then (whatsoeuer it bee) which so corrupteth and destroyeth the substance, forme, quantitie, or qualitie of any compounded body, must needs be very pernicious to that selfesame body. Capn. What meane you (Sir) by a bodie com∣pounded? Hydr. That selfesame substance whatsoeuer, which (being primarily connected, or knit together of it owne proper be∣ginning, Elements, substantiall, and integrall parts, causes, and qualities) is essentially combined in it owne proper na∣ture and substance, For Ioh. Velcurio in vniuersam Arist. Physic. lib. 2. cap. 14. composition is nothing else but the connexion of formes in a naturall bodie: by which connexi∣on, that selfesame naturall body doth essentially cohere and consist in the proper proportion of parts and accidents. Now then, that thing which corrupteth and destroyeth the pro∣portionable connexion of such a compounded body, must needs become very pernicious vnto the body. Capn. I begin now to perceiue the pregnancie of your last proposition. Howbeit, I do flatly denie your Assump∣tion: namely, that that which vndoeth the naturall pro∣portion of the Elements in bodies mixt, doth vndoubted∣ly corrupt and destroy things naturally compounded. Hydr. The same is approued by the ioynt authorities Hippocra. in libro Aphoris. lib. 5. Aphoris. 62. Galen. in libro detemperam. of Hippocrates and Galene; as also by Arist. Mete. lib. 4. cap. 1. Aristotle himselfe, in that the forenamed Treatise. Wherein the excellent Philo∣sopher (defining procreation to be properly effected by the due proportion of Elements) doth manifestly notifie vnto
vs: that death and destruction is nothing else but the disso∣lution of that selfesame proportion, or (at the least) that this dissolution is the very cause or way to such destruction. Capn. Well, be it so. But proue the Assumption put downe in your former propounded argument: namely, that the smoke of Tobacco dissolueth the naturall proportion of Elements, in bodies compounded and mixt. Hydr. The same is apparently euident by this following argument. Whatsoeuer augmenteth the iust proportion and measure of heate and drinesse limited by nature, that dissolueth the naturall proportion of the Elements in bodies compounded and mixt. But the fume of Tobacco taken inward, augmenteth the iust proportion and measure of heate and drinesse limited by nature. Therefore the fume of Tobacco taken inward dissolueth the proportion of the Elements in bodies compoun∣ded or mixt. Capn. Proue your Proposition, I pray you Sir. Hydr. Why man, the proposition is manifest enough of it selfe: so as all men (but naturall sots) may sensibly con∣ceiue the same. For as well augmentation as diminution vn∣doeth the due measure of heate and drinesse limited by na∣ture her selfe: and so consequently, dissolueth the propor∣tion of the Elements in bodies compounded and mixt. Capn. Go to then, make good your Assumption: name∣ly, that the fume of Tobacco taken inward, augmenteth the proportion and measure of heate and drinesse limited by nature. Hydr. I will conuince the same to be true, by this subse∣quent syllogisme. A more vehement heate and drought added to a lesse, aug∣menteth the proportion and measure of the lesse. But the smoke of Tobacco is more vehemently hot and dry, then the naturall heate and drought of mans body.
Therefore the smoke of Tobacco augmenteth the heate and drinesse of mans body aboue the naturall propor∣tion thereof. Capn. Make plaine your Proposition I pray you. Hydr. The same is plaine enough of it owne proper na∣ture: being moreouer confirmed by the ioynt authorities of Hippocrates, Galene, and Aristotle, as also by common sense. For who can denie that a greater quantity added to a lesse, increaseth the iust proportion of the lesse? Capn. You say very true. But yet for all that, I suspect the soundnesse of your Assumption: namely, that the smoke of Tobacco is more vehemently hot and drie then the natu∣rall heate and drought of mans bodie. Hydr. Some man (peraduenture) will not beleeue that to be true: but (being more fully confirmed by this follow∣ing argument) the truth thereof will appeare vnto any how vnlearned soeuer. That which the Physitions (in respect of mans tempera∣ture) do call hot and drie in the second degree, that (I meane) which exceedeth the due temperature of mans body by two degrees, and which (by adustion and brning) obtaineth a more vehement force from both▪ that same is more vehemently hot and drie then the naturall proportion of mans bodie by much. But the smoke of Tobacco exceedeth in heate and drinesse the due temperature of mans body by two degrees, and (by adustion and burning) obtaineth a more ve∣hement force from both. Therefore the smoke of Tobacco is more vehemently hot and drie, then the naturall proportion of mans body by much. Capn. I denie your argument. Hydr. Why man? the proposition thereof very reason it selfe doth ratifie; and all sorts of learned Physitions do ioyntly subscribe to the same.
Capn. Go to then, make your Assumption: namely, that the smoke of Tobacco exceedeth in heate and rinesse, the due temperature of mans bodie, by two degrées. Hydr. That is sufficiently maintaned and vpholden by the authenticall authoritie of Theuittus a French Monke; of Monardus a Spaniard; of Gesneus a Germane; of Wickes; Clusius; and other new writers; who do all ioyntly affirme Tobacco to be hot and drie in the second degree. Capn. Be it supposed, that those men do hit on the sooth, by telling vs ioyntly that Tobacco is hot and drie in the second degree. What then? doth it necessarily follow thereof, that therefore, the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, exceedeth the due temperature of heate and drought in our bodies by two degrees at least? Hydr. Yea, that (be thou sure) must necessarily follow. For sith heate and drinesse Ioh. Velcurio in vniuersam Arist. Physic. Lib. 2. cap. 22. be primarie sensible qualities, and that all primarie sensible qualities are the primary ver∣tues of Elements concurring ioyntly together in the due composition of bodies naturally compounded; it cannot pos∣sibly be, but as that which diminisheth the due proportion of heate and drought in bodies compounded, is colder by two degrees at the least, then if the naturall heate & drought of such compounded bodies: so surely, that which augmen∣teth the due proportion of naturall heate and drought in such compounded bodies, it must needs be hotter and drier then the naturall heate and drought of those selfesame bo∣dies, by two degrees at the least. But now, that the heate and drought of this thy Tobacco smoke surmounteth the due tem∣perature of heate and drought in the bodies of men, let our tipling Tobacconists tell thee the truth hereof in their proper experience; who (by reason of the excessiue scorching and burning flames of their inward taken Tobacco fumes) are en∣forced eftsoones to asswage the vehemencie and outrage of that excessiue heate, by an excessiue swilling in of wines, of ale, or of beere at the least. Seeing then this inward taking of Tobacco smoke dissolueth
the due proportion of Elements in a body compounded or mixt; seeing it corrupteth things naturally mixt in such a compounded bodie; seeing it augmenteth that due propor∣tion of heate and drought which nature her selfe hath iustly limited to such a compounded bodie: it is more then appa∣rently manifest, that the same surmounteth the naturall heate and drought of our bodies, by two degrees at the least. And therefore, who seeth not now by this our second assault, but that the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, is very pernicious vnto the body? Capn. Good Sir; how confidently soeuer you séeme to conclude your selfe: that (be you well assured) which you haue hitherto said will be deemed as good as nothing, a∣mong those our gallant Tobacconists who make the very smoke of Tobacco their smoking glory. Hydr. It may be true as thou sayest; especially among such as do make Phil. 3.19. their glorie their shame, minding nothing at all but earthly things. Neither do I much maruell at this their bewitched blindnesse. For how is it possible that they whom this smokie fume hath made so fantasticall (I will not say so senslesse in iudgement) should euer be able to deter∣mine substantially concerning this matter? And therefore, sith this their seducing Tobacco smoke is such an intoxicating Circes, a monster of so many heads, and hath taken withall so deepe roote in those our besotted Tobacconists minds, as it will be found but an Herculean labour to eradicate and roote out the same from a soile so suting vnto it: I hold it euery way a very good course, yet still to bend moe engines about it, and euen to pull vp (if possibly it may be) all the farre spread sprouts and riotous springs thereof. Capn. Undertake what exploit you please to supplant the same: for neither they, nor I do craue any fauour herein. Hydr. Go to then, let this which followeth now,The third ar∣gument. and which also (in such gallant brauerie against those gallant To∣bacconists here marcheth on gallantly towards the very fore∣front
of the battell it selfe, be entertained afresh for a third encounter against the inward taking of Tobacco fumes. That which maketh the cleare, sweete, and holsome spi∣rits to become obscure, stinking, and vnholsome, is very pernicious vnto the body. But the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, maketh the cleare, sweete, and holsome spirits to become obscure, stin∣king, and vnholsome. Therefore, the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, is very pernicious vnto the body. Capn. Pardon me Sir, though I do absolutely deny this Argument. Hydr. Oh nay Capnistus, beware of such an absurd and senslesse deniall. For as the Argument it selfe is absolutely sound in moode and figure, so surely, either of both propo∣sitions may thus be easily proued. Whatsoeuer infecteth the instruments of both bodie and mind, that same doth most perniciously procure the destruction of the bodie. But that which maketh the cleare, sweete and holsome spirits to become obscure, stinking, and vnholsome, infecteth the instruments of both bodie and mind. Therefore, that which maketh the cleare, sweete, and hol∣some spirits, to become obscure, stinking, and vnhol∣some, that same doth most perniciously procure the destruction of the body. Capn. I do not as yet conceiue the soundnesse of your first proposition: namely, that that which infecteth the in∣struments of both bodie and mind, doth most perniciously procure the destruction of the body. Hydr. The soundnesse thereof is hereby apparent: name∣ly; for that no one action of life can be exercised without the mind and body. But neither body nor mind may possibly performe their dutie that way without their proper instru∣ments. Howbeit, the instruments of both, they are the spirits: the clearenesse, sweetnesse, and holsomnesie of which said
spirits being made obscure, stinking, and vnwholsome: how should either bodie or minde be able to exercise any one action of life in good order? Capn. Uery true as you say. But how are you able to proue your second Proposition: namely, that the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, doth so infect, and corrupt the spirits? Hydr. The same may very plainly be proued by this fol∣lowing argument. Whatsoeuer infecteth and defileth the whole bodie with a blacke, filthie, and smokie colour, that same doth make the cleare, sweete, and wholsome spirits to be∣come obscure, stinking and vnwholsome. But the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, infecteth, and de∣fileth the whole bodie with a blacke, filthie, and smo∣kie colour. Therefore the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, doth make the cleare, sweete, and wholsome spirits to become obscure, stinking and vnholsome. Capn. Howsoeuer amazed herein, at all aduentures I denie your argument. Hydr. Thine amazednesse (it seemes) hath made thee at all aduentures to bewray thy palpable ignorance in denying the argument. For the first Proposition thereof is such, and so sound, as no man of sound iudgement will once dare to de∣nie: it being (euen in common sense) no lesse apparently e∣uident then the Sun-shine at mid-day. For must not that which infecteth and defileth the whole body with a blacke, filthie, and smokie colour, euen necessarily make the cleare, sweet, and wholsome spirits to become obscure, stinking, and vnwholsome? What one man (being well in his wits may not plainly perceiue the apparent necessitie and truth of such a consequent? Capn. But how proue you the second Proposition: namely, that the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, infecteth and defileth the whole body with a blacke, filthie, and
smokie colour? Hydr. That is fully ratified by the authoritie of Aristotle in his former Treatise; where (as I haue eftsoones told thee before) he affirmeth Arist Mete. lib. 4. cap. 9. all sorts of smoke (and therefore the smoke of Tobacco) to infect with a blacke colour: the same also auoucheth Galene in sundry places. And (besides their two approued testimonies) that which I haue heard eft∣soones very credibly reported by many; as also, that where∣of my selfe was once an eye-witnesse, namely, an approued experience in the opening of sundry mens bodies, which (be∣ing fearefully strangled vp with this poysonsome smoke) ve∣ry sodainly died) doth apparently prooue the truth of this proposition: for so much as those dead bodies (being so cut vp) were euery of them found strangely infected with a cer∣tane blacke and smokie colour. Seeing therefore the inward taking of Tobacco smoke doth make the cleare, sweete and holsome spirits obscure, stinkng and vnholsome; sith it infecteth all the instruments of the bodie and mind; briefly▪ seeing it corrupteth and defileth the whole body with a blacke, filthie, and smokie colour: who can (without blushing) denie, but that the taking of Tobac∣co inwardly, is very pernicious vnto the bodie? Capn. Howsoeuer my selfe be vnable with sway of ar∣gument to denie the same: yet be you well assured of this, that you shall find ten thousand Tobacconists flat opposite to you. Hydr. That may very well be, For so one onely Michaiah 1 Kin. 22.23.4. did find foure hundred opposite to that which he spake from the mouth of the Lord: and yet, their exceeding great multitude was no manner of preiudice to the truth which he taught. Howbeit, that I may here (as much as possiblie lieth in my power) take away whatsoeuer occasion of either gainsaying or doubting, and that the truth of this matter might be made to appeare as manifest as the Sunne in his strength: I haue euen purposely placed this following argument in the rere∣ward of the battell, as an armour of proofe, to giue a fresh
encounter against Tobacco fumes. Capn. Discharge your vttermost force, and spare not. Hydr. Well then, stand strongly vpon thy guard: for this it is. Whatsoeuer spreadeth and disperseth throughout the whole bodie a most venimous matter,The fourth ar∣gument. and a mortall enemie to the nature of man, that same doth bring de∣struction vnto the bodie. But the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, spreadeth and dis∣perseth throughout the whole body a most venimous matter, and a mortall enemie to the nature of man. Therefore, the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, doth bring destruction vnto the body. Capn. I perceiue not the truth of your first Propo∣sition. Hydr. How true that is, we may plainly perceiue by the pestilence, and sundrie such other infectious diseases. All which (by the dispersing and spreading of a venimous mat∣ter, and a mortall enemie to mans nature throughout the whole body) do procure the present destruction of men by many great multitudes, as daily experience approueth. Capn. Well, be it so as you say: but how appeareth the truth of your second Proposition? Namely, that the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, doth spread and disperse through∣out the whole body, a venimous matter, and a mortall ene∣mie to the nature of man? Hydr. The truth thereof doth sound forth it selfe through∣out euerie coast, by the sodaine and lamentable end of ma∣ny Tobacconists; more especially, by a pitifull experience in Parson Digbie at Peterborough of late: who (hauing excessiue∣ly taken Tobacco in a tippling house) did instantly fall downe starke dead in the open streets. All which examples (being no lesse true then wofull) as they may serue for a terrour to all: so especially, these our insatiable suckers in of Tobacco smoke, should conscionably apply to themselues, and be war∣ned
thereby. Notwithstanding, this fantasticall course (I know not how) is now growne into such a foole-hardie cu∣stome among vs, as other mens harmes cannot make vs be∣ware: neither yet are bare examples of sufficient force to sup∣presse and abolish this idle opinion from out of our idle braines. Capn. What Sir, would you haue men so precizely, so certainely, and so confidently conclude conceipts from eue∣ry vncertaine and sodaine occurrent? So should we be sure, eftsoones to conclude many strange, extrauagant, and vncertaine conclusions. Men must liue (you know) by in∣fallible rules: not by fantasticall, and fickle examples. Nei∣ther haue you your selfe any one authenticall rule, to con∣clude so certainely, from such an vncertaine example as you vrged euen now. For what kind of sequele call you this? Namely, such a man died instantly after his insatia∣ble taking of Tobacco fumes: therefore, his insatiable taking of Tobacco fumes was the vndoubted cause of that his so so∣daine a death. Hydr. It followeth as fitly as this: Such a man died in∣stantly vpon his carelesse entertaining of one dangerously sicke of the pestilentiall infection therefore, his carelesse en∣tertaining of one so dangerously sicke of the pestilentiall in∣fection, was the vndoubted cause of that his so sodaine a death. Capn. Nay Sir, the pestilence, and Tobacco, as they are not of one and the selfe same mortall condition: so they worke not one and the selfe same mortall infection. For the pestilence, and sundry such other infectious diseases, they containe in them essentially some contagious and veni∣mous matter, which (dispersing it selfe presently through∣out all the parts of the body) will vndoubtedly procure the present destruction of that selfe same bodie: whereas you haue not hitherto proued, that there is in Tobacco it selfe any such infectious or venimous matter. Hydr. Well then, thus much thou doest grant by the
way: that the perill by conuersing with pestilentiall persons, must necessarily arise from some infectious or venimous mat∣ter proceeding from those pestilentiall diseases, and disper∣sing it selfe presently throughout the whole bodie. Capn. Sir, if I should denie that to be true, experience it selfe would proue me a foole. Hydr. And doest thou fondly imagine, that experience will proue thee a wise-man, if thou deniest the truth of the other? For tell me (I pray thee) must not the present destru∣ction of so many Tobacconists, euen as necessarily also arise of some infectious or venimous matter proceeding from such inward taking of Tobacco fumes, and presently dispersing it selfe throughout the whole bodie? Capn. Good Sir, this sequele is yet in dispute: and you take it as granted. Hydr. I scorne such a grant at any mans hand: especial∣ly in this so euident, and so cleare a cause. And therefore, I will here vndertake afresh to conuince (if possibly I may) by sound and substantiall reasons, that which I cannot perswade by sundry examples, how lamentable and pregnant soeuer. Thou hauing therfore so freely granted, that the thing which thus sodainly surpriseth the life of mens bodies, must ne∣cessarily haue in it some infectious or venimous matter, dis∣persing it selfe presently throughout the whole bodie: why should not the Assumption it selfe (established especially vpon so certaine a ground) be able to stand inuincibly against whatsoeuer assaults of fantasticall and idle companions? Capn. Well, go to then, proue your Assumption: name∣ly, that this insatiable swallowing vp of Tobacco smoke doth spread and disperse throughout the whole bodie a veni∣mous matter, and a mortall enemie to the nature of man. Hydr. That may soundly be proued by this subsequent syllogisme. Whatsoeuer sodainly ouerthroweth both the faculties of mind, and strength of bodie, that doth vndoubtedly spread and disperse throughout the whole bodie, a
venimous matter repugnant to nature. But the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, sodainly ouer∣thoweth both the faculties of mind, and strength of bodie. Therefore, the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, doth vn∣doubtedly spread and disperse throughout the whole bodie, a venimous matter repugnant to nature. Capn. Sir, I do absolutely denie your Argument. Hydr. In so doing (Capnistus) thou declarest the selfe an absolute Asse. For this know thou assuredly, that a com∣mon axiome among Physitions conuinceth the Proposition to be certainly true: namely, that nothing can sodainly con∣found and ouerthrow both faculties of mind, and strength of bodie, & so either leaue none at all, or a depraued motion in both, but the same hath some infectious & venimous quality wherewith it possesseth the bodie. And thereupon it is, that all Physitions (with one consent) do ioyntly affirme that the falling sickenesse ariseth of a venimous aire possessing the braine. Capn. But how holds your Assumption currant and good: namely, that the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, doth sodainly ouerthrow both faculties of mind, & strength of bodie? Hydr. Surely Capnistus, the daily experience of such as vsually drinke that selfe same smoke, doth easily confirme the truth of this matter. For what one is he among our tippling Tobacconists, that doth not (alas) euen presently perceiue a certaine whirling about of the braine, and find himselfe ve∣ry fearfully possessed with a certaine kind of giddinesse im∣mediatly after the taking thereof? Or (if not so) that suffreth not at the least, a maruellous perturbation, and a dangerous disturbance of nature? Notwithstanding (besides this their proper experience) I will yet further maintaine, and defend this point, by the approued authoritie and fortresse of sundry late writers (as it were with a wall, or rampire) against the vi∣olent assaults of all sorts of gaine-sayers how gallant soeuer.
Capn. Go to then, muster forth now your surest men for the field: and make them march forewards in battle∣aray. Hydr. Content. Amongst whom I will make Dodonaeus and Metellus the first in that ranke: who do recken Tobacco among the sundry sorts of Henbane. Capn. What inferre you hereof? Hydr. The firme, and infallible proofe of that which I affirmed before: namely, that there is in the fume of Tobacco inwardly taken, some venimous matter, which so dainly o∣uerthroweth the faculties of mind, and strength of body. For whereas Dodonaeus and Metellus do so skilfully sort To∣bacco among the sundrie kinds of Henbane, it is apparently manifest (from out of Dioscorides his approued iudgement) that all kind of Henbane is venimous, as an enemie distur∣bing nature, disordering reason, assailing the braine, which is the Metropolitane ouer the whole body, & the very tower of the heart; yea and procuring a certaine madnesse withall for the present. Capn. Dodonaeus, Metellus, and Dioscorides they onely say so: as for the truth of their spéech, that we must take at their hands vpon trust: for they onely say so, but shew no one reason at all. Howbeit Sir, our Tobacconists (be you sure) they hold not those men of Pythagoras authoritie: nei∣ther will they be brought to conclude on this sort; Dodonae∣us, Metellus, and Dioscorides do ioyntly auouch, that all kind of Henbane is of a poysonsome and venimous nature, and therefore it is certainly so indéed. Hydr. Why Capnistus, hast thou not a more reuerend re∣gard of that the accustomed and ancient axiome, which tel∣leth plainly, That euery Vnicui{que} in sua arte peri∣to, credendum est. expert and skilfull Artist must be beleeued in his proper profession? Notwithstanding (because thou makest no more accompt of those their authenti∣call iudgements) thou shalt heare further, what Gesnerus Gesnerus, ad Ioh. Functium Epist. vltima. auoucheth from his proper experience: who (hauing ex∣perimented the true operation of Tobacco in his owne proper
bodie) giueth a iudicious censure concerning the nature thereof, in an Epistle to Iohn Functius, that renowned, and learned Physition. Capn. What is his censure thereof (Sir) I pray you? Hydr. I will put downe the same in his owne proper words: without either adding, or taking therefrom. The leafe (saith he) which was sent out of France to Augusta, seemed most strange vnto me, and a very plaine noueltie. Wherefore, I was very desirous to taste therof: but presently I perceiued a maruellous sharpnesse therein, and it did most strangely af∣fect me. So as, me thought verily I was starke drunke; and (as it were) sayling downe a Riuer in some staggering ship: yea and trying the same againe and againe some three or foure times, I eftsoones found the selfesame effect. Wherefore, washing my mouth, and drinking vp a spoonefull of vineger: I forthwith put away the giddinesse of my head. Moreouer, I gaue a peece of the leafe (bruised and wrapped in flesh) vn∣to a dog: which (presently after some few houres) did cause him to vomit abundantly. Verily (whatsoeuer it is) I sup∣pose, it cannot possibly be without some secret venime. Thus much Gesnerus concerning the vertue and force of Tobacco in his proper experience. Capn. This (I confesse) is something to our present purpose in hand: but Sir, one Swallow (you know) ma∣keth no sommer. Hydr. Well then, let vs adde to Gesnerus experience, that which Theuittus in his description of West India; as also that which Monardus, Clusius, and Weckerus do ioyntly remember thereof. Namely, that the Priests and other the common people of the Indians do vse to sucke vp the fume of Tobacco through a pipe or conduite, either when (as being asked) they giue answers concerning the successe of businesse, or when they are desirous to see visions; and (as it were) to be rapt from themselues in a trance: or being to enter into the dangers of battell. Which said disturbance of mind and soule,
by no meanes can be so sodainly wrought in mans body; without the force and efficacie of some venimous quality concurring therewith. Capn. Not so Sir, for then should the force thereof be generally perceiued in all men alike. Howbeit, this swim∣ming of the head is not generally in all: and in them whom it so strangely possesseth, the same may séeme rather to pro∣céede of a certaine thinne humour sodainly turned into wind, and of a whirling about of that aire so sodainly chan∣ged, then of any other supposed quality in the smoke it selfe, as being venimous, and a mortall enemie to the nature of man. Hydr. This peraduenture (in a simple swimming, and such as is eftsoones felt at some other time else) might seeme to carrie some shew of truth: but in this sodaine darknesse and falling into trances vpon the onely taking of Tobacco, and at none other time else; and wherein all the senses, and the whole braine is so sodainly ouerwhelmed with an ob∣scure and cloudie smoke, it cannot possibly haue any place at all, but by the operation of some venimous matter concur∣ring therewith. For such a swimming (for the most part) is the vndoubted forerunner of the falling euill: and impresseth such a sensible weaknesse in the braine, as may not possibly be cured, nor ordinarily helped by any medicine at all. Capn. Why Sir, not all that drinke of this smoke do feéele such a smming? Hydr. That is nothing at all to the purpose. For the pesti∣lence and such other infectious venimes they do not forth∣with destroy all whom they possesse, nor infect euery one in∣differently: which notwithstanding, haue in them naturally a power of killing and slaying. And therefore, whereas all men are not equally affected with ye selfesame swimming, that ought rather to be attributed to the benefit of nature, and sound constitution of the braine, then vnto any defectiue poysonsome qualitie in the smoke it selfe, which is euermore venimous, and a mortall enemie to the nature of man.
Capn. But Sir, the vse of Tobacco is very profitable for such as are affected with shortnesse of breath, and with stopping of the lungs by reason of grosse humours ouer∣growing the same. Hydr. What vse of Tobacco is profitable for those diseases? The scorching smoke thereof drawne or sucked into the bo∣dy by a Tobacco pipe? Nothing lesse, be thou sure. For so the lungs themselues being made hard and stiffe (as in old age it commonly cometh to passe) by reason of the extreme force of the fume in drying, so as they cannot be fanned, nor lifted vp any longer, the naturall heate is choaked vp quite for want of breathing. And there is much difference betwixt the smoke of the earthie and stinking fume of a burnt hearbe, and the airie iuyce of the said hearbe drawne forth by infusion, by steeping, by boyling, or seething. Indeed, the broath of Tobacco, or a sirupe made of the infusion thereof, doth somewhat helpe the stopping of the lungs, but not the smoke. Capn. And yet for all this, the smoke of Tobacco disbur∣deneth the braine from this sinke of humours: and purgeth the bloud from filthie and vnwholsome matter. Hydr. Yea marrie Sir, a very trimme purgation (no doubt) that draweth so forth from the bodie and braine such a thinne, subtile and waterish matter, as (it may be) nature her selfe had proportionably appointed to both for the bet∣ter and more easie conueyance of the bloud it selfe through∣out the whole bodie: and (in stead thereof) placeth grosse humours in the braine and all the rest of the members; and whereby a certaine curdled matter is increased, and this same smokie stinking fume setled in the roome thereof. Capn. But Sir, the fume of Tobacco fréeth the spirits from those burdensome humours, as it were from fetters: and so maketh them more prompt and nimble by much. Hydr. And doth it so indeed? When rather the spirits (whom nature hath ordained to be cleare and bright, both for the discoursing of reason, as also for the ministerie of the
senses themselues) by this filthie fume-drinking are made obscure and darke, and the braine, and whole bodie infe∣cted with a smokie blacke colour? yea, and when in stead of that same drie clearenesse & light which Heraclitus, and (with him) all, both Philosophers and Physitions of any sound iudgement do accompt the principall and purest soule, those fume-drinkers do substitute and thrust in their appointed place, most palpably obscured and darkened spirits? In which their so preposterous a purging of the braine it selfe, they do both confound the orderly works of nature, and euen quite ouerthrow the infallible precepts and rules prescribed by Physitions: who are the appointed ministers of nature her selfe for the orderly preseruation of the body in health. Who all ioyntly with one vniforme assent do affirme; that a cloudy and obscure aire, or such as proceedeth from hollow and fennie places, is very vnwholsome for the bodies of men. Which their canonicall iudgment those our fume-deuourers do neuer obserue, vntill (with an extreme hazard of life) they do find (by their miserable and wofull experience) how pernicious a thing it is. Neither, without an exceeding great cause were chimnies (by our Ancestors formerly inuented, that thereby, the smoke (drawne by a vehement heate of the fire from matter apt to burning) might be dispersed abroad in the aire, for feare of hurting the bodies of men. Capn. Why Sir? there are many sorts of fumes inuen∣ted and taught by the Physitions themselues, as well for the strengthning of diuerse parts, as also for the curing of hard diseases. Hydr. There are so (I confesse,) but what dost thou con∣clude from the same? That therefore the smoke of Tobacco sucked vp by a pipe or conduite, is exceeding wholsome for the bodies of men? Alas sillie soules, who may not plainly perceiue a flat fallacion in this their consequence? For almost all sorts of fumes are vsed by expert Physitions, to recreate and comfort the spirits by their odoriferous smels, rather then to draw any thing out of the bodie by such scorching
fumes as do heate and drie. Yea and that sweete kind of re∣freshing the spirits was instituted first by nature her selfe, who telleth vs directly and truly that Pro. 29.9. sweete oyntments and perfumes reioyce the heart. And as this was dame natures owne institution, so was the primarie practise thereof set first a∣floate by learned Hippocrates, the prime interpreter of na∣tures purpose therein. Whereas these filthie scorching To∣bacco smokes, do nothing else but daunt and drie vp the spirits: a thing flat opposite to natures institution, and the witles in∣uention of vicious and wild dispositions. Capn. Not so Sir, for some stinking fumes are also ap∣plied by Physitions themselues in the suffocation of the matrixe, or rising of the mother: and this also with lauda∣ble and happie successe. Hydr. Very true as thou sayest. Howbeit, those stinking fumes they are not so applied by expert Physitions with any purpose or mind to cure the disease, but for this end rather: Namely, that nature her selfe, and the naturall heate so so∣dainly surprised by reason of those stinking fumes which they naturally abhorre, might be the sooner prouoked to gather their naturall strength and vigour afresh, and thereby disperse and expell that venimous aire wherewith the ma∣trixe it selfe being stuffed, did so dainly arise and ascend vp∣ward. Capn. But ouer and besides the suffocation of the ma∣trixe (namely, in the consumption of the lungs, as also in ye French pore) certaine fumes of Cynoper, red Arsnicke, quick-siluer, Orpiment, and other venimous things are admitted and vsed of sundrie late writers in Physicke, as Fallopius and others. Hydr. They are so I confesse. Howbeit, warily, sparingly, and in very small quantitie: yea and this also not without a considerate, and proportionable mixture of some other things else to correct and alay the force of their venimous qualities. And that moreouer the operation thereof in dry∣ing onely (which agreeth with nature) might be communi∣cated
to the bodie it selfe: and yet (notwithstanding all this) the learned (for their parts) haue euermore had a very vehe∣ment suspition of this kind of curing. And (in the consump∣tion of the lungs especially) I see that Galene mislikes those fumes: and approueth rather of a sweete bath, or hot-house. And certainly, Fallopius himselfe doth not altogether ap∣proue of those fumes. And for learned Fernellius, he vtterly misliketh of them: in so much as (in the cure of the French∣poxe) he will not admit any ointment compounded of quick-siluer. And verily, if Galene durst not so much as taste of the herbe Lycoporsium, because onely it but smelt some∣what strong: shall those our smoke-deuourers thus dare, not onely to taste, but also to entertaine into the secret and most inward parts of their bodies, yea euen into the very treasury of nature it selfe, such an infectious, venimous, and most deadly consuming poyson? Capn. But be it Sir, there were (as you say) in this Tobacco smoke some certaine contagious venime: our arti∣ficiall Tobacconists they can very skilfully correct, and allay that selfesame venimous qualitie with the powder of a Nutmeg, and two or thrée drops of the Chymicall oyle of Anise, compounded and blended with the pouder of Tobacco it selfe, or euer the same be inwardly taken. Hydr. Our artificiall Tobacconists sayest thou? Nay ra∣ther, our Seraphicall smokie Asies. Who (by this their skilfull vnskilfull mingle-mangle) do shew themselues such sodden∣headded sots as blend Sugar-candie with rats-bane. Of very purpose forsooth, that (howsoeuer the rats-bane it selfe be mortally dangerous) it might by the sweet taste, be made to passe more pleasantly downe, and thereby also more vnper∣ceiueably conuey the venimous poyson it selfe into the in∣ward parts, and so more powerfully surprise the vitall spirits. And (yet for all this) these fantasticall fellowes, they must (by thy calculation) be accompted forsooth our artificiall To∣bacconists. Well then, be it so for this once; and now do tell me withall, whether thou thy selfe by the very purport of
thine owne proper speech, doest not couertly confesse the inward taking of Tobacco smoke to be very pernicious vnto the body, except the same be consideratly and skilfully cor∣rected before. But what a strange and monstrous kind of cor∣rection is this that thou speakest of? What man? When the very smoke of Tobacco it selfe is a mortall enemie to the natue of the bodie, may the grosse muddie smoke of those oylie matters commixed with that former poysonsome fume, be possibly made either good or wholsome? What is this else, but to adde fire vnto fire? and (in stead of suppressing) to set that scorching flame yet further afloate? That so (with an ouer hastie and vntimely death) they may the more speedily consume and scorch vp their vitall spirits and radicall hu∣mours. Capn. Well Sir. And yet for all that, if this smoke of Tobacco were taken but once in a wéeke, peraduenture it might do much good in resoluing the excremental humours onely; as also in expelling them out of the bodie, and yet not consume the naturall moisture thereof. Hydr. Doest thou place the preseruation of mens health vpō blind peraduentures? Surely, a wise man should be with∣out all peraduenture, before he aduenture to take any thing inwardly into his body: or else he may peraduenture but play the part of a foole. And yet this I confesse withall, yt the taking of Tobacco but once in a weeke would do ye lesse hurt, though it would (notwithstanding) do very much hurt, by working such an imbecillitie and weakenesse in the braine it selfe, as would make it much more apt to entertaine sundry other ex∣crementall humours afresh: and by procuring the said braine withall (by reason of the excessiue heate and drines thereof) to draw and sucke vp from the lower parts, some such excre∣mentall humours as were not to be expelled that way. And verily, if our common prouerbe be true in any one thing, it is infallible, and most certaine in this so seldome a sucking vp of Tobacco smoke: namely, That a little can do no harme at all, if the same be not taken.
Capn. But Sir? what spéedier course may possibly be inuented for purging those excrementall humours out of the bodie, then by drinking this smoke? Hydr. What Capnistus? And must we (in very deede) be inforced to borrow from the furthermost parts of India this stinking, infectious and venimous smoke, to expell that masse or sinke of humours from out of the body: when we haue here at home that selfesame method of curing (whether by pilles, by medicines to be chewed in the mouth, or put into the nose, or by sweating) which was formerly deriued from the ancient, & most famous Physical fountaines of the world? Or (if that do not like thee so well) thou maist then (by the meere benefit of nature it selfe) very easily dispatch thy selfe from all such corruptions, if thou diligently and religiously obserue that golden meane which Hippocrates perswades, and prescribes in thy labour, thy meate, thy drinke, thy sleepe, and thy lust. For as in domesticall and household affaires, parsimonie or sparing is worth a great stipend: so surely, from the very manner of thy conuersation and cariage, thou mayest receiue a very rich benefite, as well for retaining thy strength, as for preseruing thy health. And herein I will giue to thy selfe, and all our Tobacconists this onely precept: which if thou and they do conscionably and carefully obserue as you ought, you may easily and a long time preserue your bo∣dilie healths healths in good estate. The precept for that pur∣pose is this: Do not lift vp your hands so oft to your mouths: for, an insatiable swilling downe of wine, ale, and beere, as also this inordinate sucking vp of filthie Tobacco smoke, do e∣uen band and bend themselues ioyntly together, to breede, hatch, and nourish this filthie foule channell or sinke of cor∣ruptions. Saint Bernard is reported to haue sharply accused himselfe, for that (whiles he went about with ouermuch abstinence) to keepe his bodie vnder, by corrupting the vigour and tem∣perature of that his said bodie, he did (after a sort) defraud the functions of his mind, of their appointed organe or in∣strument.
For vnderstanding at length, that he ought not to liue priuately to himselfe alone, but also to the publicke be∣nefite of others, by instructing, exhorting, and comforting them: and perceiuing withall that those publicke duties of pietie required the ministery of the bodie it selfe, he found by experience at length, that a man ought so far foorth to make much of his bodie, or otherwise to keepe the same vnder: as (in the meane time) the powers and operations of the mind be neither choked with pleasures, nor dulled by too much austeritie. Now then, if so grieuous a pricke of con∣science did euen sting that holy man Bernard, because he but made his bodie too too leane and withered with godly exercises, what punishment (thinkest thou) are those men to expect and looke hourely for from the hands of our God, who (by vnseasonable swilling and riotous fumes) do most prodigally consume and so riotously weaken and waste the very treasurie of nature it selfe? I for my owne part will put downe no censure vpon them: but (with all my heart) I will beseech the Almightie to giue them farre better minds. Lo, this is the very worst I wish vnto them, and this is the best I can do for them. Capn. As your prayer is most charitable: euen so are your earnest perswasions with me so auaileable, as I am vtterly vnable any further to gainesay your spéeches herein. Hydr. Esdr. 4.41. A recapitula∣tion of the whole.Great is the truth I perceiue, and will euer preuaile. Well then, seeing therefore the smoke of Tobacco consu∣meth the naturall heate; sith it drieth vp that radicall moi∣sture which is the very fountaine of that selfesame heate; sith by corrupting the due proportion of the Elements, it dissol∣ueth the primarie composition of the whole bodie it selfe; sith by the sharpenesse thereof (which partly it hath by na∣ture, & partly doth draw from the burning) it euen gnaweth and fretteth the members of the bodie; seeing it causeth the cleare, sweete and wholsome spirits of the bodie to become obscure, stinking, and vnwholsome; seeing it disperseth
throughout the whole bodie a venimous aire, and repugnant to nature, assayling the head, heart, and life; finally, for so much as it bringeth all these incommodities to mans naturall life, without any one hope of profite at all to the same: let nature her selfe, and the iudgement of sound reason both say and affirme for me, that the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, is very pernicious vnto the bodie. Capn. Alas poore Tobacco, my pretie Tobacco; thou that hast bene hitherto accompted the Ale-knights armes, the Béere brewers badge, the Carousers crest, the Drunkards darling, the Draffe-sackes delight, the Easterlings en∣signe, the Fantasticals foretresse, the Gormandizers glo∣rie, the hungry Hostesses alepole, the Mad-braines merri∣ment, the New-fangles noueltie, the Poope noddies para∣mour, the Ruffians reflection, the Swil bols swine-troffe, the Linkers trull, the Tospots protection, the Vintners vintage, and the vnthrifts pasport: thou must now (I feare me) bee enforced forthwith to take thy farewell towards the vttermost parts of India, from whence thou wert first transported to England by vicious and wild dispositions, and there must make thy finall abode: hauing now (I plainly perceiue) the very head of man, the braines, the ra∣dicall humours, the vitall spirits, the wit, the memorie, the senses, all the naturall faculties, the whole body and soule, yea nature her selfe, and the sway of sound rea∣son so strongly combined in one, to proue thy inward taken smoke, a very pernicious matter for the bodies of men. Hydr. It is euen certainly so as thou sayest. And there∣fore I pray thee perswade her Capnistus, with all her fierie fumes, and fumish fauourets, to be forthwith packing toge∣ther apace, for feare of losing their tide: and so to be left in the lurch. Capn. I will (from henceforth) be readie to do mine vttermost endeuour therein. Howbeit good Sir, you do confidently auouch euen in the very forefront of your
Tractate it selfe, that the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, is not onely very pernicious to the bodies of men, but too too profluious for many Tobacconists purses; and most pesti∣ferous likewise to the publike state. Hydr. I did so confesse: and what thereof? Capn. I desire in like manner to heare those points confirmed at large. Hydr. With all my heart, if thy leisure will giue thee leaue to attend thereupon: In the meane time, let vs walke forth a while to take the fresh aire, and then returne againe to our purpose intended. Capn. With all my heart. The end of the first part. Nulla valet tantum virtus patientia quantum. .
THE FVME OF TO∣BACCO TAKEN INWARD, IS too too profluuious for many of our Tobac∣conists purses, and most pernicious to the publike State. Capnistus. SIR, hauing hitherto proued the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, to be very pernici∣ous vnto the bodie: you remember (I am sure) that you also affirmed the same too too profluuious for many of our Tobacconists purses, as also most pestiferous to the publike State. Hydrophorus. I did so indeed: and what then? Capn. Do you aske me, what then? why Sir, this is the reason of this my demand. Hauing hitherto sufficiently shewed the pernicious effects of Tobacco fumes, respecting especially the bodies of men: I pray you, proue now (in like manner) the profluuitie thereo concerning their pur∣ses, and our publike State. For so shall you be sure to let all our Tobacconists bloud euen in the basilica veine it selfe: and to draw forth presently the very feces or dregs of any their preposterous affections towards those infectious fil∣thie fumes. Hydr. In very deede, it is true as thou sayest. The purse-plague is much more respected now, with some sorts of peo∣ple, then is either the plague of body or soule: they are so desperatly drenched in their dangerous delights. And there∣fore (to effect this our pretended purpose the better) we will herein obserue this following order. There shall first be pro∣pounded
the purses profluuitie it selfe: and then secondly, there shall be resounded the consequent effects succeeding the same. Capn. A most excellent order, procéede (Sir) vnto it with spéede, I beséech you. Hydr. With very good will. Wherein first shall be she∣wed what this the purses profluuitie is: and then next, how such an insatiable sucking in of filthie Tobacco fumes, becom∣meth too too profluuious for the purse it selfe, and our pre∣sent State. Capn. What meane you first, by the purses profluuity? Hydr. By the purses profluuitie, I do not meane any fru∣gall or commodious disbursing, but a prodigall or profluui∣ous dispending of those worldly prefermens and blessings which the Lord God (in his abundant mercies) bestoweth on men for their necessary vses, not needlesse abuses: to the preposterous impouerishing of them and theirs, the dange∣rous infecting of others about them, and the pestiferous vn∣dermining of the publike State. Capn. Sir, I do now vnderstand to the full, what you simply meane here, by the purses profluuity: and therefore, shew me next (I beséech you) how this our insatiable swil∣ling in of filthie Tobacco fumes, becometh too too profluui∣ous for our Tobacconists purses, and most pestiferous to the publike State. Hydr. Content. Wherein thou hast first to obserue, that Tobacco it selfe hath bene euermore held at an exceeding high price; that those our tippling Tobacconists cannot ordinarily compasse the same without an excessiue reckoning; that such an excessiue reckoning cannot possibly be performed with∣out very chargeable cost; that such chargeable cost cannot be freed from superfluous and riotous wasting; that such su∣perfluous wasting procureth a prodigall dispending of mens patrimonies with other worldly preferments; that such a prodigal dispending of patrimonies with other worldly pre∣ferments, is ouer profluuious for our Tobacconists purses: and
that this their purses profluuitie is most pestiferous to the publike State. Capn. This gradation (I must néeds confesse) doth giue to the Eagle-eied, and sharped-sighted sort, some glim∣mering shew concerning your purpose propounded: how∣beit, that 2 Pet. 1.19. the day-dawne and the day starre thereof may more clearely breake forth to the simplest mans view, I pray you discourse of these more at large. Hydr. I am not vnwilling therewith. First therefore for the exceeding high rate that this Tobacco hath euer bene at since the very first arriuall thereof into England, thou thy selfe, and all our Tobacconists, are able to say this of your owne proper knowledge: namely, that the same hath vsually bene sold by the pound, for twentie nobles, fiue, foure, or three pounds: yea and when it came to the lowest price, it could not bee had vnder foure markes or fortie shillings, which a∣mounteth to three shillings foure pence an ounce at the least. Is not this (thinkest thou) an exceeding high rate for filthie Tobacco? And is not twenty nobles, fiue, foure, or three pounds, yea fortie shillings, an excessiue great price for a per∣nicious poysonsome smoke? And may such an excessiue great price be performed without a chargeable cost? And cn such chargeable cost be possibly freed from a superfluous or rio∣tous waste? And will not such a riotous waste procure (in the end) a prodigall dispending of patrimonies with other like worldly preferments? And will not such prodigall dispen∣ding of patrimonies, become too too profluuious for our To∣bacconists purses? And will not such a profluuitie of purses, in the end proue very pestiferous to the publike State? Speake man and spare not, what sayest thou to this demonstration? Do not euery of these (like the inseparable lincks of a deadly deuouring chaine) very dangerously draw a publike calami∣tie vpon our countrey and kingdome? Capn. Indéed Sir, I cannot but acknowledge the ex∣céeding rate, the excessiue reckoning, as also the chargeable cost bestowed vpon Tobacco it selfe: but I sée not as yet,
how thse our professed Tobacconists will accompt that thing a superfluous or riotous cost, which (as they verily suppose themselues) doth worke their so excéeding much good. Hydr. It hath bene apparently proued, and thy selfe hath freely confessed in our former discourse, that the smoke of Tobacco is very pernicious vnto the bodie: and which way then doth it worke them so exceeding much good? I am cer∣taine it worketh a wonderfull strange consumption in euery of their purses at least. If therfore some odly conceited com∣panion (whose braines are filthily besotted with filthie To∣bacco fumes) should ouer idlely imagine, that that thing which vnnecessarily costeth both liuing and life, were no superflu∣ous or riotous waste: must that his idle supposall be forth∣with priuiledged for a currant conceipt among such as are soundly wise? God forbid that any such peeuish perswasion should euer possesse the prudenter sort. For so should we Eccles. 107 Set seruants on horsebcke, and make Princes to plod by their sides as Pages: yea so sould the crew of some idlely concei∣ted companions, becme the canonized counsellers to those that haue farre finer wits then themselues. Concerning there∣fore that former superfluous and riotous waste, which those Tobacconists do so wilfully make about their beastly Tobacco fumes, do tell me in good sadnesse, whether it be not a super∣fluous waste, for any man of great place, to paddle forth yarely one hundred pounds at the least, for an hundred gal∣lons of filthy fumes? for a Gentleman of meaner condition, to be at fortie pound annuall expences, about bare fortie pottels of stinking flames? for a Yeoman, an Husbandman, an Artificer, a Trades-man, a Tinker, a Shoomaker, or a Cob∣bler, to bestow weekely some three shillings fourepence at the least, for but one onely ounce of fantasticall fooleries? What sayest thou Capnistus? Is not this a very superfluous and riotous waste? Do answer directly, either yea or no to the same. Capn. In very déed Sir, I must néeds acknowledge it a superfluous and riotous waste: yea and no better in
effect then the fantasticall purchasing of vanitie it selfe. Hydr. Go to then. Can such a superfluous and riotous waste be possibly performed without a prodigall dispending of those our Tobacconists their patrimonies and worldly pre∣ferments? or without a friuolous pursing vp of their an∣nuall reuenewes and rents Hag. 1.6. in a bottomlesse bag? Who seeth not then, but that their filthie Tobacco fumes (being ordina∣rily at such an exceeding high rate, at such an excessiue rec∣koning, at such a chargeable cost, at such a superfluous-waste, and at such a prodigall dispending of patrimonies, with other like worldly preferments) must needs become too too pro∣fluuious for any our Tobacconists purses, and very pestiferous to the publike State? Capn. It is euen certainly so. And therefore Sir, (ha∣uing hitherto succinctly shewed the vndoubted profluuitie of the purse it selfe) I pray you now likewise procéed to the orderly setting downe of those fearefull effects which suc∣cessiuely follow thereof. Hydr. With a very good will. Wherein we haue to ob∣serue, that those selfe same effects, they are such as more es∣pecially concerne the Tobacconists themselues: or some other besides. Capn. Very well. But what are those effects first which more properly concerne themselues. Hydr. They are all those accidentall occurrents which (proceeding collaterally from those their Tobacco fumes) do more especially respect the parties themselues, without any proper relation, or peculiar reference to any other man else besides themselues: being such withall as more especially concerne either their owne person, or their proper estate. Capn. What are those effects first, which more especial∣ly concerne their owne person? Hydr. They are those dangerous diseases, and those des∣perate deaths, which (by reason of such an insatiable sucking in of filthie Tobacco fumes) do euen ordinarily attend (like pursuiuants) vpon their very bodies and soules. Namely, a
fearefull consuming of the naturall heate; an vnquencha∣ble scorching and drying vp of the radicall moisture; an vt∣ter exhausting and sucking out of the corporall humours; a most poysonsome corrupting of the due proportion of Ele∣ments appointed by nature; a continuall fetting and gna∣wing of all the bodily members; a pernicious dissoluing of the primarie composition of the whole bodie it selfe; a prepo∣sterous procuring of the cleare, sweete, and wholsome spirits, to become obscure, stinking and vnwholsome; a most dan∣gerous dispersing of a venimous ayre through out all parts of the bodie; a violent assailing of the head, the braine, the heart, the whole body and life it selfe; yea and eftsoones a most so daine and desperate death, as we haue more lagely declared before. Lo Capnistus, euen these, and sundry such other occurrents, they are those proper effects which do vn∣doubtedly attend vpon the poore Tobacconists body, and as ordinarily follow his insatiable swilling in of filthie Tobacco fumes, as the shadow followes the bodie. And as his said bo∣die is therewith very dangerously infected, so surely that his honest reputation (which should be vnto him Pro. 22.1. Eccles. 7.2. as a precious oyntment) is thereby most shamefully blemished. Being poin∣ted at by all sorts of people when he walketh abroad in the open streets, and too too reprochfully termed a tippling To∣bacconist, a swaggering swil smoke, a sodden headed Asse, a fantasticall foole, a proper tale stripling to play at Poope-noddie, a man of a wonderfull wit (forsooth) cōcerning those our newly deuised chymicall extractions: being sufficient∣ly able (in very short time) to turne a shilling to nine-pence, one that hath a meruellous dexteritie in augmenting his pa∣trimonie by a plaine retrogradation, beginning directly where his ancestors ended, and neuer giuing ouer before he come where they first began: to knit vp all in a word, he is (say they) Thericleíouphils:. that is (in plaine English) a friend and follower of cup companions. What one ingenious na∣ture may possibly but heare these disdainefull reproches, and his very eares not burne on his head? Or who is the wight
which (being thus odiously branded in euery place) would not grow grosly ashamed of that shamefull condition which thus makes him the shame of the world? Surely, the timely consideration of these fearefull effects concerning especially their owne proper persons, would euen presently take vp our Tobacconists minds with farre better imployments: were they not too too beastly bewitched with those venimous va∣pours which flow from their filthie fumes. For lo, these are the faire fragrant flowers of their chargeable flames, the vn∣doubted successe of those their sottish attempts, and the flou∣rishing fruites of those their fantasticall fooleries. The very feeling of these and such other most fearefull effects should cause them continually to crie out and say thus, Nocet empa∣dolore, volup∣tas. Oh how pestiferous is that transitorie pleasure which we haue deare∣ly purchased with such perpetuall paine & shame? For lo now we do find and feele (in our proper experience) that these our filthie Tobacco fumes, are not onely pernicious vnto our bodies, but too too profluuious also for our purses, in pro∣curing such fearefull effects to our owne proper persons. Capn. They should so, I confesse. And I doubt not but (by that time they haue bene better schooled a while with the mistris of fooles) they will learne that lesson by roate. But what are those other effects (I beséech you) which do likewise concerne their proper estates? Hydr. They are those accidentall occurrents which do ordinarily attend vpon such chargeable cost, such superflu∣ous waste, such a prodigall and profluuious dispending of an∣cient patrimonies with other like worldly preferments. For what other things else may possibly follow thereof (besides a pernicious hurt to the body, and vntimely vndermining of mens honest reputations) but an vnrecouerable subuersion of that their ancient estate which they formerly receiued from their forefathers frugalitie? a perpetuall supplanting of that their primarie approued condition? and a monstrous metamorphosing of their former well managed Mannors, with other their domesticall maintenance? So as (by these
meanes) they make great noble Persons, but single-soaled Gentelmen; well bred Gentelmen, but bare thredded Yeo∣men; bountifull Yeomen, but beggerly Husbandmen; hos∣pitious Husbandmen, but shifting Trades-men, artificious Trades-men; but conicatching companions; conicatching companions, but vagabond rogues. Thus thou mayest plain∣ly perceiue how these their intoxicating Tobacco fumes are able (in an vnperceiueable and Circean manner) to trans∣forme nobilitie into gentrie, gentrie into yeomanrie, yeo∣manrie into husbandry, husbandrie into maunuarie, manua∣rie into manubiarie, manubiarie into a vagrant and retchlesse roguerie, and what not besides? Capn. Do you then determine, that these their Tobacco fumes are the vnchangeable cause of such a changed condi∣tion? Hydr. I do not make those their said fumes the efficient cause, although yet an vnchangeable occasion of such a change. For seeing Gen. 6.5. Iam. 4.5. the spirit which dwelleth in them, doth lust after euill continually: who seeth not then, but that this filthie Tobacco fume (so forcibly bewitching their braines) is the vndoubted occasion of inflaming their said luft to such a profluuious waste for the timely purchase of that which makes them eft∣soones to Deut. 23.15. waxe wanton with the good blessings of God? And euen as Israel Psal. 78.18. and 106.14. 1 Cor. 10.6. affected flesh for their lust: so these our fanta∣sticall spirits (requiring Tobacco fumes for their filthie desire) do most prodigally dispend their patrimonies about the vn∣timely procuring of those vanishing flames which they so wastfullyIam. 4.3. consume vpon their inordinate lusts. Howbeit, this one thing withall I pray thee obscrue: namely, that as the Lord God indirectly Psal. 78.29. giues them this way their hearts desire: so surely while the Tobacco fume is yet in their mouthes,Psal. 78.30. his in∣euitable wrath falles fearefully vpon them. For not onely he de∣liers them vp (in iustice) Rom. 1.24. to their owne hearts lust: but leaues them withall so sottish in iudgment, as themselues know not which way to mannage their present possessions; making thē insatiably mad in dispending their patrimonies about such
smokie delights, and in wasting their worldly preferments vpon those their preposterous lusts. And thus at length they begin to perceiue in their proper experience, that as the wa∣ter which driues the mill, decaies the mill: so surely with whatsoeuer vaine man Wisd. 11.3. insatiably sinneth, with the same eft∣soones he is foundly punished. Capn. Why Sir? may not wise men maintaine their Tobacco fumes, as well as their meate, drinke, & cloathing, without either offending God, or the pitifull subuersion of their present estates? Hydr. Dost thou accomt those for wise men, which so wantonly and foolishly waste their worldly maintenance vpon those their forenamed fooleries? But that thou may be able to vnderstand these matters the better: thou must learne here to distinguish betweene the necessary, and the needlesse supplies of nature. For all those things which do necessarily tend to an orderly preseruation of natures well being, accor∣ding to the prouident purpose of God himselfe, namely, meate, drinke, and clothing: they may, and they must bee maintained by a moderate and frugall expence, correspon∣dent to each man his present abilitie. Yea and all the neces∣sarie expences bestowed that way, they do vndoubtedly re∣ceiue such a blessed increase from the goodnesse of God, as a man shall be sure, therein Psal. 128.2. to eate the labour of his owne pro∣per hands, and it shall go well with him euery kind of way. How∣beit, all those things whatsoeuer which are but needlesse supplies to natures well being, not onely needlesse (I say) but noysome withall (such as are our immoderate gorman∣dizings, our superfluous quaffing vp of wine and strong drinkes, our insatiable sucking in of filthy Tobacco fumes, with sundry such other fantasticall fooleries) as they are not the ordinarie appointed labours of those mens hands which Psal. 128.1. walke vprightly in the waies of the Lord, so hath the Lord him∣selfe not onely alotted no one blessing vnto them, but rather imposed a Mat. 3.9. fearefull curse of penurie vpon them. For as it is the Pro. 10.22. blessing of the Almightie that maketh men rich, so surely
all those senslesse fooles which so insatiably deuoure their owne proper substance, they shall be enforced eftsoones Iob. 20.15. to vomite it vp againe, for the Lord God will draw it out of their bel∣lies, be they neuer so great, or so mightie. Yea and not onely the great ones shall be sure to feele this fearefull effect con∣cerning their owne present estates, but euen the Ecclus. 19.1. labouring men likewise that are so resolutely giuen to these their drun∣ken delights, they shall neuer be rich: and all they that make not much of a little, by little and little shall soone come to nothing; so vncertaine are the estates (be thou sure) of all those our insatiable suckers vp of filthie Tobacco fumes. Capn. But why should the expences bestowed vpon meate, drinke and clothing receiue such a blessing from God, and the excessiue cost layed forth for filthie Tobacco fumes, vndergo so fearefull a curse? Hydr. The reason is this. Meate, drinke, and clothing, they are necessarie supplies for natures well being, and the ordinarie props appointed of God for the timely support, and needfull preseruation of this present life: so as a mode∣rate expence bestowed that way, it is the Almightie his mer∣cifull designement to such as Psal. 128.1.2 vprightly walke in his waies. Whereas that superfluous waste which these men do rio∣tously lauish forth vpon their filthie Tobacco fumes, it is not the approued ordinarie way which the Almighty appointeth for mans preseruation, but rather such an inordinate desire of mans lusting heart as procureth his present destruction. To the one sort therefore the Lord hath promised a Deut. 28.3.4.5. blessing vpon their basket and store: and telleth them withall, that they shall vndoubtedly Psal. 128.1.2. eate the labour of their owne proper hands, which do so industriously and so painefully walke in his waies. To the other, he not onely denounceth a curse vpon Deut. 28.16.17.18. Malac. 3.9. their fields their basket, their store, the fruite of their land, the increase of their kine, and the flockes of their sheepe, but also vpon their re∣uenewes and rents how exceeding soeuer; telling them with∣all, that they do but euen Pro. 23.21. Hag. 1.5.6. purse vp the same in a bottomlesse bag. So as the very curse of the Lord (thou seest) is in Pro. 3.33. 1 King 17.14.16. the
house of the wicked: but he blesseth the habitation of the righte∣ous. I will make thee perceiue my purpose herein, by some plaine demonstration: and (for better performance hereof) let vs put this downe here for the present proportion. Be it supposed that some great man receiued yearely but fiue hun∣dred pounds annuall rents to defray his domesticall charges withall; which said fiue hundred pounds (being handsomly husbanded, and frugally employed) would accomplish that worke in a very commendable and competent manner: but being any way superfluously or wastefully spent vpon ex∣cesse of apparell, meates, drinkes, and other such riotous courses, would come very short in the reckoning. Suppose now withall, that this man forsooth (to fulfill the inordinate lust of his owne licentious heart) would yearely dispend one hundred pound at the least, vpon the vanishing flames of fil∣thie Tobacco fumes, not abating at all his said excesse in appa∣rell, in meates, and in drinkes: doth it not necessarily follow, that either this mans fiue hundred pounds rent must other∣waies receiue some extraordinarie supply for the continuall support of such a superfluous waste, or that else his present estate (in continuance of time) will be tumbled vpside downe? What sayest thou Capnistus? do answer directly either yea, or no. Capn. The one, or the other (I fréely confesse) must ne∣cessarily follow thereof: namely, either some present sup∣plie, or a present supplanting of that mans present estate at the least. Hydr. Thou iudgest aright. But tell me now where must such a present supply be had? There is no hope to obtaine the same from the blessing of God, because such a riotous course is directly opposite to his holy appointed ordinance: but rather the contrarie. For as those men do prodigally e∣uen blow away their wealth about filthie superfluous fumes, so surely the Almightie himselfe (euen in his fuming ven∣geance) doth proportionably blow forth a fearefull curse vpon all their labours: willing them to Hag. 1.5. consider their owne
waies in theit hearts, and telling them withall that Deut. 28.38. Mich. 6.15. Hag. 1.6.9. although they sow much they shall bring little home, and though they do eate, they shall not be satisfied: and although they do drinke, they shall not be filled; hough they cloath themselues, they shall not be chea∣rished; yea although they addle much wages, or receiue large reuenewes, yet shall they but purse vp the same in a bot∣tomlesse bag: because I haue blowne vpon it, saith the Lord God. Yea, the iust reuenger of such fantasticall courses, will ap∣point Ioel. 1.4. the Palmer worme to spoile the rest of their store; and that which is left by the Palmer worme, shall the Grashopper eate, and the residue of the Grashopper shall the Canker-worme eate; and the remainder of the Canker-worme, shall the Caterpiller consume and deuoure. By all which thou mayest very plainly perceiue, that rather a final consumption, then any formall supply, it is to be fearefully expected from the hands of the Lord. Capn. Very true it is. And therefore, I sée now they must either surceasse from that their former superfluous waste: or vse some other deuice of their owne, to supplie their wants. Hydr. Thou sayest very well. But what one deuice of their owne will be able to counteruaile the determined ven∣geance of God against those their superfluous vanities? No no, it is vtterly in vaine for those vaine-headded men, whose Iob. 27.3. Psal. 146.4. Isa. 2.22. breath is in their nostrils, to encounter herein with that Psal. 94.1. God of vengeance whom they haue Deut. 32.21. moued with iealousie, and prouo∣ked to anger by those their superfluous vanities: and who moreo∣uer (besides that ineuitable curse vpon their worldly prefer∣ments) will yet further smite their owne persons with such Deut. 28.28. ama∣zednesse, such blindnesse, and astonishment of mind, as they shall be quite destitute euen of naturall discretion and iudgement which way to mannage well their proper estates: but shall ignorantly Deut. 28.29. grope about the same at middle-time of the day, as blind men grope in the darknesse, and shall not be able to prosper in any their waies. And from hence (I assure you) it is that thou beholdest hourely among them, such sodaine alienating of ancient inheritances; such a beastly bangling
out of their birthrights; such carelesse curtolling of ancient entailes; such iniurious transporting of former titles; such an horrible chopping and changing of long continued Lord∣ships; such a monstrous metamorphosing of their ancestours Mannors; such a gracelesse acknowledging of fines and re∣coueries, and such a preposterous posting ouer of patrimo∣nies with other like worldly preferments. And howsoeuer these our Ammorites sinnes Gen. 15.16. are not as yet mounted vp to their excessiue height, but that the men themselues do still continue a time in some part of their ancient possessions: yet be thou assured of this, that (so soone as the iust measure of those their monstrous enormities are heaped vp once to the full) then euen those their reserued possessions will likewise vo∣mit them forth; so as open bils of sale shall be set ouer their doores, to purport to all passengers the sale of such houses. Yea and this also, to the great admiration of those our Dio∣genists, who will be readie to put downe this their cynicall censure vpon it, and say, Diogenes. Oh house, house; I thought thou woul∣dest surfet so long vpon those thy Tobacco fumes, that at the length thou wouldest spew thy maister quite out adoores. For now we do plainly perceiue, that the Lord 1 Sam. 25.22 1 King. 21.21. hath not left in thee, one man of thine owne bloud, to make water against the wall. Lo, here the fearefull effects concerning these our fume-suckers present estate in the world. Capn. Very fearefull effects I assure you. But Sir, hauing succinctly shewed me those horrible effects which more especially concerne the Tobacconists themselues, in an onely respect either of their person, or their proper condi∣tions: now shew me in like manner (I pray you) those o∣ther effects which more respectiuely concerne some others besides themselues. Hydr. With very good will. Wherein also thou hast to confider, that those selfe same effects they are of two sorts: Namely, such as more properly concerne their owne wiues and children: or such else, as do more generally concerne some others besides.
Capn. What are those effects first, which more proper∣ly concerne their owne wiues and children? Hydr. They are all those accidentall occurrents which do very fearefully affect their sorowfull hearts. Namely, the ri∣otous dispending of that their allotted maintenance; the ali∣enating of their designed inheritance, and their vtter impo∣uerishing without all hope of redemption. From the wofull consideration of which occurrents, they are seuerally enfor∣ced to put vp their pitifull complaints for the ease of their endlesse griefes. Capn. What complaints (I pray you) are those? Hydr. Surely, euen such as are able to batter our Tobac∣conists hearts in an hundred peeces, were they not an hun∣dred times harder then the Adamant stone. For imagine thou beheldest here such a fume-suckers wife most fearefully fu∣ming forth very fountaines of bloud, howling for anguish of heart, weeping, wailing, and wringing her hands toge∣ther, with grisly lookes, with wide staring eies, with minde amazed, with thoughts perplexed, with body shiuering and quaking in euery ioynt: wouldest thou not wonder greatly at this her so sodaine a change? I am sure thou couldest not but wonder much. But suppose withall thou shouldest pre∣sently heare the thundring eccho of her horrible outcries ring in the clouds, while she pitifully pleades with her hus∣band thus: The same or the like com∣plaint may al∣so be taken vp against adul∣erous hus∣bands.Oh husband, my husband, mine onely husband! Consider I beseech thee, thy deare, thy louing, and thy kind-hearted wife. Am not (I alas) thine onely wife; thy best beloued wife; yea and Mal. 2.14.15. the onely wife of thy youth? Out, out (alas) why art thou then so carelesse of this my present estate? Why dost thou so vainely preferre a vanishing filthie fume before my permanent vertues; before my amourous imbracings; yea before my firme setled faith & constant loue? Alas (my sweet husband) haue I not bin the Almightie his sanctified meanes to Gen. 30.3. build thee vp with an Mal. 2.15. holy, a blessed, and a sanctified seede? Haue not I here brought forth Gen. 30.11. an armie of children vnto
thee? Haue I not enabled thee (husband) to Psal. 127.5. speake with thy stoutest enemies in the open gates? yea haue I not made thee (a∣las) an happie man, by Psal. 127.5. filling thy quiuer full of faire, of faithfull, and gracious young impes? What might any one woman in the vniuersall world haue done more for thee (my deare husband) then thy deare wife hath done? Oh, out (alas) why art thou then become now so graceles a father towards this thine owne of-spring; and so grieuous an husband to me their poore mother, in preferring a fantasticall smoke before these so substantiall blessings? Oh husband, husband, oh hard hearted husband! nay rather, a Exod. 4.25. bloudie husband thou art vnto me. For that thou (neglecting 1 Tim. 5.8. thy proper calling & care concerning an husband) hast causelesly brought Luke. 10.41. abun∣dance of cares vpon me thy sillie poore carefull wife: A care how to liue my selfe, a care how to vphold our present estate, a care for these my poore comfortlesse brats, a care for their present prouision and foode; hil-backe, and fil-bellie is now mine hourely care, yea and a care for some corner (God knowes) wherein we may hide our beggerly heads. For thou (alas husband) hauing hitherto vainely wasted their proper reuenewes vpon a vanishing filthie fume, I my poore selfe must be faine (now) to forgo my Feoffement also, I must (perforce) be enforced to yeeld to the present sale thereof, to acknowledge before some Iudge my vnwilling willing consent thereunto, full sore (God he knowes) against my owne will. Howbeit, necessitie (they say) hath no law: I must now do it (alas) or let thee lie fast by the heeles. I must do it (God wot,) otherwise my poore selfe and my sorowful chil∣dren must starue in the open streets. Tell me Capnistus, if thou shouldest but heare a poore sorrowfull wife thus piti∣fully complaine vpon her pitilesse fume-sucking husband, wouldest thou not forthwith imagine that her poore fain∣ting heart had too effectually felt the fearefull effects of that his former fantasticall fooleries? Capn. Yes in very déede would I Sir, and (I suppose) not without a very vrgent occasion: but what are the
poore childrens complaints, I pray you? Hydr. They are those sighing sobs, and those sorowfull outcries which euen present necessitie, and the fearefull fore∣sights of their future wants doth hourely vrge them vnto. For the better explanation wherof, imagine thou shouldest here likewise behold before thy face, a yong tender brat, or little pretie nest-cukkle (beginning to bite in the lip, to whimper a little) and then (creeping pretily betweete the degenerate father his legs) should cry out and say thus vnto him in the name of all the rest of his brethren and sisters: Dad, hearke Dad in thine eare. Am not I thy best boy, am I not, Dad? And doest thou not loue me thy best boy, Dad? Harke Dad, thou wert wont (whē thou wentst to the Faires) to buy thy best boy, fine knacks, fine boxes, fine rattles, a fine feather, a fine gilden dagger, and a fine golden hobbie-horse: wert thou not, Dad? And wilt thou now let me thy white-headed boy runne barefoote and barelegged without hose and shooes? Why harke Dad, hath the fire of Tobacco filched thy purse? Hath filthie Tobacco flames enforced all thy gol∣den angels to creepe couertly out of thy coffers into thy pro∣fluuious pouch, and from thence to flie forth all about? Tell me good Dad, hath the poysonsome stinke of those filthie Tobacco fumes made me thy owne pretie boy, my brethren and sisters to stinke now so horribly in thy vnnatural nostrils, as thou art vtterly vnable (how willing soeuer) to buy my brother Humfrey an hat, or little Francke a fustian coate, or my sister Kate a new coife, or poore prettie Tib a tawdrie lace, or yet me thy best boy a new nothing to hang on my sleeue? I pray thee hearke Dad, and i'le tel thee a thing in thine eare. My brother Robin he wrings his hands thus, and cries mainly out: because thou art now no more able to maintaine him any longer to schoole, and yet he hath halfe learned his Pu∣erilis (he saith) without booke. And my sister Meg, she sits mourning in corners, because (being now ripe and readie for mariage) thou art not able to prefer her that way, with one groates-worth of goods, she being otherwaies capable
enough of many good mariages. And Dad, little Kit, he cries out for a prenticeship, but cannot preuaile therein, for want of preferment. Yea and mine eldest brother Will, he goeth wailing vp and downe: because his birth-right (he saith) is bangled out about nothing. Dad, hearke in thine eare; Will, he prates many bugs-words to my brothers and sisters be∣hind thy backe. He maruels (he saith) how thou canst for very shame go daily (as thou doest) to heare Sermons, and profite no more by preaching. Nay, hearke Dad, he telleth them that Saint Paul saith plainly, 1 Tim. 5.8. thou hast denied the faith; art become an apostate, and worse them an infidel: because thou shewest thy selfe so carelesse in prouiding for vs, & the folke of thy familie. Yea and that the Lord God proceedeth iustly in iudgement against thee, by causing thy fantasticall suc∣king in of filthie Tobacco flames, to feede thee as fat as a foole. For lo (saith he) our Father long since did lie Mich. 2.1. in his bed, de∣uising that monstrous flame: neuer regarding at all, how the Lord (in the meane time) was Mich. 2.4. deuising a plague against him and his familie, from which neither he himselfe, nor we his forlorned of-spring, shall euer be able to plucke out our neckes. And therefore (with very great griefe and anguish of heart) we may now take vp this reproachfull parable against him▪ yea we may now lament with a dolefull lamentation, and say one to another. Alas, we be Mich. 2.4.5. euen vtterly wasted? Be∣hold here, how the righteous Iudge (for our fathers fanta∣sticall fooleries) hath iustly dispersed the long setled portions of vs his poore of-spring for euer. For lo, our owne father himselfe (being fearefully giuen ouer to the insatiable lust of his owne licencious heart) hath now made such an absolute sale of his lands, and so beastly bangled out our birth-rights in so many odde parcels, as there is vtterly no hope at all of any redemption; nor possibilitie that any one of our fathers poore of spring shall euer be able to cast forth a coard by lot, in any our alienated inheritances. In so much as wise men (wondring greatly thereat) may say one to another: Behold, we Iob. 5.3.4.5. haue seene the foolish man substantially rooted, and surely set∣led:
but lo, now the Lord curseth his habitation, and telleth him, his children shall be destitute, and farre from succour: yea that they shall be destroyed in the gate, and none shall deliuer them. The hungrie shall eate vp this foolish mans haruest; yea they shall euen take it away as it were from a∣mong the thornes; and the thirstie shall drinke vp his sub∣stance. Neither may our said father impute the blame hereof to the barrennesse of the soile, but to the badnesse rather of his owne proper husbandry, and to the preposterous waste of his profluuious purse. For Iob. 5.6. miserie cometh not forth of the dust, neither doth pouertie spring out of the earth. Lo Dad, my brothers and sisters they prate thus in corners behind thy backe, so they do: and I said I would tell thee thereof, so I would; and wilt thou not whip them soundly for it? How sayest thou Capnistus? if thou shouldest but heare some poore distressed mother and her pitifull brats thus greeuously crie and complaine, wouldest thou not forthwith conclude that their poore hearts had formerly felt the forenamed effects of such a fantasticall sucking in of filthie Tobacco fumes? Capn. Yes that would I, no doubt: and not without ve∣ry great cause. But good Sir, forbeare (I beséech you) all such your further patheticall Prosopopoeias. For my very heart it bléedes in my body, to thinke that any poore harme∣lesse infants should thus be enforced to pull a publike re∣proch vpon their owne fathers, for those their fantasticall and palpable fooleries. Hydr. I am very well willing (vpon this thine intreatie) to surceasse forthwith from those their supposed most pitifull plaints; not taking any pleasure at all in such prosecutions, but desiring thereby to make those their vnchristian courses become odious, euen in the eares of all sorts of people. And surely, had those our blindfolded sots but one dram of Gods grace, or one drop of good nature remaining within them, they would eftsoones imagine such patheticall Prosopo∣poeias in their owne sinfull soules. Howbeit, this is certainly a vengeance decreed with God, that as Pro. 1.32. the prosperitie of
those our foolish Tobacconists is their proper destruction, so sure∣ly the Almightie (in that selfe same decreed vengeance) will euen constraine them perforce to Pro. 1.31. eate vp the whole crop of their owne foolish waies, and to be filled with the fruites of their former deuices. Yea he will enforce their Pro. 6.11. appointed po∣uertie to come speedily vpon them as one that passeth apace by the way: and make their allotted beggerie very fiercely to assault them, like a strong armed man. Capn. Well Sir, let this fully suffice for those feare∣full effects which more respectiuely concerne their wiues and hildren: an now lay open those other effects (I pray you) which more generally concerne some other besides. Hydr. With a very good will. Wherein thou hast here to obserue, that those selfe same effects, they are either such as more especially concerne the poore Tenants themselues: or such else as more generally appertaine to the publike State. Capn. What are those effects first, which more especi∣ally concerne the poore Tenants themselues? Hydr. They are all those importable burdens which their intoxicated Land-lords do most grieuously impose vpon the poore mens backs, for the bloudie supplie of their beastly wants. For, these our insatiable suckers of smoke, feeling once (in a miserable experience) that their fiue hundred-pounds yearely reuenewes will not render an allowance to that their prodigall dispending of one hundred pounds yearely at least vpon those their filthie Tobacco fumes, without a finall confu∣sion of their forefathers patrimonie; and perceiuing moreo∣uer, that no one supply of those their superfluous wants may possibly bee expected from any the good blessings of God, but the cursed supplanting rather of their present possessions, they begin eftsoones to cast about with themselues, which way they may assuredly support their fantasticall fooleries, without the finall subuersion of their proper estates. And this imagination of theirs, no sooner possesseth their swim∣ming heads, but the diuell himselfe doth forthwith suggest as pleasing a supply to their swilling hearts; perswading them
seriously (through the diuellish deuice of Christian Craft, that Machiuilian monster which hourely attends on their persons, and vndertakes withall to mannage their domesti∣call affaires) that they may very well raise yearely some two hundred pounds more at the least from among their poore Tenants, towards the timely defraying of those their super∣fluous and idle expences, without any present oppressing of those peasant-like fatbackes at all. Capn. Oh monstrous imagination of theirs! All the diuels in hell could neuer haue found forth a more mischie∣uous deuice for the pitifull spoyling of those their poore Tenants. Hydr. Very true as thou sayest. For this diuellish deuice is no sooner set on foote by those monstrous Minotaures, but the same is as diuellishly entertained of our Tyger-like Tobacconists, and as perniciously put in present practise by them, and their bloudie Bailifs together. So as, from this sandie foundation doth forthwith arise the monstrous im∣prouing of Lordships, the mercilesse inclosing of seuerall grounds, the insatiable inhaunsing of incomes and fines, the excessiue racking and raising of rents, the beggerly boro∣wing of some three yeares pay before hand at the least; the rufull riding and running; the chargeable carting and cary∣ing, so vncharitably exacted vpon the poore Tenants; their bondslaue-like boonings at euery becke; their extraordina∣rie rent-corne, rent-coales, rent-capons, and I wot not what; together with the vnseasonable haling home of their hungry Land-lord his haruest, notwithstanding the exceeding great losse of their owne, lying all abroad in great danger of waste. Yea from hence also ariseth the taking of so many new lea∣ses, in a needles reuersion; the vnhonest drowning vp of some nine or ten yeares in the old lease at least; the finding forth of some certaine odde quirkes in either of both; and the vn∣equall making of forfeitures in either of both, so oft as poore Tenants refuse to crouch downe like old beaten hounds at their maisters becke, or to supply the insatiable
want of the Land-lords insatiable lusts whensoeuer they call. By all which thou maist plainly perceiue, that these our insatiable suckers of smoke, do nothing else in effect, but euen Isay. 3.15. batter their poore Tenants to pouder, Isay. 3.15. grinde the poore mens faces away, Am. 8.4. swallow vp the hungrie soules, Am. 8.4. buy the needie for shooes, Am. 5.12. oppresse the iust in the gate, Am. 8.4. make the needie of the land to faile, yea and Hab. 2.8. insatiably deuoure the innocent bloud, to vp∣hold their insatiable filthie fooleries. So as, the Am. 8.8. whole land must tremble for this: and euery man mourne that dwelleth therein. Capn. And very well worthie they are. But Sir, Do you absolutely ascribe these fearefull effects, to our insatia∣ble taking of Tobacco fumes alone? Hydr. Not so. For howsoeuer it be a most fearefull sinne before the Maiestie of the immortall God, for any man thus vainely to waste his wealth: yet surely this our superfluous sucking in of filthie Tobacco fumes goeth neuer alone by it selfe, but hath (like an amourous Ladie) her lasciuious hang∣bies attending hourely vpon her traine, to aggrauate her needlesse excesse the more in the presence of God. For this burning and scorching flame being once inwardly taken in∣to the bowels; there must necessarily follow, an insatiable quaffing vp of wine, ale, or beere at the least, to allay and quench the excessiue heate of the stomacke. And by the in∣satiable quaffing in of these strong drinks, Dame Venus her selfe beginneth eftsoones so fiercely to be enflamed and set on fire, as nothing in the world but some one of her Damo∣sels, or Draf-sackes at least, must forthwith be fetcht, to calme the new kindled coales of their lusting hearts. And those a∣mourous Damosels so seruiceably attending their becke, & so wantonly seruing their turnes that way, they must not only be most gallantly adorned with whatsoeuer ornaments of brauery themselues, but be courted eftsoones (by those their prodigall paramours) in sundry changeable & charge∣able sutes. And this brauery of apparel, it must be proportio∣nably graced with proud & sumptuous buildings: and those
sumptuous buildings, they speedily procure a prodigall dis∣pending of patrimonies with other like worldly prefer∣ments. And this prodigall dispending of patrimonies, it cannot but impaire our fume-suckers ancient estates. And this needlesse impairing of ancient estates, it must haue for∣sooth some present supply from a pitifull oppressing of the poore Tenants themselues. So as, albeit these sundry most wastefull disorders do all ioyntly concurre in the speedie sub∣uersion of our fume-suckers ancient estates, and therefore we do synecdochically put downe but a part for the whole; yet the filthie Tobacco fume (thou maist plainly perceiue) is now adaies become the Troian horse-bellie of those other hid∣den mischiefes, and the onely Metropolitane of all those monstrous misorders. By the misguidance whereof, our in∣satiable fume-suckers (thou seest) they do nothing in effect: but euen Isa. 59.5. hatch the Cockatrice egges, and weaue the poysonsome spiders web, Isa. 59.4. conceiuing mischiefe, and bringing iniquity forth: thus Isa. 5.18. drawing wickednesse to themselues with the cords of vani∣tie, and sinne, as t were with cart-ropes. Capn. Let this suffice for those fearefull effects which more especially concerne the poore Tenants themselues: and now shew me (I pray you) those other effects which more generally appertaine to the publike State. Hydr. With very good will. And those effects also are such as do primarily proceed from the mightier sort of our filthy fume-suckers: or from the more abiect crew of those our tippling Tobacconists. Capn. Very well. But what (first) are those fearefull effects, which do primarily procéed from the mightier sort of our fume-suckers? Hydr. They are such monstrous attempts and outragious enormities, as honest minded persons should euen tremble to tell; as men of common humanitie should abhorre to heare; and as holy religious wights should loath in their hearts. For when those our insatiable suckers of filthie fumes are vtterly sunke; when their ancient estates (I meane) haue suffred
such an vnrecouerable ship-wracke, as they know not which way to winde themselues forth from the sands of sorrow, and shelfs of shame, then they forthwith resolue vpon despe∣rate courses for the daily supply of their present wants. For then (forsooth) they will either become magnificent states∣men in Stand-gate hole; or too too humbled suters at Shoo∣ters-hil; or huffing hunts-men on new Market-plaine; or bra∣uing Bow-bearers at Black-moore heath; or hucking Hab∣berdashers on Hog-magog hils; or the Kings cauallering coyne-takers at Crabtree corner; yea or the most fliggering Faulkeners at Flittesse hedge, to let flie at each passengers purse at the least. For as these fellowes can neither Luk. 16.13 dig, nor delue: so are they most egregiously ashamed to beg their reliefe at honest mens houses. Capn. These Sir (I confesse) they are most horrible effects. Hydr. They are so indeed. And yet (if no helpe might be found for the same) I could euen heartily wish that these were the worst. Because then it were more safe to suffer some small inconuenience, then desperately admit of an horrible mischiefe. Yea and of two dangerous occurents, rather to tollerate the least of the twaine, then fearefully vndergo the hazard of all. Capn. What might be your meaning herein Sir, I beséech you? Hydr. My meaning herein is this. Namely, if there could none other helpe at all be had, then were it much better to beare a time with such desperate aduentures as tend to the onely hurt of some priuate persons, then ouer carelesly to neglect the vnnaturall nourse-mother of some such dange∣rous attempts as directly do aime at the publike good of the State. I will demonstrate this matter by an apparent exam∣ple thus. Those our late traiterous Recusants, they were all (for the most part) but beggerly Bankrupts, and men of very base condition, as Authoritie it selfe (by due inquisition, and pro∣uident
enquirie) found plainly forth, and their owne fauou∣rites themselues very freely confesse. Now those men (for the most part) they were formerly held for professed Tobacco∣nists: namely, for disordered and riotous persons. Who fal∣ling first from Tobacco to tippling; from tippling to who∣ring; from whoring, to a Court-like brauing; from a Court-like brauing, to superfluous building; from a super∣fluous building, to a prodigall dispending of their ancient patrimonies, & other their alloted preferments; from a pro∣digall dispending, to an excessiue want; from an excessiue want, to a wofull malcontented condition; and from their malcontended condition, to the proud pioners most bloudie profession in that the vndermining practise of theirs: where∣in they purposely put downe their pestiferous proiects and plots for their present reliefe. For howsoeuer they made Re∣ligion it selfe vnseemely couerture to those their traite∣rous attempts, because among them, In nomine Domini incipit omne malum. In the name of God, all mischiefe begins: yet (without doubt) the preposterous sup∣ply for those their profluuious purses, was the principall pro∣pounded period to those their pestilent purposes, and the ful∣ly determined shot-anker of that their subsequent shame. The sequele it selfe doth sound forth at large the truth of the premisses now, how intricate soeuer before. For their intol∣lerable wants became so heauie a burden vnto their vnben∣ded backes, as (before they would too long vndergo the huge weight thereof) they rather most damnably resolued among themselues to massacre our most Christian King, our graci∣ous Queene; our peerlesse young Prince, the whole royall of-spring, the honorable Councell; the Nobles, the Gen∣trie, the Cleargie, the Communaltie, and the happie estate of this our whole countrey: like a most viperous brood, de∣uouring the very belly it selfe wherein they were borne and bred. Capn. Oh horrible attempt! What stéelie heart would not tremble and quake at the very hearing thereof? But go to Sir, make haste I beséech you, to the timely vnfolding
of those other effects which more respectiuely procéed from the baser sort of those our tippling Tobacconists. Hydr. Content. Wherein also I would haue thee con∣sider afresh, that albeit this sort of tippling Tobacconists bee accompted for men very abiect and base, in comparison of those loftie fume-suckers we spake of before, yet proue they too too pestiferous also to the publke State; and their pre∣tended proiects and plots are much more pernicious that way, then may well be perceiued at first. And howsoeuer these, and the other may seeme somewhat to differ in their seuerall circumferences, they do both of them ioyntly fall iumpe and pat vpon one and the selfesame period of publike disorder. For (concerning any their practicall designements) they mutually march forwards in one and the selfe same cir∣cular motion, I meane, in the pestiferous disturbing and pre∣posterous supplanting of our publike State. Capn. Good Sir, I cannot as yet conceiue your purpose herein. Hydr. I will thus more expresly demonstrate the same. Be it here supposed that this baser sort of tippling Tobacco∣nists (whether Husbandmen▪ Artificers, Trades-men, Sadlers, Shoo-makers, Taylers, Tinkers, or any other else of the vul∣gar condition) hauing in all▪ but twentie nobles, twentie markes, twentie or fortie pounds maintenance to defray all manner of domesticall charges withall) should weekely dis∣pend some three shillings fourepence vpon filthie Tobacco fumes: who seeth not plainly, but that either their said maintenance must forthwith bee mannaged by some other bad meanes, or this their ancient estate in very short time be shrewdly surprized, and (in a manner) quite subuerted? Capn. There is no necessarie consequent in either of both. For behold Sir, they may forthwith surceasse from such a superfluous waste, and eftsoones betake themselues to a much more frugall course. Hydr. Surceasse from their former superfluous waste (saist thou) and fall to frugalitie? When the skie falleth so downe
to the ground, wee may haply gather great store of Larks. No, no, its more possible for a man to take an Hare with a tabret and whistle, then turne those bewitched Tobacco∣nists frō that tippling course wherein they were more accusto∣mably bred and brought vp. For howsoeuer they be Ierem. 4.22. wise e∣nough to do wickedly: yet (without question) to do well, they haue no knowledge at all. Do thou but take an exact suruey of any their disordered courses, or desperate attempts in all their assemblies, and at euery time and tide: and then tell me withall, what any one hope may bee had after such a Moone-shine in the water? And whether worse Canker∣wormes can be found in a Christian Common-wealth, then those our Exod. 10.13.14. Egyptian Caterpillers. Capn. Helpe me good Sir (I beséech you) in such a suruey. Hydr. With all my heart. And (for the more orderly ef∣fecting of this our intent) it shall be by a liuely resemblance of them, and their ordinary practises. Let vs therefore accor∣dingly imagine, that Prince Arthur our Aleman, Babble-much the Barber, Barthelet the Butcher, Cocke-on hoope the Cob∣bler, Ding-thrift the Dog-keeper, False-chaps the Fidler, Grout-nolle the Girdeler, Huf-cap the Hunts man, Iustle-king the Ioyner, Lithersbie the Lath-render, Martin the Marriner, Mad-braine the Make-shift, Nichol the Net-mender, Oliuer the Oyster-man, Perkin the Pedler, Partiface the Piper, Proud-mind the Plummer, Runagate the Royster, Simkin the Sithe∣smith, Small-braines the Shoo-maker, Thin-gut the Thatcher, Talke-apace the Taylour, with Tom-trash the Tinker: imagine here (I say) that all and euery of these should mutually assem∣ble themselues at Saint Paltockes Inne, wouldest thou not accompt them Crobyll ugum. a quaint Crobylian yoke, a congruent clu∣ster (I meane) of prettie carowsing companions? Capn. I might (at first sight) so accompt them, I fréely confesse. Howbeit Sir, this your cynicall censure, it will (I feare me) be shrewdly distasted of some: because the Trades themselues which you speake of here (being
rightly respected) are very commendable, yea and sundry men of those selfe same trades, are worthily reputed for ho∣nest persons. Hydr. Distasted of some (sayest thou?) A silie poore wit∣lesse some they are (be thou sure) who wot not how to di∣stinguish betweene those trades themselues, and the men in those trades. For I do not here censure those good trades themselues, nor the honest men whatsoeuer, imployed in any of those commendable trades: onely I taxe the scum and of∣scouring of honest men, and the palpable abusers of those the good trades whatsoeuer. And therefore (to proceede direct∣ly in that our former suruey,) let vs imagine that either all, or some certaine of these should purposely assemble them∣selues at Arthur ale-mans house about eight or nine of the clocke in the morning, with a ioynt and full resolution there to hold out side till eleuen or twelue in the night: what kind of coile (thinkest thou) would those our quaint companions keepe there for all the day long? Capn. When the good ale were once got in the head, and wit gone out, I feare me Sir, they would kéepe a ve∣ry bad coile. Hydr. Thou mayest be assured of that, if thou but obserue their ordinarie courses. For (hauing ioyntly determined vp∣on the match making) to make then their sweete liquor of life the appointed period to all those their pot-like procee∣dings, they suppose it not greatly amisse, to begin the match first, by drinking in measure next their hearts; that is, each man (for his share) must carouse a whole quart at a clap, for cu∣ring his eie-sight. After all this, they mispend some quarter of an houre in questioning about the maner of their Hostes∣ses brewing, and in commending most highly that last bre∣wed liquor of life. But now (forsooth) perceiuing some so∣daine cold qualme ouerwhelming their queasie stomackes by reason that their lately receuied liquor lieth cold in the same, they do call forthwith for one ounce of Tobacco, for a Tobacco pipe, and a greasie candle to kindle the same: suc∣king
in (by course) that filthie Tobacco fume, as eagerly (I as∣sure thee) as the hungrie horse-leach sucketh vp the putrified bloud from a sore bruised leg. This is no sooner done, but they begin eftsoones to feele the fierie scorching flame of that filthie Tobacco fume, to fret and burne in their bellies: and thereupon, they do presently call for a whole yard of ale, that is, for so many fresh cups of that their beloued liquor, as may stand one by one within a yard compasse euery way. With these they resolue to allay, and to quench the outragi∣ous heate in their belching breasts: wherein also they do make exceeding much haste, for feare of fiering their rubie vermilion noses. This purpose performed, they perceiue their former fierie stomackes so sodainly cooled, and do then feele withall, such a chilling cold dispersing it selfe throughout all the parts of their bodie, as they feare to be forthwith surpri∣sed with a cold deadly palsie, or to fall eftsoones into some new feauer-lurden at least: and thereupon they take Tobacco afresh: and withall (for preuenting the worst) they do call forth a whole Iurie of fresh cups, to conclude and determine the good estate of their bodies. The first quart cup of those twelue (being called Tom Troth) they do make the foreman of the Iurie: swearing him forthwith, to giue vp a very true verdict concerning this present point, and to kisse the booke, that is, to cleaue close to their pale coloured lips till all the liquor be out. After him, Brafield-font he is next called, and so all the rest of their Iurie in order: telling them one by one, that the same oath which their fore-man had taken, must e∣uery one of them also (for their parts) take and fulfill, so helpe tem Belzebub, in the name of bleare-eied Bacchus their ale-mighty soule-slayer, & to kiffe the said booke as be∣fore. The Iurie now hauing thus deuoutly taken their oathes, and very deepely considered their late-giuen charge to the bottome, Breede-bate ye Bailieffe he cries, A verdict, a verdict. Whereupon Prince Arthur the ale-man (being then made the deputed Rhadamanthus ouer those his tippling Tobacco∣nists) he readily receiueth the verdict, as followeth: Namely,
that (howsoeuer all the rest of their damned crew, are in pret∣tie good case) Cocke-on hoope the Cobler is fallen into very great danger, hauing too too beastly surfeited in his swine-like bodie, and being soule-sicke to death: so as there is none other way with him for the present, but forthwith to dispose of his last Will and Testament, and so to betake himselfe (hand ouer head) into the hands of Pluto his magnificent Lord and maister. Capn. A very sharpe verdict. But Sir, what was the successe thereof? Hydr. Vpon the hearing of this late-giuen verdict, the whole company aduise Cocke-on hoope to deuise of a Will: who willingly consented thereunto. And thereupon Rince∣pot the Register, he is sent for in haste, to write & record the same. Rince-pot (hauing formally put downe the stile of the Testament) doth aske him withall, what he would haue him write. Cocke-on-hoope willeth him to write word for word from his mouth, as he vtters them forth: which (immediatly after the ordinarie stile) was thus in effect: namely, Drinke, then more drinke, then a little more drinke, then yet more drinke, then a little modicum of Bakers bread, then drinke a∣gaine, then more drinke, then a little more drinke, then yet more drinke, and so forth. Item, I appoint Arthur Ale-man mine onely Executor, making Huf-cap the Hunts-man, and Small-braines the Soomaker, the ioynt Superuisers of this my last Testament: allowing them all three, a full pipe of Tobacco, for their paines that way. Witnesse hereunto, the whole ras∣kallike-rabblement of this our damned crew. Go to now (saith Cocke-on hoope) let me heare my last Testament. Con∣tent (quoth Rince-pot) and thereupon (crying Silence my maisters) he read the same forth in this following order: In the name of Belzebub, amen. I Cocke-on hoope Cobler, being now most shrewdly surfeited in my beastly bodie by reason of the good ale suddes, and damnablie soule-sicke in these my damned delights, but yet of a reeling and rotten remembrance, blessed be Bacchus therefore, do ordaine this
my last Will and Testament, in manner and forme follo∣wing. First, I bequeath my beastly body to Bacchus mine onely ale-mightie protector, and the same to be buried di∣rectly vnder our gallowes, at the East townes end: surren∣dring withall my swine-like soule into Belzebubs hands, to be shrined vp for euer in the neathermost Stygian gulph. Then next, I bequeath to the whole societie of these my ca∣rousing companions, as followeth: Namely, drinke, more drinke, a little more drinke, yet more drinke, then a little mo∣dicum of Bakers bread: then drinke againe, then more drinke, then yet a little more drinke, and so forth. Item, I appoint Arthur ale-man, the sole and onely Executor of this my last Testament, making Huf-cap the Hunts-man, and Small-braines the Shoomaker, my ioynt superuisers; allowing to euery of them, a full pipe of Tobacco for his paines taken that way. Witnesse hereunto, the whole Rascabilian rabblement of this our damnable Crew. Lo this (quoth Rince-pot) is here set downe as your last Will and Testament: How like you thereof? I do like it (saith Cocke-on hoope) exceeding well, sauing in one onely point, namely, that little modicum of Ba∣kers bread marreth all: if that were some way amended, I do ot doubt to recouer forthwith. Can you not put out the modicum of Bakers bread clean, and put downe a good pipe of Tobacco in the place thereof? That may be done with a trice (quoth Rince-pot) and so accordingly recordeth the same. Cocke-on hoope, at the hearing thereof (being somthing recouered of his surfeiting sicknesse) he biddeth Groutnolle the Girdler to reach maister Rince-pot the bottome of the pot for his paines: and withall prayeth False-chaps the Fiddler, & Partie-face the Piper to play him his resurrexit à mortuis. At which his idle conceite, the whole company they fell forth∣with into an exceeding loud laughter: and thereupon (cal∣ling eftsoones for faire Allicocke their Hostesse, as also for her fine minion, mistresse Winefride the wring-spigot) they held it an ancient kind of carousing curtesie (in a merrie memento) to kisse both of them round for feare of some ranckling.
Capn. But, how did Arthur her Husband like of that matter? Hydr. Exceedingly well: and no maruell at all. For it is the manner of such cup-shotten companions, to accompt those wiues the best wiues (what baddes-bies soeuer) which with one after-noones sport, are able to make their pottage∣pot play the better for a whole weeke together. Howbeit, here began the new broyle. Breede-hate, he breweth a mar∣uellous brawle about his ordinary Fee for summoning the Grand-Iurie before; and Runagate the Royster, he lendeth him a sound cuffe on the eare for the same. Whereupon the whole crew of companions fell a scuffling together, neither once knowing, nor yet caring whom they do strike, so they may soundly light pat on any mans pate. In this their drun∣ken fought fray, there was giuen many a broken head, be∣sides sundry drie blowes about their shoulders. At length they friendly parted themselues: and thereupon Arthur (to saue his recognizance) conueyes them one from another in∣to seuerall corners, there to sleepe out the good-ale suddes. After all this (hauing somewhat recouered their senses) they call forthwith for a reckoning: which came iust to twentie shillings ten pence for ale, and seuen shillings sixe for Tobacco and candle. Such as had present money payed their shares: and such as had none, either layed downe their pawnes, or else ranne on the score till a further reckoning. And then (calling for a fresh paire of cardes, and their reckoning cups) they thought good to conclude their sport, with a game or too at Poope-noddie. Capn. At Poope noddie Sir? What game (I beséech you) is that? Hydr. What Capnistus? art thou a professed Tobacconist: and knowest not Poope-noddie? I had thought the very hearing of these former disorders, would haue made thee acquainted therewith. Well then, I will shew thee the whole sport, according to the credible information of such as lear∣ned the same themselues in a sound and setled experience.
Marke it well man; for this (I assure thee) it is: Namely, all the kine out of the stall; all the sheepe out of the fold; all the corne out of the barne; all the coine out of the coffer; all the webs out of the wardrobe; all the pennies out of the purse; all the drinke out of the pot; all the wit out of the head; all the shame out of the face; all honestie out of the heart; bodie it selfe vnderneath the boord; and soule and all to the diuell. Lo here the sway of Poope-noddie: and this for a short suruey concerning any their disordered courses. Capn. Disordered courses indéed. But yet Sir, these courses (how disordered soeuer) they hurt onely them∣selues: neither do I perceiue as yet, how the same should be greatly pernicious to the good of our publike State. Hydr. Surely, Capnistus, thou art ouer shallow of conceit to deale in deeper matters of policie, if thou perceiuest not this. For (besides the great hurt which those our Tobacco∣nists do causelesly procure to their owne proper persons and states) is it not exceedingly hurtfull to the publik good of our countrey, that any such able persons should be so carelesly permitted to cassier their publike callings; to leade an idle and loytring life; to lose their precious times; to abandon their ancient trades; to neglect their charges; to consume their patrimonies; to lauish forth their worldly preferments; to waste their whole wealth; & so to procure such needlesse pouerty vpon themselues and all theirs, as they must be en∣forced perforce, either to beg their bread, or to be maintai∣ned vpon publike charge at the least: to the vntimely imbea∣zilling of their present prouision, and the preposterous vn∣dermining of publike good? Tell me (I pray thee) whether these their disordered courses do not collaterally and con∣sequently become very pestiferous to our publike State? Be∣sides that, these disordered persons, they are egregiously scandalous to sundry such others of like disposition, in giuing them all a very pernicious president to such profluuious ex∣pences as they are naturally prone vnto, by procuring them
to the like disordered practises; by causing them very care∣lesly to foreslip their present auailes; to lose their precious times; to neglect their commendable callings; to cast off all Christian care concerning themselues, their wiues, their chil∣dren, and all the folke of their familie; yea and euen prodi∣gally to dispend, and wastefully to consume their worldly wealths vpon vanishing and vaine delights. Are not these squandring courses of theirs become very pestiferous presi∣dents, and most pernicious practises (thinkest thou) to the vndoubted preiudice of our publike State? For how should publike States be prouidently supported, and safely preser∣ued in their publike good: without the honest cares, the care∣full endeuours, and industrious labours of men in their sun∣dry professions and callings? And who shall attend vpon such industrious, laborious, and painefull endeuours, if all sorts of trades-men should confusedly become such carousing com∣panions? And why should Cocke-on hoope the Cobler, or Ding-thrift the Dog-keeper, or False-chaps the Fidler, or Li∣thersbie the Lath-render, or Partiface the Piper, or Small-braines the Shoo-maker; or Spend-all the Spurrier, or any o∣ther else of that retchlesse rascabilian route, be more priui∣ledged to plod forth their precious times in any such pestife∣rous practises, then either Bonny-boy the Barber; or Doubti-man the Draper; or Honest-heart the Hatter; or Lustie-lad the Labourer; or Trusty-man the Mason; or True-pennie the Tay∣lour; or Labour-hard the Lock-smith, or any other man else that make conscience of their calling, that do Psal. 127.2. eate the bread of carefulnesse, that (as the beloued of God) do re∣pose their whole rest in his gracious and most mercifull pro∣uidence? Capn. It is certainly euen so as you say. Hydr. Very well. And will not then (thinkest thou) these the disordered courses of those our carousing companions become very pernicious occasions of breeding and procu∣ring a maruellous discontentednesse in the mindes of these other industrious persons, all the while they perceiue them
thus wastefully to liue of the spoile? The pretie Pismires prouiding Pro. 6.6.7.8. and 30.25. their meate in sommer, and gathering their winter foode in the haruest before, they can (by no meanes) abide and sloathfull Ants in their companie. The painefull Bees they cannot possibly endure that any idle Drones in the hiue, should Iudg. 14.14. Ecclus. 11.3. sucke vp the sweete of their diligent labours. And how (thinkest thou) may these our honest minded labouring men (at any hand) be made to mannage the ruinated estates of any such monstrous Minotaures as seeke nothing else (in effect) but euen vtterly to massacre and spoile their owne, and other mens publike preferments? No, no, they will ra∣ther run desperately vpon them at once, like Isa. 7.18. fierce Assyrian Bees; or cruelly Psal. 118.12. cluster about them as an angry swarme; or Deut. 1.44. chase them away from their hiue at the least, like Amo∣rite waspes; and so send them Psal. 109.10. to beg their bread in desolate places. Capn. And very well worthie they are. Hydr. But yet this would I haue thee obserue herewithall: namely, that ye honester minded sort, grow maruellously mis∣contented with those their monstrous misorders. For, out vp∣on those gracelesse Ding-thrifts say they: what an excessiue spoile do they make of all the good blessings of God? Wee must be carking and caring, while they sit carousing and car∣ding; we must be labouring, while they lie loytring; we must be toyling at home, while they are tippling and trifling a∣broade; we must be warily working in haruest, while they are wantonly wasting at ale-houses; yea we (alas) must bee spending our spirits at plough, while they lie spoyling our purses at play. What reason haue we to become bondslaues for bellie-gods; poore Saint Christophers, for proud carousers, diligent drudgs, for such desperate drunkards; yea and most prouident sparers, for such prodigall spenders? Is it not strange that authoritie should so curbingly bridle vs in, and so carelesly cast the raines in their neckes to all licentious courses? That they should so greeuously Math. 23.4. Luke 10.46. Act. 15.10. bind burdens vpon vs while our backes are readie to burst; and so egregiously
to winke at their carousing of cup after cup, while their bel∣lies are readie to breake? That they should so chargeably ex∣act payment after payment vpon euery of vs for the necessa∣rie support of publike affaires▪ and so vncharitably grant payment to any of them for the pernicious supply of those their prodigall dispendings? Or that a weekely contribution towards the poore, should be imposed vpon euery of vs: and a weekely distribution thereof be so pestiferously allowed to euery of them, to the irreligious robbing of poore men in∣deed and the profluuious dispending of our proper wealths? Much better were we to forsake our painefull professions, and to follow eftsoones their prodigall practises, with an hourely expectation of like publike reliefe, then (in this sort) to toile and turmoile our selues about a pestiferous sup∣portation of any their retchlesse reliefe. Lo here (Capnistus) how these honest poore men grow malcontented against those monstrous Minotaures? how they begin to distaste au∣thoritie for their pestiferous permission? yea and how bit∣terly they murmure at those superfluous impositions which they are enforced eftsoones to vndergo about the vnnecessa∣rie releeuing of these our riotous rungates? May not these beginnings of mischiefe become very pestiferous in the end (thinkest thou) to our publike State? Capn. Yes verily may they: and it were very conueni∣ent they should be circumspectly preuented in time. Hydr. Very true as thou sayest. Howbeit (in the meane time) these our tippling Tobacconists they run headlong an end vpon sundrie other disordered courses, no lesse perni∣cious to our publike State then those other before. For when their patrimonies are all dispended; when their world∣ly wealth is vtterly wasted; yea when those their profluui∣ous purses haue thus prodigally poured forth the best bloud in their bellies, then they bring their hungrie Hostesse some pretie pawne or pledge for their beloued liquor. Then their houshold trash must trudge forth; then their whole webs of cloth must walke; then their bras pots, their bras-pans, their
platters and the rest, must be purloyned away for the vnneces∣sarie purchase of the blacke stone pot, and their pretie Tobac∣co pipe: yea then the very couerlet and sheetes from their bed must be carelesly chaffered forth for their filthie Tobacco fumes, and causlesse carousing cups. And now (hauing their faces frecked ouer with a crimson colour, and their wits well whitled with the good-ale suds, and perceiuing withall, the pulse-veine of those their profluuious purses to beate ve∣ry weake for want of further supply) they begin forthwith to cast about for their neighbours chickins, to houer vp and downe for their hens; yea and eftsoones to prey vpon their yong sucking pigs, for their owne and their hungrie Hostes∣ses tooth, and what not besides? Tell me (I pray thee Capni∣stus) are not these their disordered courses become very pestiferous practises to our publike State? Capn. They are so, I must néeds confesse. Hydr. Well then, let vs here forbeare to speake further of their disordered courses; and now turne our talke towards some of their lte most dangerous attempts against the good of our State: to see whether these our tippling Tobacconists be not that waies also become most pernicious and pestilent companions towards ye wished welfare of our publike State. For when they haue played the Poope-noddies too long in dispending their worldly preferments after such a riotous sort, and are also enforced to feele the present want of their filthie fume, and to perceiue some lacke of that their beloued liquor, not knowing which waies in the world to supply their said wants: then they begin eftsoones to pray for the pestilence, to wish for wars, to hope for a change, to broach many dangerous babbles about some sodaine inuasion; to mutter forth certaine mutinous murmurings concerning some ciuill dissensions among men of State; yea and to wish the whole land on an vproare at least: that so they might come to make present spoile of Haukin-holdfast his house, or to preie vpon Godfrey-gather-goods purse. Tell me now Capnistus, are not these their desperate attempts most dan∣gerously
pestiferous to the present good of our publike State? Capn. I dare not denie them to be certainly so. Hydr. And yet these (alas) they are but the beginnings of mischiefe, in comparison of those their subsequent most des∣perate attempts. For (feeling once a greater increase of their present wants, and perceiuing all further supply therein to decrease more and more) they do then forthwith become professed malcontents against the well setled peace of our publike State: wishing and praying eftsoones for their long expected Iubilee: and hoping earnestly after a presposterous deliuerance from all dutifull subiection towards their holie Superiors: telling their carousing companions, that it will neuer be merrie with boon-companions in England, before the inhabitants of England bee vp together by the eares a∣mong themselues. For then (say they) would forthwith be∣gin the sport: then should we come to Catch that catch may; yea then should we compell our countrey cormorants them∣selues, to catch at a broun-bread crust: whereas those mer∣cilesse peasants do now leade the whole world in a string, and deale with good fellowes as it pleaseth themselues. Then would wee soone make their full barnes to supply the long lacke of this our beloued liquor, then would we constraine their rustie red ruddockes to run at our becke, and to attend vpon the pleasure of vs, and the rest of our carousing com∣panions: yea then would we cause their inclosures to cracke. How sayeth thou Capnistus to these their desperate attempts, are they not (thinkest thou) most dangerously pestiferous to the present peace of our publike State? Capn. Surely Sir, their desperate prate it selfe is very pernicious: for it puts disordered persons in present mind of some such desperate practises, as cannot but greatly pre∣iudice the long and well setled peace of this our publike State. Hydr. Thou speakest the truth. And therefore, their ve∣ry prate it selfe would forthwith be sharply suppressed, for
feare of some subsequent mischiefe. Howbeit, these our tip∣pling Tobacconists (those riotous companions I meane) they feare not to surpasse the pestilent bounds of that their pestiferous prate, by putting in present practise all those perni∣cious proiects and plots which their pestilent tongues had so audaciously, and so vndutifully prated of, long before. For Mad-braine the Make-shift, Proud-mind the Plummer, Small∣braines the Shoomaker, and Iustle king the Ioyner, they do no sooner heare speech of causing Inclosures to crack, but forth∣with they care not a point to cracke their desperate consci∣ence on peeces, in an vndutifull vndertaking to set such a pe∣rillous practise on foote: arming themselues, and animating their desperate associates to the ioynt and speedier perfor∣mance (forsooth) of such a preposterous enterprise. Preten∣ding withall (to such as demand a reason of those their des∣perate aduentures) that one Maister Neede did this way set them on worke; that they were resolued to deale no further therin, but according to Maister Mend-all his only direction, and with the authenticall warrant besides of an old penall Statute against such hurtfull Inclosures: yea and that also (for their protection and pay) they marched vnder the approued conduct of Captaine Pouch. This exploit was no sooner brui∣ted abroad, but the very garbage of gracelesse subiection; they off-scouring of honestie; the scumme of humanitie; yea the whole rif-raffe of vicious persons came flocking thicke and threefold from euery coast vnto their accursed company: reporting abroad, they had twelue pence aday for their paines, with wine, ale, and beere so much as their bellies would hold. These flying reports drew multitudes vnto them from euery place, and procured them many moe fauourets wheresoeuer they came: who would not sticke on their ale∣bench to say, God speed the plough, though yet they durst not afford them their presence. How sayest thou Capnistus, are not these the odde youths of our countrey? Are not these our old suresbies to serue at a pinch, and to helpe our State at any dead lift? What saist thou mā, to these desperate practises?
Capn. I should accompt them desperate practices in∣déed, had they not had the Kings broade-seale for their war∣rant: which was commonly reported they had. Hydr. The Kings broade-seale for their warrant? Fie, fie for shame man, that any such the incredible reports of idle∣brain'd fellowes, should once make thee imagine we had but a foole to our King. Capn. God forbid that such a grosse and vndutifull imagination should euer be found in any true hearted sub∣iect. For all the whole world doth vniuersally both know, and acknowledge his Highnesse to haue a most admirable, superexcellent, and sanctified wisedome. Hydr. They do so I confesse, and this also not without a iustly deserued cause, I assure thee: beseeching the Almigh∣tie Iehouah thatRom. 16.27. onely wise God, euen ten Deut. 34.9. times yet more to double his spirit of wisedome vpon him. And yet without doubt, his Highnesse should herein haue shewed a very slender vse of his said excellent wisdome; if (as that rebellious rout made publike report) he should (by his Prerogatiue royall) first priuiledge them to dispark and disclose all such Inclosures: & then should forth with authentically arme a subordinate po∣wer to suppresse their person with Rom. 13.4. the sharpe sword of ven∣geance, if none other peaceable meanes might make them de∣sist from those their desperate attempts. For how long (thin∣kest thou) could his Highnesse securely continue a superemi∣nent King ouer England, if he should so improuidently haue set all his subiects in England together by the eares? Capn. Not halfe so long (I feare me) as 1 King. 1.34, 39. my heartie de∣sire is he may by many hundred yeares: if it were so the good pleasure of God. And surely, the whole world may now plainly perceiue by the sequele it selfe, that those foolish re∣ports were purposely prolated abroad, to make the foolish people applaud their irregular procéedings. But yet Sir, it was commonly said, that the yong Prince himselfe (by the peremptorie command of his mercifull mother) was priuately conuersant with thē, to protect their procéedings
this way: and moreouer, that the good King of Denmarke himselfe was personally, and newly entred England with fortie thousand strong to mannage their matter in hand. Hydr. Oh heauens! Oh hell! Oh horrible hideous hel∣hounds! Was it likely (thinkest thou) that the enterprise it selfe should euer attaine to an happy end, which was former∣ly begun, and forthwith continued with such horrible and such monstrous lies? Although yet this their diuellish dissem∣bling doth palpably discouer their diuellish dissent to all the world, and that their impudent lying, most apparently vn∣folds their impudent Ioh. 8.44. lying father the diuell. For is it possible (thinkest thou) that such a pearelesse Prince should proudly attempt, or such a gracious Queene, should preposterously command any one proiect or plot, so authentically, and so pe∣remptorily countermanded by his most excellent Highnesse before? Or is it credible in nature, that a naturall King, yea a King of such a sanctified nature withall, should so vnnatu∣rally permit his owne naturall Prince (being the Gen. 49.3. primarie of-spring of his fatherly strength) the secondarie supply of his princely succession, and the happy eternitie also of Englands princely hope on earth: is it credible (I say) that such a pru∣dent fatherly King should so improuidently permit his owne naturall sonne (in such dangerous manner) to sort himselfe among such degenerate and desperate monsters, as neither re∣garded God nor the diuell in those their desperate and dan∣gerous attempts? And now next (concerning the good King of Denmarke himselfe) may it in any humane reason (thinkest thou) bee possibly brought within the compasse of paganish humanity, that an humane King (being withall so good and so Christian a King, a King ouer a nation so humane and Christian, an hu∣mane kingly brother to so humane and Christian a King) should so inhumanely, and so vnchristianly inuade so humane and Christian a kingdome; either to mannage so inhumane, and so vnchristian an enterprise, or once to vndertake so in∣humane, and so vnchristian an exploite? God forbid that
any humane, or Christian-minded man should once dare (so inhumanely and so vnchristianly to dreame of any such pal∣pable fooleries: or that any sound-hearted subiects should seeke to shelter such desperate attempts, vnder any such plau∣sible pretences. Capn. I wish so much with all my heart. Neither did I euer admit such an idle imagination to enter my head: how∣soeuer (by obiecting the same to your selfe) I déemed it ve∣ry conuenient that those their palpable fooleries, and trea∣cherous pretences should thus be desplayed to all y• world. But yet Sir, many men (notwithstanding) do confidently affirme that they had the warrant of an old statute law, a∣gainst such a lawlesse inclosing or arrable grounds conuer∣ted to pasture. Hydr. I do not denie, but that (for the necessarie vphol∣ding of husbandrie, as also against the apparent decaying of tillage) there haue bene sundrie good penall statutes proui∣ded from time to time. First in the Ann. 4. Hen∣ry 7.29. Ann. 7 Henry 8. i. ann. Dom. 1515. An. 20. Henry 8.22. An. 27. Henry 8.22. Ann. 5. Eliza∣beth, 2. Ann. Dom. 1569. Ann. 27. Eli∣zabeth, 1.10. Ann. 31 Eli∣zabeth, 5. Ann. Iaco. 1.1. reigne of Henrie the sea∣uent▪ ye same also being further fortified by sundry other like godly statutes, in the reigne of Henrie the eight; with a fresh corroboration also therof, at sundry other Parlaments since, in the flourishing reign of our late soueraigne Ladie Queene Elizabeth: yea and those also more fully confirmed since by the Kings most excellent Highnesse, at his very first entrance into this his kingdome. So as wise men may iustly wonder that any one of those our Isa. 3.15. gripers and grinders of poore mens faces, should not be grosly ashamed to shew their shamelesse faces, in but once daring either to vphold their old, or to ad∣uenture so boldly vpon any other new inclosing of tillage, contrary to those the former most forcible statues, conside∣ring especially the greeuous penalties imposed vpon euery such wilfull transgression. But what? doth it follow thereof (thinkest thou) that (be∣cause for the needful vpholding of tillage there are prouided many good statutes,) therefore these disordered persons (for the better preseruation of tillage) might (at their priuate plea∣sures)
very boldly pull downe whatsoeuer Inclosures against those the said statutes? Nothing lesse. And therefore, it was to no purpose at all for those persons to pretend so pre∣sumptuously the supposed timely supportation of those their disordered attempts from any those penall statutes, vnlesse they could shew in some one of those statutes, an apparent Prouiso at least; that one maister Neede, maister Mend-all, maister Proud-mind the Plummer, maister Small-braines the Shoo-maker, maister lustle-king the Ioyner, with the residue of that rafcabilian rebellious rout (so riotously marching vnder the conduct of Captaine Pouch) had speciall priuiledge to disparke and disclose such lawlesse Inclosures euen in an open despite of the owners themselues, as also, in a rebelli∣ous contempt of our gracious Soueraigne. Capn. Sir, I am certainly assured there is no such Pro∣uiso at all, in any one of those the forenamed statutes. Hydr. Then am I also as certainly assured, that they did more then they might do by much. And so (for that their law∣lesse vsurpation of the Princes sword contrary to Christ his commandement, who chargeth all priuate persons to put vp the sword into his owne place: because, whosoeuer in such sort vsurpeth Math. 26.52. the sword, shall be sure to perish with the sword) they were therefore most iustly suppressed by that the Prince his authenticall sword, who Rom. 13.4. Reuel. 13.10. beares not the same for nought, but is the subordinate minister of that immortall Prince who hath power to take an ineuitable vengeance on such as do euill. Capn. But Sir, séeing those kinde of Inclosures, are so directly opposite to the good lawes of our land, as I per∣ceiue by the former statutes they are: it séemeth strange to those disordered persons themselues, as also to their fauou∣rites of euery sort, that such an hard hand should be caried against them, for but pulling downe that which is so direct∣ly opposite to the law it selfe. Hydr. Howsoeuer all those kinds of Inclosures which directly do tend to the hinderance of husbandrie, and decay
of tillage be vndoubtedly opposite to those the established lawes of our land, as I she wed thee before: yet had those dis∣ordered persons no one law of the land (in such riotous and rebellious sort) to pull downe Inclosures; but rather ye sharpe lawes of our land against euery such disordered and vnlaw∣full attempt: as is apparently euident in See Pultons Abridgment of penall sta∣tutes: against riots, routs, & vnlawfull as∣semblies. sundry good penall statutes prouided against riots, routes, and vnlawfull assem∣blies. And therefore, no hard, but an heedfull hand for pub∣like good, was so carried against them. Capn. I must néeds acknowledge so much as you say, if (indéed) there be any such sharpe lawes prouided against those disordered actions: and therefore I beséech you set downe some summarie abridgement of those selfe same lawes, as well for my further satisfaction herein, as also for a necessarie caueat or watchword to all others hereaf∣ter, to beware how they deale afresh in any such disordered actions. Hydr. With all my heart; and therefore, giue eare to the words of those statutes as followeth thus: If See the sta∣tute, primo Mar. 12. And the sta∣tute primo E∣lizabethae, 17. any persons to the number of twelue or aboue, shall intend, go about, practise, or put in vre with force of armes vnlawfully, and of their owne autho∣ritie, to ouerthrow, cut, breake, cast downe, or dig vp the pales, hed∣ges, ditches, or other the Inclosure of any parke, or other ground inclosed; or the bankes of a fish-pond, or poole; or any Conduicts for water, Conduict-heads, or Conduict-pipes hauing course of wa∣ter; to the intent that any of the same from thenceforth should re∣maine open, not inclosed, or void; or vnlawfully to haue common, or way in the said Parke, or other ground inclosed, or in any of them; or to destroy the Deere in any Parke; or any warren of Conies, or any Doue houses; or any Fish in any Fish-pond or Poole; or to pull, or cut downe any houses, barnes, mils, or baies, or to burne any stacks of corne; or to abate, or diminish the rents, or yearely value of any lands, or tenements, or the price of any victuall, corne or graine, or any other things vsuall for the sustenance of men; and being required or commanded by any Iustice of Peace, or by the Sheriffe of the Countie, or by the Maior, Bailieffe or Bailieffes, or other head-offi∣cers
of any Citie, or towne-corporate where such assemblies shall be had, by Proclamation to be made in the Kings name, to returne in peaceable manner to their places and houses from whence they came: and they or any of them (notwithstanding such Proclamation) shall remaine and make their continuance together, by the space of one whole houre after such commandement or request made by Procla∣mation; or after that, shall (in forcible manner) do, or put in vre any of the things before mentioned: then as well euery such conti∣nuing together, as euery such Act, that (after such commandement, or request by Proclamation made) shall be done, practised, or put in vre by any persons being aboue the number of telue, shall be ad∣iudged felonie; and the offenders therein, shall be adiudged felons, and shall suffer onely the execution of death, as in cases of felonie. Lo here Capnistus, whether there be not a plaine staute di∣rectly against such disordered and vnlawfull attempts: what sayest thou vnto it? Capn. In déede Sir, I do now perceiue that the case is very cleare against all such riots, routs, and vnlawfull as∣semblies for any the forenamed intents, by what persons soeuer attempted: and therefore, I dare not (in any sort) approue of the late vnlawfull enterprise of those disordered persons. And yet (had not some bad practices by sundry of lewd disposition) incensed and raised vp the people of euery Towne thereabouts, for very shame to yéeld their present assistance to that vnlawfull enterprice; neither had the assemblie it selfe bene so mightie as it was, by many hundred folds; nor the primarie attempters thereof (be∣ing but few in number before) neuer would, nor could haue continued the disorder so long as they did: and there∣fore, thē selues & their fauourites thinke there should haue bin had a more respectiue pitie vpon the first actors thereof. Hydr. Nay, not one whit. For as it was their owne dis∣order first, which subiected their persons to such a sharpe and bitter suppression: so surely, all those the incensers and ray∣sers of others whosoeuer they be, they are (by the iust sen∣tence of law) made liable likewise to the selfe same punish∣ment,
as appeareth in those the forenamed statutes, telling them thus. If See the sta∣tute primo Mar. 12. And the statute primo Eliza∣bethae 17. any person or persons vnlawfully and without au∣thoritie, by ringing of any bels, sounding of any trumpet, drumme, horne, or other instrument, or by fiering of any Beacon, or by malici∣ous speaking, or vttering of any words, or making any outcry, or by setting vp, or casting of any bill or writing abrode, or by any other act, shall raise, or cause to be raised, or assembled, any persons to the num∣ber of twelue or aboue; to the intent that they should do or put in vre any of the things aboue mentioned; and that the persons (to the num∣ber of twelue, or aboue) so raised and assembled after request, or commandement had, or giuen in forme aforesaid, shall continue to∣gether as is aforesaid, or vnlawfully, and in forcible manner shall commit, or put in vre any of the things aforesaid: then all and sin∣gular persons, by whose speaking, act, or any other meanes aboue spe∣cified, any persons to the number of twelue or aboue, shall be raised or assembled fo the doing, or putting in vre any thing, or things aboue mentioned, shll be adiudged for his so speaking or doing, a felon, and shall suffer execution of death, as in case of felonie. What sayest thou Capnistus, to these raisers of vnlawfull assemblies? doth such action of theirs either helpe themselues, or any way quallifie the disordered enterprise of those other disor∣dered persons? Capn. Neither of both, if I my selfe vnderstand the matter aright. But Sir, howsoeuer the concourse of people (in those their vnlawfull assemblies) was growne to a wonderful greatnesse: yet surely, had they not bene excée∣dingly animated, encouraged, and hardned forwards in those their disordered enterprises by such as assisted them with meate, drinke, monie, and other like néedful supplies, they neither would, nor could possibly haue held out so long as they did: and therefore, so much the more to be pitied, as them selues and sundry others suppose. Hydr. Not fo. And surely, euen this which they say here, doth rather aggrauate, then extenuate the act. For it plainly purporteth to all the world, that neither their loue to God and the King; nor the conscionable obedience to his Maie∣sties
lawes, neither yet the terrour of threatned death, but the onely exceeding great want of some needfull supply for the present, could possibly suppresse the outrage of those their vnruly attempts. And as for those their inconsiderate and rash releeuers, it had bene much better for euery of them, to haue left such vnlawfull assemblies succourlesse at sixe and seauen, without yeelding them succour at all, then (by the preposterous supply of those their preposterous wants) to procure their owne present woes, in making them selues guiltie likewise of those their iustly deserued punishments: as by the former statutes is very apparent, telling them thus: If See the sta∣tute, primo Mar. 12. And the sta∣tute primo E∣lizabethae, 17. any wife, or seruant of any of the same persons assembled, or any other person else whatsoeuer, shall willingly, and without compulsion bring, send, deliuer, or conuey any monie, harnesse, artillery, weapon, meate, bread, drinke, or other victuall, to any person or persons so assembled as is aforesaid, during such time as her or they shall so bee together: then euery wife, seruant, or other person so bringing, sen∣ding, deliuering, or conueying any of the foresaid things to the same persons so assembled, or to any of them, and not departing to their dwelling places vpon request or commandement made vnto them as is aforesaid, shall be adiudged a Fellon, and shall suffer onely the execution of death as in cases of fellonie. These things exactly considered, what thinkest thou now of that former hard hand, so vniustly surmized, against them selues, their abettors, procurers, and counsellers; as also, their assistants, aiders, and comforters: were they not very well worthie of whatsoeuer hard measure befell them? Capn. I must néeds acknowledge the same from my heart. Although yet, they them selues, and their fantasti∣call fauourites so couertly séeme to impose some imputa∣tion of blame vpon those his Maiesties Iustices who were next to the places where they so assembled them selues: be∣cause they no sooner suppressed the outrage, or euer it came to such a strong head; as also, for that they then caried so hard an hand in suppressing the same as they did. Hydr. Oh horrible ingratitude of base minded monsters!
that would so outragiously procure their owne hurt, and then thus vnhonestly go about to impose the blame thereof vpon those his Maiesties Iustices, whom rather they ought to re∣uerence and loue all the daies of their life, in an onely regard of that their exceeding great lenitie, and Christian care to restraine their said excessiue outrage, with none or as little spilling of bloud as possibly might be. For, did not those his Maiesties Iustices from time to time (by all gentle and louing allurements) very earnestly labour their peaceable and quiet departures in euery place? Did they not rather aduenture the hazard of See Pulton in the title of Riots &c. sect. 5. an hundred pounds apeece in regard of their kind and godly forbearance a while, then that they would set too fiercely vpon them at first? And (hauing solemnely published his Maiesties late Proclamation in euery open market) did they not euen then also intimate eftsoones his Maiesties further pleasure concerning their speedie suppres∣sing by force and armes, if none other meanes else would serue the turne? Yea and (which more is by much) did they not (with often intreaties, againe and againe) perswade them to a peaceable departure, or euer they published the appointed Proclamation against their outragious disorders, or did once endeuour to put the seueritie of his Maiesties po∣wer in practise vpon them? Capn. What Proclamation I pray you was that? Hydr. The same which is authentically put downe among those forenamed statutes in this following order: First his Maiesties Iustices caused to be openly made an Oyes: & then afterwards was deliberately pronounced these following words, or the like in effect: The forme of the Proclama∣tion. See Pul∣ton. The King our soueraigne Lord chargeth and commandeth all persons assembled, immediatly to disperse them selues, and peaceably to depart to their habitations, or to their lawfull businesse, vpon the paine contained in the Act lately made against vnlawfull and riotous assemblies. And God saue the King. Capn. And was this Proclamation then published ac∣cordingly?
Hydr. That was it, I assure thee, and a full respite giuen them withall, for their peaceable departures, with like ve∣hement perswasions thereunto as before. And (which more is) did not his Maiesties said Iustices, vpon the very day of the skirmish it selfe (for the former part of the day) both traine and march their souldiers very neare the place of that their vnlawfull assemblie, of very purpose, to strike an impression of feare in their hearts, to further their present departures? Did they not moreouer send sundry messengers of purpose vnto them to perswade that matter by all possible meanes? Did not some of his Maiesties Iustices solicite them sundrie times on their knees with teares? Yea did not the right wor∣shipfull Sir Anthony Mild-may (with hat in hand) very ear∣nestly intreate the same, or that (at the least) they would de∣sist from their purpose for fiue, or sixe daies, till they might know his Maiesties further pleasure? yea and (which is most to be wondred at) did not the said Iustices before the skirmish began (in an exceeding great care of sparing their bloud) giue secret direction to the whole companie of shot, for dis∣charging the first volley of shot but idlely vpon them, in hope that the sodaine feare of the said shot, would make them the sooner depart the field? Capn. But Sir, what effect did all this take among them, I pray you? Hydr. All the premises were so farre off from working their timely departure, as they were rather more desperately imboldned in that their rebellious attempt. For not onely they cast vp their caps with a wonderfull shoute, crying, A∣gaine, againe, come better, come better: but they endeuou∣red also with stones, and other bad meanes, to driue the said Iustices, with his Maiesties power from out of the fields. Which their said in satiable outrage did then enforce a shar∣per fresh charge and onset vpon them; whereof (I suppose) they were very well worthie. Tell me now Capnistus: was this an hard hand against them, or no? Capn. Surely Sir, if all this be certainly true, I must
néeds confesse they were very well worthy of whatsoeuer hard measure befell them either then, or at any time since, Although yet their fauourites, and such as applaud the en∣terprise, they say their intent was onely for publike good: yea and they worke also it selfe (namely, the casting downe of such vnlawfull Inclosure) was simply and in it owne nature, a very good worke. Hydr. First, for the truth of the matter, let those parties themselues vndertake to contradict the same in any one point, if they possibly can. Next, for thei good intent: who can certainly say what good intent they had in them selues, saue onely that God who is . Psal. 17.9. cardognostes, the searcher (I meane) of the heart and the reines? But be it, their intention therein was fully so good as themselues and their senslesse fa∣uourites do seeme to surmise: can the goodnesse of any mans intention, make good an vnlawfull action? I suppose no: be∣cause it is not enough for a man to do what which in it selfe is simplie good and iust, vnlesse the same also be iustly effected. And whereas they accompt such casting downe of Inclosures a very good worke, they do therein declare them selues, ei∣ther such as cannot Ionah. 4.11. euenly discerne betweene the right hand and the left, and therefore vtterly vnable to distinguish sound∣ly betweene good and euill: or such impudent wretches at least, as are not ashamed of sinne, nor yet care for honestie in any respect. But (being growne to a desperate impietie) do Pro. 17.15. and 24.24. Isa. 5.20.23. speake good of euill, and euill of good; putting darkenesse for light, and light for darknesse, holding bitter for sweete, and sweete for bitter: and therefore a fearefull woe with a vengeance, is de∣nounced against them. For may that be a good worke (thin∣kest thou) which was so wilfully wrought with the Wisd. 6.3. Rom. 13.2.3. Tit. 3.1. 2 Pet. 2.13. wron∣ging of others; with open contempt of publike authoritie, & with an obstinate rebellion against God, and his Maiesties highnesse? Capn. Sir, those men (commending the goodnesse of that worke) do meane (as I verily imagine) the onely matter it selfe, that is, the onely disparking of such lawles
Inclosures: and not any such a disordered manner of ca∣sting Inclosures downe. Hydr. Then surely, howsoeuer the matter (the dispar∣king of Inclosures I meane) be simply good in it selfe, their manner of casting Inclosures downe (by their owne confes∣sion) was simply euill; and so the very worke it selfe, which was thus outragiously, and without authoritie performed by them, deserues not the name of any good worke. But be it here supposed, their action was simply lawfull: and now tell me withall what makes them to thinke that the casting downe of Inclosures should (in it owne selfe) be simplie good? Capn. Because then (say they) such conuerting of pa∣sture to arrable ground, must necessarily tend to the migh∣tier augmentation of tillage: and so consequently to the publike good of our countrey. Hydr. As though the owners of such pasture grounds were more necessarily constrained to plough vp their said grounds being so disparked, then at any time before when they were hedged in. But suppose those said grounds were all conuerted to tillage; how are they able to proue, that the augmentation of tillage doth vndoubtedly tend to the pub∣like good of our countrey? Capn. Because (say they) the augmentation of tillage would procure more plentie of corne by much; the great plentie of corne would presently pull downe the excessiue prices of corne: & the excessiue prices of corne being brought once to a very low rate, then the Artificer, the Trades∣man, and poore labouring people might more merrily liue by much. For was it not a merrie world (say they) when a man might buy barley and pease for foure pence the bushel, mault for fiue, rie for sixe, and wheate for seauen or eight at the most? Hydr. In deede, those our beastly bellie-gods who liue onely to eate, but not eate to liue, they reason euen so for all the world, saying thus: Oh sir! was it not Ier. 44.17. a merrie world (I
pray you) when a poore man might buy twentie foure egges for a pennie? Or as those our tippling Tobacconists do now say one to another: Ah sirrha, how sayest thou (my heart) was it not a merrie world (thinkest thou) when good fel∣lowes might haue foure gallons of good-ale for an halfe-pennie? And thus, these our poore mault wormes they mea∣sure the publike good of our countrey by their owne proper bellies, and so determine the matter and meanes of mainte∣nance (thou maist see) as if the welfare of countries and kingdomes consisted wholly in gormandizing and gulling in of meates and drinkes, and in an onely fragging and pam∣pering of poore mens bellies, though it were with the fil∣ching and pining of all other besides them selues. Yea surely, these our tippling Tobacconists they measure the welfare of men in the world, as the common drunkard vseth to size the fatietie of such as sit with him at table, by the onely placing of all ye good-ale pots plumme vnder his owne proper nose, saying thus to the rest: Sirs, set vp your pots hither I pray you, that euery man may the more easily reach them. As though he him selfe were euery man, or as if (because the said pots be now within the reach of his owne proper nose) it may be Videre licet, gustare non licet. enough for the rest to see them, or to liue by their onely smell, without any tasting at all. Euen such is our tippling Tobacconists care (thou maist see) for publike good. Although yet, I will not denie, but that this which they thus babble a∣broad, might haue in it some better resemblance of truth, if in (very deede) the welfare of kingdomes cosisted alone in the exceeding great plentie of corne, and in an onely su∣perfluous support of the poorer sort. And therefore (for a further manifestation of this one matter now in question) let vs here first consider vpon what kind of people the wel∣fare of countries and kingdomes doth chiefly consist: and then next, whether the low prices of corne would bee the onely best meanes for the better vpholding of that kind of people. Capn. Vpon what kind of people, I pray you, doth
the welfare of countries and kingdomes chiefly consist? Hydr. Vpon that selfesame kind (I verily suppose) which best maintaineh the whole, or greatest multitude of men in the kingdome. For sith the Pro. 14.28. honour of a King is immoueably setled vpon the multitude of Subiects, and that (for want of such Subiects) the Prince himselfe must necessarily come (in suc∣cesse of time) to an ineuitable desolation and spoile: who seeth not now, but that the happie estate of kings, of king∣domes, and countries must consequently arise from that sort especially, whereby the greatest multitude of true hearted Subiects is most surely maintained? But that sort (all men know by daily experience) is the Yeomanrie or Husbandrie of countries and kingdomes: because by it are Kings suppor∣ted; by it, are Princes and Nobles sustained; by it, all artifi∣cers, trades-men, and poore labouring people are preserued from famine. For tell me, I pray thee Capnistus, from whom es∣pecially do Kings receiue their subsidies, their fifteenes, their taxes, and yearely prouisions for any their domesticall or publike affaires, but principally, or collaterally from poore husbandman? From whom do the poore, the Nobles, and Gentrie of countries or kingdomes possesse their annuall rents, their ancient reuenewes, their incomes and fines, their boonings and ordinarie carriages, but primarily from out of poore husbandmens purses? From whose onely endea∣uours and labours do all Artificers. Trades-men, and poore labouring people enioy their bread-corne, and mault-corne, but onely, and altogether from the poore husband∣mans plough? Capn. That is certainly so: and thereupon they boldly conclude without all contradiction, that the augmentation of tillage would yéeld a further complement to all those the former supplies. Hydr. Very well. Now then we are consequently come to consider more especially of that our second propounded point. Namely (for that the surest supportation of all estates in a countrey or kingdome doth primarily consist in the or∣dinarie
vpholding of husbandmen) whether therefore the augmentation of tillage (all other things continuing still in their ordinarie course) would become the onely best ordina∣rie meanes to maintaine that one onely state it selfe in such solid condition, as that thereby also all other estates besides are the more surely supported from time to time? My mea∣ning is this, whether (all other things else continuing stil their ordinarie accustomed rate) the onely augmentation of til∣lage must be adiudged the best meanes of all to maintaine and vphold the husbandmans happie estate? Capn. Surely Sir, they do all ioyntly imagine it would be so. Hydr. Their vncertaine imaginations, they are no cer∣taine conclusions. And therefore, do speake directly to the question propounded: by giuing some certaine demonstra∣tion of that their vncertaine imagination. Capn. They take in hand to demonstrate the matter thus. By the augmentation of tillage (say they) there might be maintained in England, as many moe husbandmen as there are at this present. And so the greater multitude of husbandmen, the greater aboundance of corne; and the greater aboundance of corne, the better cheape it would be by much. Hydr. They shew themselues to be men of shallow con∣ceipts: because such an augmentation of husbandrie, would directly become an augmentation of beggerie. For if a poore husbandmā may now very hardly vphold his present husban∣drie, when corne is presently worth some two shillings sixe-pence at least: how should he be able to vphold the same in any good sort, when the price of corne is but sixe-pence the bushell at most? Capn. That might be very well done, say they: because for euery bushell he hath at this present, he should then be sure to haue full foure at the least. Hydr. They haue no certaine assurance of such a propor∣tion: because the increase of their labours consisteth not
1 Cor. 3 6.7. in any their owne proper planting, but in the onely good blessing of God. But be it supposed, the increase it were cetainly such as they say; and yet euen then also a man may plainly perceiue, that (according to this their propounded propor∣tion) the poore husbandmans state should euen now become worse then it was before, by sixepence at least in euery bu∣shell. For if he might vsually sell his one bushell before for two shillings sixe-pence at least, and now (that corne is so cheape) can sell those his foure bushels but for bare two shil∣lings at most, is not the poore husband-mans state impoue∣rished, rather then bettered, by this their augmentation of tillage, notwithstanding any the exceeding great plentie of corne? Now then, if the abundance of corne (arising from that their former augmentation of tillage) be brought once to such a low price, as (albeit the poore husbandman had now foure bushels at least for euery one bushell before: how shall he be able (in such an impouerished estate) to discharge his annuall rents, to performe his seruants wages, to pro∣uide plough and plough-geares, cart and cart-geares, at such an excessiue reckoning, to defray his domesticall charges, and vphold his husbandrie also, without the vtter impouerishing of his present estate? Capn. Very true. But then the rents of Farmes would be brought to some low reckoning they say: and so should the husbandman be somewhat eased thereby. Hydr. How should the rents of Farmes be brought to a lower reckoning, when the greatest number of Farmes are leassed forth for some ten, twentie, yea forty yeares yet to come, with a strict couenant for such an excessiue rent, du∣ring the whole remainder of yeares? Those our husbandmen therefore being thus shrewdly impouerished through the small prices of corne, and no way eased of those their exces∣siue rents, neither yet any thing bettered by the abundance of corne: who seeth not, but that such an augmentation of tillage, would become the vndoubted diminution of the poore husbandmans estate?
Capn. The Kings Maiestie might be moued (they hope) to mitigate those their excessiue rents in such reasonable sort, as the poore husbandman may be able to liue well of his Farme. Hydr. Yea, but sith the leasing forth of lands is allowed by positiue lawes, and for that many of our Noble-mens and Gentlemens lands are already so leased forth: the Kings Maiestie (gouerning the whole kingdome by those his posi∣tiue lawes) he will not so farre forth intermeddle with those Noble-men, and Gentlemens priuate possessions, vnlesse such an extraordinarie course did necessarily tend to a more pub∣like good, then these our preposterous platformers are yet a∣ble to demonstrate vnto him, by any one probable reason. Besides that, as the head must (by no meanes) go about to strengthen the legs and the feete, by infeebling the shoul∣ders and armes; for that would bring hurt to the whole bo∣dy it selfe: no more may his excellent Highnesse (for the onely support of inferiour subiects) so weaken the good estate of his Nobles and Gentlemen, (who are the very shoulders and armes of his kingdome) as they shall not bee able to yeeld him their publike assistance in time of need. For must not our Nobles and Gentlemen, of necessitie be maintained by their yearely reuenewes and rents? But this could not now be possibly done, if those their annuall rents and reue∣newes were brought to such an abatement as these our base∣minded platformers propound to them selues. And there∣fore (all other things else continuing still in such sort as they presently do) I cannot perceiue (I assure thee) how the poore husbandmans state should not rather be hindred, tn hel∣ped by this their preposterous augmentation of tillage. Capn. But, if husbandmen (say they) were wise, vpon the clause of réentrie contained in their lease, they would (by one vniforme consent) make presently a forfaiture of all their old leases, for the none-payment of those their ex∣cessiue rents: and so suffer their land-lords to réenter vpon their farmes.
Hydr. A very proper deuice to impouerish them selues, and to procure a present great hurt to our publike good: be∣cause (by this meanes) that their supposed great multitude of Farmers should rather be decreased, then any thing in∣creased at all. Moreouer, what would then become of that their augmentation of tillage which they so eagerly pursue, if all Farmers should so foolishly forfait their leases? But (to shew them their follie more plaine) bee it supposed a great number of Farmes were so fallen, and left for a while in the land-lords hands, what issue (thinkest thou) might follow thereof for publike good? Capn. This good (say they) would follow thereof: Namely, by that time those insatiable land-lords had held such forfaited Farmes in their owne occupation but sea∣uen yeares together, they would be right glad to let them afresh at a farre easier reckoning. Hydr. As though (if the Farmer did good on such a Farme, notwithstanding his former excessiue rent) the land-lord sit∣ting rentfree, and throughly occupying that selfesame Farme, might not do much more good thereof then did the Farmer before him: yea and so perhaps (beginning a little to feele the sweetnesse of gaine) will not hereafter lease forth the faid Farme any more, but still hold the same in his owne oc∣cupation. How then? Where are now become the great mul∣titude of Farmers which these our foolish platformers do idlely dreame of by this their augmentation of tillage? But be it supposed those land-lords so holding those forfaited Farmes in their owne hands for seauen yeares together, would quickly waxe wearie, and so be right glad to lease them afresh at a more reasonable reckoning: how then? what (in the meane time) thinkest thou are husbandmen bet∣tered? or how is husbandrie it selfe any better held vp by this their idle augmentation of tillage, when (by reason of the low prices of corne, and such excessiue great rents) the poore husbandman himselfe is enforced to forsake his Farme for seauen yeares together, in hope of an easier rent:
and in all the meane while both he and all his fit pilling of strawes by the fire side? When in the meane while all tillage decayeth; the old store of corne is quite consumed; the No∣bles and Gentlemen are mightily impouerished for want of their vsuall rents; and poore men are famished for lacke of foode? Is this the publike good we are to expect from that their former augmentation of tillage? But, be it supposed a∣gaine, that the poore husbandmen might now haue those their said Farmes at twenty nobles rent by the yeare, for which they payed yearely some twentie pounds at the least before: would those husbandmens state become any thing better now by this abatement of rent, then it formerly was when they payed twentie pounds yearely at least? Capn. What one wise man (say they) would make any question thereof? Hydr. That would I mine owne selfe, I assure thee, not without great probabilitie of reason also: and therefore, do heartily desire thine owne selfe, as also those our disordered Tobacconists, that you would herein permit me to 2. Cor. 11.19. play the foole for a while; because you your selues are so wonderfull wise in your proper conceipts. And (for a further demonstra∣tion hereof) let it here be supposed againe, that the poore husbandman (when he sate vpon twentie pounds rent be∣fore) by his good husbandrie grew yearely some threescore quarters of corne; and that now (paying but twentie nobles a yeare) he doth one yeare with another reape some twelue score quarters of corne at the least; which (thou mayest not denie) were a wonderfull oddes: yet surely (so long as all o∣ther things else do hold their accustomed rate) thou mayest plainly perceiue (euen by that selfe same proportion which them selues haue made) that the poore husbandmans state (notwithstanding the former abatement of rents, and great a∣bundance of corne) is farre worse now then it was before when he payed a farre greater rent, and grew not so much corne by foure times double at least. For first, if we rate his threescore quarters of corne but at threescore pounds, after
two shillings sixepence the bushel, who seeth not plainly but that (deducting twentie pounds from the same for his twen∣tie pounds rent) he hath still remaining fortie pounds to him∣selfe, for the timely discharge of his other domesticall expen∣ces, as also the orderly vpholding of that his said husbandrie? Perceiuest thou this Capnistus? Capn. He were worthie to be crowned a coxecombe, that cannot perceiue the same? Hydr. Go to then, let vs now likewise obserue that their former proportion also in their abundance of corne, and a∣batement of rents, by rating their tweluescore quarters of corne, at their owne wished price, namely, at fiue pence the bushell, that is, three shillings foure-pence the quarter; and so, our totall summe for the tweluescore quarters amounts but to fortie pounds. From this now deduct his twenty no∣bles rent (which is their desired abatement) and so hath he left to himselfe but fortie markes at the most, to defray his domesticall charges and vphold his said husbandrie. Is not herein his estate made worse then it was before by twentie markes yearely at least, notwithstanding his former twentie pounds rent, and the small quantitie of corne, in comparison of his tweluescore quarters now? So then, this his impoue∣rished state being soundly considered, as also, the excessiue charges of all other things being still considered; how shall this poore husbandman be able (thinkest thou) to vphold his said husbandrie, to maintaine his owne house, to pay seruants their wages, to bring vp his children, to performe to the Kings Maiestie his ordinarie subsidies, fifteenes, taxes, pro∣uision, and such other extraordinarie payments, without the vtter subuersion of himselfe, and his happie estate? Capn. Good Sir, your obseruations herein they are, I assure you, very probable, neither do I perceiue how the poore husbandmans state should possibly (in such an a∣batement of the prices of corne) be bettered one pennie by the augmentation of tillage: vnlesse all other things else that belong to his husbandry, were likewise abated in price.
Hydr. Thou conceiuest the matter aright. For whereas in former times (when corne was sold for fiue pence a bushell) the poore husbandman payed for a good new cart but one noble at most: now he payeth foure nobles at least for the like. Then he might buy him a plough readie made for four∣teene pence; now it will stand him in fourteene groates at the least. Then he might prouide him his yron-workes for three farthings the pound: now he must pay three pence halfe-penny for euery pound at the least. Then he might haue a whit-leather hide for one shilling at most: now he payeth fiue shillings foure pence at least. Then he might haue had an acre of grasse both mowne and made to his hands for two groates, or ten-pence at most: now he must giue two shil∣lings sixe pence at least, and not haue it so well done by the halfe. Then might he hire a very good man-seruant for twen∣tie groates wages: now can he not haue any so good for twice fortie shillings at least. Then might he purchase a very good yard of full brode-cloath for three shillings foure pence at most: now he must pay some foureteene shillings foure pence at least, for the like, Then he might haue had a good paire of Shooes for sixe pence: now can he not haue the like for two shillings sixe pence at least, and so for the rest. These things therefore being soundly considered, how should the poore husbandmands state be bettered one pinne, by aba∣ting the prices of corne through that their preposterous aug∣mentation of tillage, so long as all other things, else do con∣tiue still in that their former excessiue reckoning? Capn. Sir, I am full of your mind concerning this. But so long as corne say they, is at such an excessiue reckoning, all other things else must néeds be deare; whereas the small prices of corne will bring all other commodities to their former low rate. Hydr. Alas good Capnistus, it should seeme that these our disordered reformers do either dotingly dreame of some drie haruest after Michelmas moone when corne is cleane gathered into poore husbandmens barnes: or that else their wilde wits do rouingly run a wool-gathering, after
the sheepe-maisters flockes are all shorne. For, tell me (I pray thee) which waies a Wheele-wright should any way possibly afford an exceeding good cart for twentie groates now, as in former ages, and pay for the very timber thereof some six∣teene shillings him selfe? Or how a Tanner may well forgo a good bend of soaling leather for eightpence now, as in for∣mer daies: and pay foure markes a loade for his barke at the least? or how the Shoo-maker should sell a good paire of shooes for sixe pence now, as in former seasons: and himselfe pay twentie pence full, for the leather thereof at the least? Or how the Ioyner should yeeld a very good cup-boord for foure shillings now, as in former times: when the very tim∣ber thereof doth stand him in twentie shillings at least? Or how a good man-seruant should be able to serue for twentie groates wages now, as before: and pay ten-groates thereof, for one paire of high-buckled shooes? and so forth for all the rest. These things therefore being soundly considered, let all those our tippling Tobacconists which so eagerly affect the former low prices of corne, first deuise which waies to reduce the ordinarie trafficke of all other commodities else to their pristinate state: and then vrge (as they now very idlely do) the pristinate prices of corne. Or (if that will be thought a matter impossible) let them (at the least) begin this their pre∣posterous reformation first in them selues: and then see how thicke & threfold all other sorts of people will follow their foote-steps. My meaning is this. Let Iustle-king the Ioyner afford so good a cup-boord for foure shillings now, as other men sell for foure nobles before his face; let Proud-mind the Plummer forgo so good a brewing-lead for foure shillings now, as other men sell for sixteene shillings at least: let Small-braines the Shoo-maker not take aboue sixe pence now for so good a paire of shooes as others do sell for two shillings sixpence: briefly, let Lithersbie the Loyterer not take now aboue ten pence for mowing and making an acre of grasse, howsoeuer all other poore painfull labourers do take two shillings sixe pence for doing the like: and then see how
the abatement of rents, and low prices of corne will follow thereof. Capn. What Sir? they will neuer be brought to such an abatement in any their trades (they say) do the Prince what he please. For, (besides that such a fond course would worke nothing at all towards the publike good) they should thereby be sure to impouerish themselues. Hydr. And why then should the Prince (at any their pre∣posterous beck) be pleased to procure the Peeres of his king∣dome, the Nobility, Gentrie, Yeomanrie & poore Husband∣men to bee brought vnto such an excessiue abatement of rents, and prices of corne: sith (besides that the same would become no furtherance at all towards publike good, all other things else considered) they should therby but impaire their proper estates? Thus then, thou maist plainly perceiue by the premisses, what manner of reformation it is, that these our disordered fellowes do 2 King. 9.20. so furiously driue at, as if they were mad; namely, at the preposterous prancking vp of their pri∣uate estates, without giuing regard to the publike good of our countrie and kingdome: not caring one whit (so them∣selues may stretch out their infatiable guts with bread, ale, and beere) though the whole Peeres of our kingdome, the Nobilitie, the Gentrie, the Yeomanrie, the Husbandrie, yea and (by consequent) our good King himselfe, come all to present confusion: such a publike good (thou seest) must ne∣cessarily insue of this their preposterous augmentation of tillage. Capn. Me thinke Sir, you speake probably herein, and to very great purpose. But yet, those our monstrous mal∣contents they haue still a mighty imagination among thē∣selues, that such augmentation of tillage would vndoub∣tedly tend to a publike good. Hydr. So might it do, I confesse, if the poore husband∣mans state were not hindred, but helped also thereby: other∣waies not. But tell me (I pray thee) what the abundance of corne would be better for him, all the while such an abate∣ment
in the prices of corne did drinke vp his gaine? As also, which way would the abundance of corne make the Artifi∣cers and Trades-men become the wealthier one groate then they were at the first, if corne (notwithstanding the abun∣dance thereof) continue still at the accustomed price? It is not therefore the abundance of corne, but an excessiue a∣batement in the prices of corne, that these men do make the onely shot-anker of all their hope. And very certaine I am, that (so themselues might buy bread-corne and mault-corne fox sixe pence a bushell) they would neuer thus disorderly prate, and practice for the augmentation of tillage: though there were lesse corne in the land then (God be blessed) there is, by ten hundred thousand quarters at least. By all this it is apparently euident, that then the augmentation of tillage doth vndoubtedly tend to a publike good, when not onely some one or two sorts of people are thereby helped, and the poore husbandman especially is not therwith hundred at all. Otherwise the partiall supportation of some few alone, with ye fearefull suppression of sundrie besides, were very preposte∣rous. For euen as in our naturall bodies, when the sustenance thereof is soundly concocted, and proportionably dispersed throughout for conuenient nutriment to each seuerall part, then the whole bodie it selfe is vniuersally vpheld and conti∣nued in a very good state; whereas, if that the said nutriment should be wholly exhaust by some three or foure members, with an vtter depriuation of nutriment from the rest of the members besides, then surely, that selfe same body would not onely grow out of order in it selfe, hauing some three or foure members thereof puffed vp vntill they bee ready to burst, and all the rest made as leane as a rake; but besides, there would follow (in continuance of time) a finall confu∣sion of all the whole bodie: So surely, in the body of our Commonwealth, when the whole commodities thereof are aptly imployed, and proportionably disposed for the more conuenient welfare, and publike good to each seuerall mem∣ber thereof, then the whole bodie of Commonwealth is
vniuersally vpheld, & continued in an happie estate. Where∣as, if the commodities of our countrie were wholly sucked vp by some three or foure sorts of subjects, to the pitifull im∣pouerishing of all he rest: then without question, the whole body of our Common-wealth could not long continue in good estate. Because some would be readie to burst with a∣bundance, while many other besides, do euen woorne away with their wants, to the finall confusion of the whole State it selfe in a very short time, without some timely redresse. And therefore, howsoeuer such abundance of corne, might vndoubtedly become exceeding commodious to some three or foure Monopolian Merchants, who (by transporting the same (at such a slender reckoning) into all forraine parts with an excessiue great gaine, would grow (in a very short time) so abundantly rich as if they were readie to burst. Or how∣soeuer such an excessiue abatement in the ordinarie prices of corne, might be singular good for Artificers & Trades-men, and poore labouring persons, who (buying corne now for nothing, and selling their commodities and ordinary labours as excessiuely deare as euer before) might (in very short space) attaine to a wonderfull wealth: yet without doubt, the poore husbandmans state (by whose onely industrious labours all other estates are hourely vpholden) it being greatly impouerished by the small prices of corne, and migh∣tly oppressed through the excessiue rating of all other com∣modities else; I cannot possibly perceiue how this their aug∣mentation of illage should in any sort be helpfull, but euery way hurtfull to him. Capn. Oh yes Sir. For if there were once a farre grea∣ter augmentation of tillage obtained, then euery husband∣man (say they) should hold (in his proper occupation) twice so much land as he held before. Hydr. And what then, I pray thee? Would not the small prices of corne (in such an hourely excesse of all other things else) become a very shrewd cooling card to that his great store of tillage, he hauing thereby, as much more toile im∣posed
vpon him, with a farre lesse commoditie then he vsual∣ly reaped before? For tell me, I pray thee, whether it be the great store of tillage, or the well manuring of tillage that breedeth abundance of corne? Hath not some excellent husband as much corne of one acre, as some haue of two or three? Be it therefore supposed that a poore husband∣man, hauing in his occupation before, but bare fortie acres of arrable land, did yearely grow thereof some fortie quarters of corne at the least: whereas now (when he hath some fortie acres more annexed to his Farme) hee hardly groweth fortie quarters of corne at the most. How much (thinkest thou) is this poore husbandmans state aduanced by this their augmentation of tillage? May he not boldly put vp the whole gaine of his getings in his eye, & yet see neuer the worse? Is he not properly promoted by tillage, being thereby surcharged now with a two fold toile, for a bare sin∣gle increase of corne? Is not his great abundance of arrable ground (through some lacke of good order) growne now so farre out of order and heart, as it will either yeeld him but little, or no burden at all? His charge of housekeeping, of houshold seruants, of horses, of carts, of ploughs, with other odde implements, is mightily increased: and the great gaine of those his daily endeauours, and industrious labours, as deepely decreased. How then is this poore husbandmans estate made any thing the better, by that their augmentation of tillage? Capn. Sir, he must procure him abundance of shéepe (they say) to amend his barren land by the often foulding thereof: and withall, he must get him a great companie of beasts to bréede him good store of compose, and thereby better his barren grounds by manuring of the same to the full. Hydr. This, (indeed) is something they say. But yet now (when the small prices of corne haue so mightily impoueri∣shed the poore mans purse, as he is hardly able to buy him cloathes to his backe) where is ye meanes (thinkest thou) that
should compasse those cattle? Corne he hath none to sel: and many quarters of graine would not buy him halfe a quarter of a flocke to fould his said barren ground. Or, be it supposed the man had money good store to buy those beasts: where is the most conuenient place for their walke? or wherewithall shall he pasture those cattell, when all his Inclosures and o∣ther laie-grounds are quite conuerted to tillage? Before this augmentation of tillage, a poore man might very well raise his whole rent from out his Fallow-fields, those fields affording him great store of grasing to pasture his sheepe: but when all his gras-grounds are turned to tillage, that hope of gaine is growne out of vse; and he may haply reape from his Fallow-fields now, some three or foure loades of thistles to recompence his paines in ploughing the same. For, consider Capnistus and marke it well, are there not (at this present) in euery Champion field, some ten, twelue, yea twenty hun∣dred acres of laie-grounds at least, which being (as it appea∣reth) in former times made arrable land, were all of them left laie by poore husbandmen, some two hundred yeares past or more. What was the maine cause (thinkest thou) that our fore-fathers (in former times) did make such a mighty decay of tillage? Capn. Surely Sir, either it was so because those poore husbandmen then could make no benefit at all by vphol∣ding of tillage, corne being brought at that time to such a low price, and all other things else at an excessiue recko∣ning: or for that those husbandmen wanted both grasse and hay for their cattell, and were therefore enforced for very great néed, to conuert their tillage againe into pasturing grounds. Hydr. Thou speakest aright: and therewithall dost fully conclude euen this our disordered persons proper dispute in a circular motion: not vnlike to the circular paces of a mault∣mil horse. For, marke here I pray thee, the manner of this their preposterous prate. We must haue (forsooth) an aug∣mentation of tillage, by conuerting all ancient Inclosures
and pasture-grounds into arrable land, for the speedie aba∣ting of these excessiue prices of corne: and then (when corne is once come to so low a reckoning as the poore husband∣man is not able to liue of his plough) we must forthwith turne the greatest part of our tillage againe into pasturing grounds, for the necessary increase of grasse and hay for our cattell. Tell me Capnistus, whether these their changeable courses, be not (in very deed) to make and marre, to do and vndo, because the day is our owne till night. Yea tell me, I pray thee: whether this be not a proper roauing dispute of these our round-about Robins, as if they were hunting the wild-goose chase? A man (without question) might quickly purse vp whole poake-fuls of wit, if he would but follow a while all these their extrauagant courses, and wandring va∣garies: and (in the end) be enforced to bring them backe∣wards againe by the nose, to let them then see (if they would not be wilfully blind) that the poore husbandman (so long as all other things else do still continue their excessiue rec∣konings) is rather hindred, then helped by this their augmen∣tation of tillage. Capn. But Sir, do you hold in good earnest, that such an augmentation of tillage would bring some hinderance now to our Common-wealth? Hydr. Perceiuing not hitherto, any reason at all to the contrarie, I vndoubtedly do, and may very confidently hold this one speciall point: Namely, that such a preposte∣rous augmentation of tillage as these our polypragmatcall spirits do now so fiercely pursue, would rather be hurtfull, then helpefull to the poore husbandmans present estate: so long especially as all other things else do thus continue (as we see) at such an excessiue reckoning as I shewed thee, and thou thy selfe hath confessed before. Besides that, these our beastly Pil. 9.19. bellie-gods who babble so inconsiderately (I might say so baldly) about the abundance of corne, without due consideration or further regard of any other as needfull com∣modities for publike good, they grosly imagine (as it seemes
by their courses) that each Common-wealth is sufficiently vpheld in an happie estate, all the while they haue plentie of bread and beere. But tell me (I pray thee Capnistus) are not good dearies as conuenient euery way for euery house-kee∣per, as is plentie of corne? May butter and cheese, may milke and milke-meates by missed wholly in husbandmens houses? What one familie at all throughout the whole country, may well be maintained without butter and cheese? What prety young brats may possibly be bred, or brought vp without milke? What flesh-meates may fitly be rosted? what light stuffe may soundly b baked? what minced meates, what carrots, what parsneps, what other ates else may be butte∣red, where poore house-keepers can haue no butter at all? Capn. Good Sir, this is euen certainly so as you say. Hydr. Very well. Hereupon then let these our tippling Tobacconists tell thee with the best wits they haue in their head, how those poore house-keepers may possibly compasse such store of milke, butter, & cheese without keeping milch-kine; how milch-kine may be maintained and kept without conuenient pasturing; and where such conuenient pasturing may possibly be had, when all Inclosures and pasture grounds are so preposterously conuerted to tillage? Capn. In déed Sir, as I (for my owne part) do hold it impossible for husbandmen to haue good dearies but by kéeping milch-kine: so is it hard for them to kéepe milch-kine at all, where Inclosures and pasture grounds are so preposterously conuerted to tillage. But yet (say they) this their augmentation of tillage would bring abundance of corne: and so poore husbandmen (hauing abundance of corne) might kéepe (if néede were) their milch-kine with corne. Hydr. I told thee euen now (and thou couldest not deny) that it is not the abundance of tillage, but the well manu∣ring of tillage which breedeth abundance of corne. But be it here granted, that the abundance of tillage would vn∣doubtedly bring them abundance of corne; what then?
How would the excessiue prices of corne be any whit abated thereby, all the while that selfe same abundance is quite consumed with keeping of cattell? And this their abun∣dance of corne being that way consumed quite, how then shall the Artificers, the Trades-men, and poore labouring peoples estates bee any way bettered at all by such abun∣dance of corne, if corne (being so consumed) did still con∣tinue their excessiue great prices? By all which thou mayest plainly perceiue, that euen this their preposterous augmenta∣tion of tillage, it would either procure a present diminution of dearies, and so that way become very dangerous to the publike good of our countrey: or (if such an augmentation should maintaine good dearies by keeping milch-kine with corne) that then the said Artificers, Trades-men, and poore labouring people their estates could not be bettered at all, by any their supposed abatement of the excessiue prices of corne. Capn. Surely, the one or the other would follow there∣of. And therefore Sir, these mens preposterous augmen∣tation of tillage it doth but endanger their owne proper persons, without bettering their owne, or the poore hus∣bandmans state at all. Hydr. Very true. But (for further demonstration hereof) be it againe supposed that such an augmentation of tillage would both breed an abundance of corne, and bring downe also the prices of corne; what then? When these our insatia∣ble suckers of filthy fume haue euen fragged their bellies with bread and beere to the full, would they then bee content (thinkest thou) with their present estates? It is a common speech (I confesse) among those our ordinary Ale-knights, that such nippitatie new liquor wil serue very wel for meate, drinke, and cloath, if it bee soundly taken in a cold frostie morning next a mans heart. But (howsoeuer their tongues run round when they are met on their ale-bench) can they and their families liue without flesh-meate, or the offals ther∣of at the least? Do thou aske them (I pray thee) whether
there may be an excessiue abatement of beeues and muttons in England without the present impairing of our publike good? May the ordinary prouision of flesh in any our mar∣kets, be much lesse then it is any market day, without won∣derfull hurt to the countrey in sundry respects? Are not beasts hides, sheepe-skins, with such other pelts else (notwithstan∣ding our daily, & our ordinary slaughter of beeues and mut∣tons) euen litle enough in euery country? Doth not the great scarcitie of hides and skins make leather and shooes, with liquor for leather, and tallow for candle, excessiuely deare? Now then, those our Artificers' and Trades-men, who keepe such a combersome coyle for corne (hauing once corne to their owne content) let them then tell me in sadnesse, whe∣ther themselues▪ and the fulke of their families, are able to liue long without any meate; to run, or ride without bootes; to go or walke without shooes, to worke day and night without any candle, or to dispatch (in any good sot) the most of their ordinarie trades without much tallow, and great store of kitchin stuffe compoundd therewith? But how should they haue flesh-meate to eate, store of leather for bootes and shooes, tallow for candle, or kitchin-stuffe at all for any their needfull affaires, without an exceeding great breede of beefes and muttons? And how should such an ex∣ceeding great breede of beefes and muttons be possibly bred and maintained, without very great store of Inclosures and pasturing grounds? And where must such store of pasturing grounds be got (thinkest thou) if all Inclosures were prepo∣sterously turned to tillage? Capn. The certainty of your spéech is such, as I am not able to contradict. Hydr. Besides all this, when these our disordered persons haue (by much augmentation of tillage) euen crammed their bellies with bread and beere till they be readie to burst: must they not likewise haue cloathes for their owne, and their fa∣milies backes? But can they possibly make webs of cloath without any wooll? Or can they haue wooll to web, but by
breeding abundance of sheepe? Or can such abundance of sheepe be bred without many Inclosures, and much pastu∣ring grounds? But where may many Inclosures, and pasturing grounds be got, when all our Inclosures are preposterously turned to tillage? Capn. Surely Sir, these your apparent demonstra∣tions of policie they are held in as high admiration with me, as were (in times past) the sundry Oracles from A∣pollo Pythius at Delphos. Howbeit, many others do hold, and my selfe haue heard some Preachers auouch in publike place, that this onely great bréede and pasturing of shéepe, is the most gréeuous bane and spoile of our land. The silie poore shéepe (say they) which are (by nature) the méekest creatures on earth, are now made the most mercilesse Mi∣notaures in the world: for euery where now they do eate vp whole Townes, and deuoure the Inhabitants young and old. Hydr. I hate from my very heart ye destroying of Townes and depopulation of countries, as a most barbarous crueltie beseeming rather the sauage Cannibals, then any sound hearted Christians. Assuring my selfe withall, that all those our vgly blacke raues which seeke to Isa. 5.8. dwell alone vpon the face of the earth by that their vnspeakeable crueltie, shall one day be sure to feele a woe with a witnesse, and to haue Isa. 33.1. Mich. 2.1.2.3.4. the law of like repayed double and treble vpon their owne pates. Yea and that they, and all theirs (without a speedie repen∣tance) must vndoubtedly receiue their allotted reward 1 Kin. 21.21. with wicked king Ahab. Although yet I doubt not at all but that those our great breeders of sheepe, which so make the best of their pasturing grounds without Isa. 3.15. grinding the faces of their silie poore Tenants, they are the blessed instruments of our bountifull God, for publike good. And therefore (con∣cerning that point which thy selfe hath heard some Prea∣chers auouch in publike place, about the great breeding of sheepe) howsoeuer I make no doubt but that those selfe same Preachers they deliuered then the priuate opinion and
thought of their owne proper hearts: yet when they shall hereafter somewhat more considerately examine the matter it selfe without any such wry-respect, and according to the proportionable bounds of Christian policie for publike good, I make no question at all, but that they themselues will eftsoones affirme, that (in those their blind baiard-like bold speeches against such necessarie breeding of sheepe) they were rather misguided with the sway of inordinate af∣fection, than soundly directed with any authenticall rule of setled reason. For, howsoeuer those our great pasture men do gather vp to them selues an exceeding great gaine by the breeding of sheepe, as there is no reason at all, but that they which win it, should weare it: yet surely (if I conceiue not the matter amisse) there is no one commoditie throughout the whole land more tending to the publike good of rich and poore, than the great abundance and mightie increase of sheepe, as that which was Gen. 13.2.5.6. and 24.35. and 26.14. and 29.6. and 30.31.32 1 Sam. 17.15. Psal. 78.70.71. the ordinarie practise of all the Patriarkes, and which also receiued from time to time Gen. 24..35. Ps. 144▪13.14. an extraordinarie approbation from the vnchangeable proui∣dence of the eternall God. And (to let passe the much bette∣ring of arrable ground by the foulding of sheepe) this (I do verily suppose) may here be auouched for an infallible truth: that almost the third part of people in this our English Iland, are vpheld & maintained by the breeding of sheepe. Where∣upon this consequent doth clearely demonstrate it selfe to all the world, that those men which prate purposely against the great breeding of sheepe, they do either discouer (at vna∣wares) their wayward and enuious hearts against the bree∣ders themselues without any respect of publike good; or lay open at least, their owne inconsiderate thoughts, and shallow conceipts concerning such matters of publike re∣gard. Capn. The one or the other must necessarily follow thereof. But Sir, if you be able (indéed) so demonstrate soundly vnto vs, that almost the third part of people in this our English Iland are vpheld, and maintained by the
ordinary bréeding of shéepe, you shall satisfie many concer∣ning this point. Hydr. I doubt not to demonstrate the same to the full. For first, let an exact suruey be had of those our great sheepe-maisters themselues, as also of that their ordinarie retinue which they hourely imploy about the breeding & hearding of sheepe; then next, of all those our professed clothiers in Wales, in Cornewall, in Deuonshire, in Kent, in Essex, in Suffolke, in Northfolke, in Yorkeshire, Lancashire, Che∣shire, Hallifax, Kendall, with other like places where cloath-making is purposely professed and practised together, with all their whole families depending vpon them; then next, let the selfe same suruey be likewise taken of al the poore labou∣ring people which are this way set hourely on worke by those our cloth-makers, about the seuering, sorting, tow∣sing, carding, spinning, knitting, weauing, fulling, shearing, dressing and dying of wooll and of cloathes; then next, of all those prouident husbandmen who yearely defray their rents, and apparell themselues by the breeding of sheepe; and then lastly, of all those Artificers, Trades-men, and poore labouring people which yearely do cloathe themselues, their wiues and families, with those webs of cloath which they v∣sually make of the gathering loakes that are scattered in pa∣stures and fields by the breeding of sheepe: let (I say now) some sound and exact suruey be forthwith taken of all and e∣uery of these, and I doubt not (when the accompt is cast vp in a totall summe)but that the whole wil amount to the third part of people in our land at the least. Capn. The third part (say you Sir) nay, the better halfe I am sure. Hydr. Go to then, tell me what one reason those Prea∣chers haue to barke so bitterly against ye breeding of sheepe? or any man else to mislike of that one commoditie whereby the one halfe of our kingdome is so well set on worke, and which tendeth to the publike good of our countrey? Capn. But Sir, howsoeuer there be great store of cloath-making
amongst vs in England, yet cloathes (they say) are neuer the cheaper in England: and therefore they sée not how poore men are bettered any thing at all, by the making of cloath. Hydr. Though cloathes (in very deede) were neuer the cheaper by the great store of cloath-making among vs in England, which is vtterly vntrue: yet would cloathes be∣come more excessiuely deare among vs in England by much, were it not for the great store of cloath-making throughout the whole land. And therefore howsoeuer these gaine-saying companions, do grosly imagine that the poorer sort of peo∣ple are nothing bettered by the making of cloath, yet surely if that one trade alone were discontinued among vs but for few yeares together; not onely the better sort of men they would quickly begin to feele some very shrewd want, but many poore soules besides (set on worke by that meanes) should shortly haue hungrie bellies. Yea euen those our To∣bacconists themselues would plod vp and downe with thread∣bare backes, and tattered tailes. But now tell me Capnistus (I heartily pray thee) how any great store of cloathes may possibly be made without abundance of wooll; which way, men may haue abundance of wooll, without a continuall breeding of sheepe; how such a continuall breeding of sheepe may well be maintained without abundance of pa∣sture; and how such abundance of pasture may possibly be had, where all our Inclosures are thus preposterously conuer∣ted to tillage? Capn. Surely Sir, I wot not which way to supply such a want: and therefore I do fully referre the further answer hereof to those our disordered Tobacconist's who labour so eagerly after such a preposterous augmentation of tillage, without giuing regard at all to sundrie other as néedfull commodities as corne it selfe, for the orderly supportation of euery seuerall estate in the land. Wherein moreouer they declare (at vnawares) that as the water which dri∣ueth the mill, decayeth the mill: so surely, those their disor∣dered
affections which so preposterously enforceth them for∣wards in such an idle conceite of publike good, would turne (in very short time) to the fearefull subuersion of our pub∣like good. Hydr. That is vndoubtedly true, as may bee plainly demonstrated vnto them by a pregnant comparison, put downe by Adrian the fourth, vpon a very like occasion of discontentment. Capn. Declare the comparison I pray you at large. Hydr. With a very good will: this therefore it is. It came to passe on a time (Policrat. de nugis Curiali∣um. lib. 6. cap. 24. saith he) that all the members of a mans body conspired ioyntly against the poore stomacke, as a∣gainst him (forsooth) who (by his insatiable rauine) did con∣tinually exhaust and deuoure the ordinarie labours of all the other members besides. For, whereas the eie it selfe was neuer satisfied with seeing, nor the eare with hearing; whereas the hands were bent each minute of an houre vpon their ordina∣rie labours, the feete became fearefully sorebated with trot∣ting to and fro; the tongue was euen worne to the stumpes about the moderating of speech and silence; yea all the whole members were mutually deuoted towards the pub∣like good of the whole body it selfe: onely (in this their ge∣nerall carefulnesse and excessiue toyle) the stomacke it selfe (as they falsly surmised) he liued at ease, and whatsoeuer the rest of the members had carefully prepared before by any their mutuall labours, he alone deuoured vp the same by a prodigall waste. What neede many words? The rest of the members considering this, they do all ioyntly conclude to desist forthwith from all those their peculiar designements for publike good: and therewithall (withholding whatsoe∣uer conuenient sustenance from the said stomacke it selfe) they fully resolued to torture that their insatiable and sloth∣full aduersarie with the continuall want of nutriment. Vpon this their ouerhastie and headie resolution, one day was pas∣sed quite in a pining penurie. The second day followed more tedious and irkesome than the other before. But the third
was so extremely byting and pinching to the stomacke it selfe, and all the said members besides, as they ioyntly be∣gan to faint and to fagge. Oppressed thus by vrgent necessi∣tie, the members they assemble themselues afresh, very seri∣ously consulting about their owne, and that their supposed aduersarie his present estate. In which their publike assem∣blie, the head it hung drooping downe; the shoulders (be∣ing shrewdly benummed) they shakingly shrunke together; the armes became weake; the hands vnable to hold them∣selues vp; the feete were infeebled so sore, as they could not possibly support their appointed burden; the whole body it consumed away; yea the tongue which vntill then was preg∣nant enough to pleade for the publike good of the whole body it selfe, it eftsoones began to faulter, and cleaue so fast to the roofe of the mouth, as it had now no power in it selfe to propound and expound the publike occasion of that their present calamitie. The case standing fearefully thus, the whole members (by a ioynt consent) they make their mutu∣all recourse to their soueraigne Ladie the Heart, for pre∣sent aduice in this their publike distresse: who (examining the matter with a more aduised and mature deliberation,) by the very sway of sound and substantiall reason did make it apparently euident to all the members, that this so exceeding a miserie befell them all, onely because of their former hard measure towards the said stomacke their falsly supposed ad∣uersary. For, by withdrawing a competent sustenance from him (he being the deputed publike dispenser thereof to the rest of the members,) they did thereby also depriue thēselues of conuenient naturall nutriment. And (sith none ought 1 Cor. 9.7. to go a warfarre at his owne proper cost) it cannot otherwaies be, but that (by withholding the publike maintenance from the said stomacke it selfe) they themselues were proportio∣nably disabled euery of them from the dutifull discharge of their proper designements for publike good. Neither may any blame thereof bee iustly imputed vnto the poore sto∣macke: because he could not possibly distribute that publike
sustenance to the rest of the members, which he receiued not first for himselfe. And therefore (saith reason) I conclude it a safer course, and much more consonant to natures sacred direction, that a conuenient nutriment be primarily besto∣wed on him who must proporionably distribute the same vnto others, then (by thus peeuishly depriuing the said sto∣macke therof) to procure an ineuitable penurie vpon it selfe, and all the rest of the members. Hereupon it came forthwith to passe (by reasons pithie perswasion) that the said stomacke being presently repleate with corporall sustenance, all the rest of the members (by her operation) were proportiona∣bly, and mutually refreshed together. Ladie Experience (the Schoolemistrisse of fooles) making the rest of the members now to perceiue their former exceeding great follie, the sto∣macke he was vniuersally freed from all imputation of blame concerning this their needlesse calamitie. Because, howsoeuer he be (in very deede) an insatiable deuourer of whatsoeuer their publike labours, yet doth he not so insatia∣bly feede thereupon for himselfe alone, but likewise, for all the rest of the members: and therefore, he being pined with a needlesse penurie, they cannot but be miserably pinched with a biting hunger. Surely Capnistus, if thou examine the matter aright, thou shall find it euen so in the politicke body of euery particular countrey. Wherein, albeit the stomacke (the poore husbandman I meane) doth heape vp together exceeding much maintenance: yet doth he not heape vp the same so much for his owne proper vse, as for the publike good of all the particular members in that selfe same politi∣call body. And therefore so much the more heedfull regard must hourely be had about the orderly supportation of that one estate aboue all the rest: by how much the prosperous, or the pining condition of all other estates doth proportionably depend vpon that one estate aboue all the rest. For be thou throughly assured of this, that there is proportionably euen one and the selfe same office of the stomacke in a naturall bo∣die, and of the poore husbandmans estate in euery politicall
body. Because if the stomacke it selfe be hourely kept in good quarter, all the rest of the members they are mutually refreshed thereby. Whereas, if it be made empty of corporall sustenance, how should it then be able, either properly to support it owne selfe, or collaterally to sustaine the rest of the members? And euen so, if the poore husbandmans estate be vpheld in an happie condition, the rest of the members throughout the whole politicall body, are substantially and soundly supported from vtter confusion. Whereas, if the poore husbandmans happie estate be fearefully impoueri∣shed, how should any estate else in that selfe same politicall body be possibly enriched, or safely preserued? And therefore let these our disordered Tobacconists take heede in time, lest (by this their preposterous augmentation of tillage vnder an idle and fained pretence of publike good) they do not hurt themselues and the rest of the members in this our politicall body, to the vtter subuersion of our publike good. For if corne it selfe (by this their augmentation of tillage) should inconsiderately and causelesly be brought to such a small price, as the poore husbandman (all other things else conti∣nuing at an excessiue great reckoning) be not able to sustaine himselfe and his familie: how should he possibly be able to afford any publike maintenance to all other states else in the politicall body? Capn. Surely Sir, this comparison doth set forth the matter so plaine, as none now but sencelesse and péeuish i∣diots may possibly be ignorant thereof. Although yet (for all this) there be many rich Parsons and Vicars in sundrie parishes, who likewise do kéepe a combersome coyle about this their preposterous augmentation of tillage, as an vn∣doubted present good meanes for publike good: commen∣ding each enterprice that waies attempted, and wishing an happie successe to the same. Hydr. Why Capnistus; neuer wonder at this. For so Act. 19.14.15. Demetrius the siluer-smith he kept a combersome coile, concerning the prosperous and happie estate of his siluer-shrines.
In so much as he called together the workemen of that selfe same trade, and told them saying: Sirs, you all do very well know, that (by this our craft) we haue gotten our goods. Declaring (by this his pernicious prattle) that it was neither the loue of Religion, nor the honest care of publike good that set him so greedily a gog in that his tubulent course, but the onely inordinate desire of his owne, and of those his copartners priuate respects. If these pratling priests thou speakest of now, were carried with wrie respects, and such other like priuate motions about any their vndutifull managings of these late disordered and diuellish attempts, they may rather more truly be termed the pestilent Parsons of poysonsome parishioners, than the prouident Pastours of a peaceable people; yea and the Demetrian Vicars of most de∣testable villanies, rather than the honest deputed Vicege∣rents of Iesus Christ concerning the Christian subiection of dutifull subiects. Declaring themselues to be such Isa. 56.10.11 insatiable dogs as neuer haue enough: and therefore, they do all of them looke to their owne proper waies, euery of them seeke his peculiar aduantage, & after his owne priuate gaine, without giuing a due regard to the publike good. Capn. But Sir, what might it be that makes those our rurall Parsons and Vicars so rustically mad vpon that so mischieuous a matter in hand, if the augmentation of til∣lage doth tend so little to the publike good? Hydr. I cannot certainly set downe the reason of that their vnreasonable applaud to such a pestiferous purpose, vn∣lesse I did certainly know the very thought and intent of their secret hearts. Howbeit, if the secrets of the heart it selfe may shrewdly be gessed vpon, by the Math. 15.18.19. very outgoings they haue to any externall action, then surely this their preposte∣rous approbation of any such a pernicious practise, it could not possibly proceede from any good motion; the best that may be conceiued thereof is this: namely, that as those kind of persons are commonly Isa. 56.11. destitute of all vnderstanding, so (it may be) they but drousily dreamed that this preposterous
augmentation of tillage would vndoubtedly bring forth an augmentation of tithes; and that such an augmentation of tithes, would more abundantly increase their augmentation of worldly trash. And that therefore (vpon this their fantasti∣call fliggring confidence) when the whole countrey was Act. 19 29. full of cofusion, it may be they thought it not gratly amisse, to keep such a combersome consort with that rascabilian rout who so disorderedly made the late vprore, and euen mainely to crie out among them and say, Act. 19.28. Oh great is Diana of the Ephesians; or rather more plainly thus: Great Gen. 34.13. gaine without doubt, will grow yearely to vs, by this their prepo∣sterous augmentation of tillage. Howbeit, if these pedling Parsons and Vicars were but once enforced to find and feele in their proper experience, that such a preposterous augmen∣tation of tillage did afford them no further augmentation of tithes then they reaped before, yea and that those selfesame tithes which thus befall to their portion, are farre worse in quantitie and qualitie both, then were those their former tithes which they possessed before, when there was lesse store of tillage by much; and (which more is) that (notwithstan∣ding the badnesse thereof) they are eftsoones enforced to bestow a twofold labour in gathering the same: surely when their proper experience hath made them perceiue the plaine truth of the premisses, they will then crie out to their seruants and say, Sirs, we haue now adaies a very long haruest for a little corne. For fie vpon this preposterous augmentation of tillage: it was neuer well with the Common-wealth, since the same was first so fantastically set on foote. For euery hus∣bandman now hath so much arrable land in his proper pos∣session, and so little manure withall to make it more burthen∣some, as he loseth one acre while he is sore toyling about a∣nother. The land (for want of good order) is now so cleane out of order and heart, as it yeeldeth more weeds then corne: yea and the corne which it commonly beareth is so leane and so light, as it affordeth no floure at all. What sayest thou now Capnistus, to these our counrrey Parsons and Vi∣cars
cars who so highly applaud these publike disorders? Capn. Surely Sir, if the sequele should thus fall forth, I might boldly affirme, that the iudgement of God were iustly vpon them. Hydr. Very true as thou sayest. For, as it is a most filthie shame for them, to yeeld their vnderhand approbation to∣wards any such publike disorders: so surely, had they but one dramme of Gods grace in their hearts, one scruple of a subiect like subiection in their heads, yea one iot of an honest humanitie in any of their minds; they would hold it much more beseeming their persons and places, to teach their pari∣shioners al holy subiection towards their superiours; to beate downe very bitterly whatsoeuer disorders shall but put out their head against our positiue lawes, and the publike peace of our soueraigne Lord the King; yea and euen rather to ha∣zard their proper persons and states about the timely suppres∣sing of euery such desperate attempt from priuate persons, than either by deed, by word, or by countenance, to giue any encouragement at all to such a preposterous proiect. How∣beit as Mat. 11.19. wisedome is euermore iustified of her owne proper chil∣dren: so surely, there was neuer yet any one faction so filthie in nature, so foule in apprehension, neither yet so furious in practise, but the same had euermore either the primary sproute, the preposterous proceeding, the pernicious pro∣gresse, the pestiferous perfection, or the pestilent approba∣tion at least of some of those simple Sir Iohns; who rather should soundly conuince, then seditiously confirme the same. Howbeit, as euer there hath bene, so still there will be Hos. 4.9. like people, like priest. That so (the base people practising, and the bad priest approuing such pestilent practise) they might all ioyntly become liable to one and the selfe same determined iudgement of God against such disordered attempts: accor∣ding to the testimonie of the Prophet who saith, Hos. 4.8.9. The priests they eate vp the sinnes of my people, and lift vp their minds in these their palpable iniquities. Therefore there shall be like people, like priests: for I will visite their waies vpon them∣selues,
& reward their wicked deeds vpon their owne pates. By all the premisses then thou maist plainly perceiue, that (nothwithstanding whatsoeuer those our disordered Tobacco∣nists pretend, or these our men-pleasing priests do prate) a∣bout their preposterous defence) the poore husbandman his estate (so long as all other things else do continue at such an excessiue reckoning) is rather hindered then helped by this their preposterous augmentation of tillage. Capn. Good Sir, the whole matter it selfe (in my poore apprehension) is so apparently euident, as I am able Gen. 24.50. to say nothing thereunto either good, or euill. Hydr. I hope, by this time thou maist plainly perceiue the falsly supposed goodnesse of that preposterous worke which was so perniciously applauded among the very gar∣bage of humane societies: namely, those the desperate at∣tempts of these our disordered Tobacconists against the long setled peace of this our publike state, in a matter especially of such slender importance and so needlesse moreouer, if all other things else be soundly resolued. Capn. But Sir, do you hold (in good earnest) the aug∣mentation of tillage a matter most néedlesse, especially in this our age? Hydr. I tell thee this in good earnest: it must either be needfull, or needlesse. But howsoeuer the augmentation of tillage may very truly be said to be simply good init selfe, be∣cause it was Gen. 3.23. the primarie ordinance appointed by God for mans preseruatiō & practise: yet do I not hold it so needfully good for ye present, if all sorts of people in our publike state be pro∣portionably respected, according to the seuerall qualities of their persons and places. For how may this their preposte∣rous augmentation of tillage be held now so needfully good, it being euery way so hurtfull as thou heardest euen now, the present condition of our publike state being duly consi∣dered? Then next, a matter but needlesse it may seeme to be for the present: because corne is not now so excessiuely deare, but that each man (of what sort soeuer) may as sufficiently
be able to maintaine his proper estate, by paying two shil∣lings sixe pence the bushell, as were the people of those former times, when they payd but sixepence the bushell. Capn. I pray you Sir, demonstrate this point more plainly for the better satisfaction of my selfe, and all others besides. Hydr. This thing is so plaine of it selfe, as it needs no plainer demonstration at all, then the former, and now pre∣sent experience. For who doth not see, but that the whole Peeres of our kingdome, ye Nobles, the Gentrie, & Yeoman∣rie also, might much better maintaine their estates in former ages with some fiue hundred, three hundred, or one hundred pounds rent at the most, when all other things else appertai∣ning to their houshold prouision, their ordinarie attire, and the moderate pompe of their persons and places did gene∣rally run at so low a rate, then they may now (in this pre∣sent age) with a thousand, sixe hundred, or three hundred pounds rent at the least, when all those the former supplies cannot possibly be gotten without an excessiue reckoning? Capn. I am iust of your mind for that. But Sir, these our great personages (say they) do prodigally and waste∣fully consume so much wealth vpon superfluous buildings, and sumptuous apparell, as they cannot possibly vphold their estates, without an excessiue polling and pilling of all their poore Tenants: and there is the welspring it selfe of all their wants. Hydr. I intend not now to pleade for, much lesse to put downe any patrocinium at all to mens superfluous expences, how many, or how mightie soeuer: hauing so sufficiently censured the same a little before. Although yet (respecting these great mens persons Deut. 28.13. Psal. 45.7. Ecclus. 38.25. &c. and places, the Math. 6.29. royalties of Salomons house, the clothing of the Kings daughter Psal. 45.9.13.14. in beaten gold with ray∣ment of needle worke; the acustomable Math. 11.8. wearing of silkes, and soft apparell, in Princes courts; yea and that Ioh. 19.23. seame-lesse coate of our Sauiour Christ being wrought vpon throughout) I dare not denie a different dignitie in apparell, in diet, in sumptu∣ousnesse
in buildings and euery way else, from the base and vulgar sort; which made me euen purposely put downe the moderate pompe of their persons and places in my former speech, as a pompe respectiuely permitted vnto them by the Almighty himselfe. Howbeit, Capnistus seeing thou thy selfe art iust of my mind (as thou saidest euen now) cōcerning our purpose propounded, I will therefore (without further delay) proceed in the rest. Capn. Do so Sir, I pray you: and first, how they hus∣bandmans state is euery way now as good as in former times. Hydr. Why man, who makes any question at all, but that the poore husbandman may as competently, as commē∣dably, and as contentedly continue the good estate of him∣selfe, and his husbandrie, now when he sits vpon twentie pounds rent, and growes but threescore quarters of corne at the most, as he might haue done in our forefathers daies, when he payed but twentie nobles rent by the yeare, and rea∣ped tweluescore quarters of corne at the least, all other things else being proportionably and euenly respected according to their different rates and reckonings? For when as one bu∣shell of barley (being then sold for fourepence in former times) was able to buy him but one pound of candle: one bushell of barley now (being sold for two shillings sixpence) will purchase this poore husbandman, a pound of candle, a pound of hops, a quarter of lambe, three pennie-worth of bakers bread, & a gallon of good ale at the least; & so forth proportionably for the rest of any his other needfull affaires. Capn. The case is apparently euident concerning the husbandmans happie estate: but how for the inferiour sorts of subjects? Hydr. The selfe same proportion (respecting their seue∣rall persons and places) will fitly serue for euery of them. For who seeth not but that the Artificers, Trades men, and poore labouring people (being painefull in their callings, frugall in their gettings, and prouident in all their dispendings) may
as competently, and as conueniently maintaine themselues, and the folke of their familie now, with bestowing two shil∣lings sixpence vpon euery bushell of corne, as their fore-fa∣thers might haue done in former seasons when they payed but sixpence for euery bushell. For euen as the prices of corne are now increased, so surely the different prices of their se∣uerall traffickes, their sundrie commodities, and ordinarie labours, they are likewise proportionably augmented and raised accordingly, so as the different times haue brought no disparagement at all to their different states. I will make it more apparently manifest by this demonstration: When a Shoo-maker (in former seasons) might readily buy him a bu∣shell of corne for sixpence, in those selfe same times he hard∣ly could sell a good paire of shooes for sixpence. And where∣as a Shoo-maker now payeth two shillings sixpence for eue∣ry bushell of corne, he may now also sell the like paire of shooes for two shillings sixpence. So as one paire of shooes (in former times) would buy but a bushell of corne: and one paire of shooes (in our present daies) will likewise procure him a bushell of corne. These things being certainely so, the Shoo-makers state is much better now, then was the Shoo-makers state in former seasons. For, this Shoo-makers hauing once procured him a bushell of corne with one paire of shooes, which also his fore-fathers were forced to giue for a bushell in former ages, he hath fully as many shooes remai∣ning for his further vses, as had his fore-fathers before him, yea and each paire of his will be fully as much worth as fiue paire of the like in his fore-fathers daies. And as in this one, so likewise in all other trades else, according to the selfe∣same proportion of persons, of times, of trades, and of traf∣ficke. Capn. It is euen certainly so as you say. And therefore I wonder what should make our Artificers, our Trades∣men, and poore labouring people so malcontent as they are, with their present estates. Hydr. It is not any vnauoydable want (I assure thee) but
a fantasticall wantonnesse rather, which (shaping their shooes now a great deale higher in the instep, then did their fore-fathers in former times) doth make them so malcontended. My meaning is this. Our men (hauing now more ambitious, more aspiring and haughtier hearts than had their fore-fa∣thers before them) they cannot Phil. 2.11.12. 1 Tim. 6.8.9. content themselues with meate, drinke, and clothing, with that competencie (I meane) where∣with their fore-fathers were fully contented before them: or (at least) they will not be pleased before such time as they haue abundance of blessings, to Iam. 4.3. consume the same vpon their inordinate and licentious affections. For let our Artificers, our Trades-men, and our poore labouring people be as in∣dustrious now in their different degrees, as diligent in their seuerall callings, as painfull in their ordinary labours, as pro∣uident in getting, as carefull in keeping, as frugall in dispo∣sing, and as heedfull in their domesticall dispendings as were their forefathers before them: and I see not (as yet) to the contrary, but that (the premisses themselues being proporti∣onably and rightly respected) they might euery way liue in as happie a state as did their fore-fathers before them. But when those men were industrious, and our men are riotous; when they were diligent, and ours too too lazie; when they were painfull, and ours ouer playfull; when they were proui∣dent in gathering, and ours profluuious in scattering; when they were carefull in keeping, and ours carelesse in sauing; when they were frugall in disposing, and ours prodigall in bestowing; when they were heedfull in dispending, and ours altogether heedlesse in dispersing: how should they possi∣bly accord in their proper conditions, when there is so great discord in their diuerse professions? How should they con∣sent in their equall properties, when they dissent so much in their seuerall practises? or how should they iump pat in their congruent states, when they so greeuously iarre in their dif∣ferent stirres? The Trades-men (in former times) would not willingly spend so much in seuen yeares together about the necessarie decking vp of themselues, their wiues, and seauen
small children, as our Trades-men now do wilfully waste a∣bout the needlesse trimming vp of proud Tag-tailes their wiues in lesse then one quarter of a yeare, or two at the most. The ancient Artificers then would not vsually prouide so many delicate dishes for themselues and their families in a whole twelue-moneth together, as our new vpstart Artifi∣cers do now commonly procure for each Sundaies dinner at least. Milke, cheese, and butter, was a rich and bountifull banquet with them: Pig, porke, and lambe is nothing with ours, vnlesse also they haue a whole quart of sacke to kindle their queasie stomackes withall. It was very much with poore laboures then, to play one poore halfe-pennie at cards throughout a whole Christmas together to cobble their shooes: it is nothing with our loyterers now, to lauish forth twelue-pence a weeke at one vnthristie, or poope-noddie at least, for whole gallons of ale to comber their cockscombes withall. It was fully sufficient for the common sort then, their wiues & poore children, to be reputed good, honest, plaine countrey people: whereas our vulgar sort are neuer satisfied now, vnlesse themselues be reckoned the odde burgo-ma∣sters of euery parish; vnlesse their proud wiues be gentilized with, May it please your good worship at euery word; vnlesse my yong princkcockes their sonnes be maistered with long lowsie huge lockes on their head, and a guilt-dagger for∣sooth, behind at their backes; yea and vnlesse my prettie pigs-nie their daughters bee ladified with a tucke on their tailes, and a paire of new pumpes on their heeles for hurting their kibes. So as howsoeuer our ancestours liued honestly, & contentedly with their former conditions, it is no maruell at all if these our late vp-startes be monstrously malcontent for their proper estates; without any one occasion at all from the scarcitie of corne for want of more tillage. Capn. Surely Sir, if you had bene lodged these seauen yeares together in the very closet of our common peoples hearts, you could neuer haue layed forth more soundly, the foolish humours of those their fantasticall heads. Yea and
all men may now plainly perceiue, that it is not any want of corne, but the wantonnesse rather of their leud disposi∣tions that makes them discontented with the times, with their states, and with whatsoeuer else is opposite to their humorous affections. Hydr. Very true as thou sayest. For the times themselues are as tollerable now, as euer before; their ordinarie estates as competent now, as euer before; the great plentie of corne as exceeding much now as euer before; yea and the prices also of corne as proportionably conuenient as euer before, if all things else bee rightly respected: onely our mutable minds are now growne quite out of order, and that is the onely maine cause which maketh vs so malcontent in our selues, and so mischieuous also against the publike good of our present state. But be it supposed there were now some present want of corne in our countrey, as these our disorde∣red persons may seeme to suggest, might not this want (thinkest thou) be much better supplied, than by these their disordered attempts about the vntimelie disparking of all Inclosures, for that their needlesse augmentation of tillage? Capn. Good Sir, I sée not (as yet) how these our un∣ruly Tobacconists may be brought to conceiue the reason hereof. Hydr. When proud horses (being handsomly had forth to the christall streames) may not possibly be made to drinke, canst hou conceiue any other reason of this their wilfull re∣fusall, but the onely pride of their stomacks which maketh them so causelesly to distaste the good and wholsome water before them? Capn. No surely Sir, that is the onely cause, I verily suppose. Hydr. And euen so in like manner, it is the onely height of our proud Tobacconists minds that will neither suffer them∣selues to see the depth of their desperate follie herein, nor yet let them be handsomly led forth to a better dexteritie, from ye approued iudgement of others. For let the earth but yeeld
yearely the like abundance of graine that it now ordinarily groweth from time to time: and I doubt not at all but the prices of corne may still be continued in the selfe same reaso∣nable reckoning which they hold at this present, yea and (perhaps) be brought to a lower rate (as neede shall require) if the obseruations I could giue them herein, were rightly respected. Capn. Put downe those obseruations, I beséech you Sir. Hydr. Nay, soft here a while. For as I am not (I assure thee) a professed Polititian, so dare I by no meanes presume to put downe political orders for the publike State, in a king∣dome especially so prudently gouerned. Capn. Let no such néedlesse conceite (I beséech you) withhold your Christian care from ye publike good of your countrey. For as it was no presumption in 2 King. 5.3. Naamans little girle to propound, nor any preiudice to the reputation of Naaman to practise her prudent aduice for the timely re∣stauration of his diseased bodie to it pristinate estate: so is it no arrogancie in your owne selfe, nor derogancie at all from the iustly deserued dignity of any our politike states∣men, to referre your good thoughts (for the publike good of your countrey) to a publike consideration. And therefore, feare not to put your obseruations vpon termes at ye least, whatsoeuer dislike ensue thereof. Hydr. I do willingly consent to this thy reasonable and honest perswasion. First therefore, if it might but please his excellent Maiestie, to command from time to time, a strict execution of all those penall statutes which were formerly See Pultons Abridgment in the statute of corne d graine See the statute of 1. & 2. Phil. & Mar. Also the statute of 5. Elizab. 5.27. prouided against the needlesse transportation of corne and victuals into forreine parts, beyond ye ordinary prices of corne put downe in those statutes; with a seuere exaction of the penalties appointed, at the hands of such husbandmen first, as conuey, or cause to be conueyed their corne to any hauen or port to be so transported; at the hands also of such insa∣tiable Merchants or others as do so transport our said corne; and then lastly, at the ship-maisters and marriners hands for
so transporting the same: & I doubt not but that there would be plentie enough of corne in our countrey, and the same continued from time to time at a reasonable rate. Againe, if his said Maiestie might eftsoones be pleased to See Pultons Abridgment ibid. 3.4. Item ibidem, in the title of corne and graine. 3.4. become very prouident in granting so many needlesse li∣censes to any of those our monopolian Merchants especially, who do nothing else in effect, but ship ouer our corne, with other the like substantiall commodities of their natiue countrey into all forreine parts, and bring home from thence their trifling toyes; I meane boxes, hobbie-horses, and rat∣tles for little young babes, loombe-works and laces for young ladified lasses; proud pomanders, perriwigs, and squirrels tailes for prickmadaintie fooles, with other like trumpry trash: and I doubt not but that there would be plen∣tie enough of corne in our countrey, and the same continued from time to time at a reasonable rate. Againe, if his said excellent Maiestie might likewise be pleased to command from time to time, the like seuere exe∣cution of penall lawes, prouided See Pulton, in the statute against fore∣stallers, &c. See the statute of 5. Edw. 6.14. See 5. Eliz. 5. Item: 27. Eliz. 11. against all Fore-stallers, Regrators, and Ingrossers of corne and victuals, with a full exaction of the penalties appointed against euery offender therein: and I doubt not but that there would be corne e∣nough in our country, and the prices continued from time to time, at a reasonable rate. Againe, if his said Maiestie might be pleased to giue it in speciall charge, that the Iustices of euery countrey should from time to time See Pultons Abridgment in the title of Farmers. 2. Item, ibid. in the title of corne, 10. take a diligent suruey and view whether any of our countrey cormorants do accustomably keepe vp in their hands, some two, three, foure, fiue, yea sixe yeares corne together, first for the feeding of rats, mice, weasels, and then (being good for no purpose else) to bee tumbled forth by whole quarters at once for hogs and swine; with a very seuere and sharpe punishment for such as so filthily consume the good blessings of God: & I doubt not, but that there will be plentie enough of corne in our countrey, and the prices continued from time to time, at a reasonable rate.
Againe, let his Maiestie be likewise pleased to giue strictly in charge from time to time, that See the Ca∣nons against resorting to Alehouses. no roysters, ruffians, rio∣tous persons, nor tippling Tobacconists do continue day by day, and night by night, at tippling Alehouses in a needlesse gormandizing, carousing, quaffing, and swilling in of wine, ale, and beere, as they vsually do; but See Pulton in the title of labourers, sect. 2.3.13. Also in the ti∣tle of poore peo∣ple. sect 22. be industriously held and kept to their seuerall callings and labours: and I doubt not but that there will be plentie enough of corne in our countrey, and the prices therof continued from time to time at a reasonable reckoning. Againe, let his excellent Maiestie be likewise pleased to command very strictly See Pulton in the title of vagabonds, 1.2. &c. the due execution of lawes from time to time vpon rogues, vagabounds, and sturdie-beggers, who like greedie Caterpillers, deuoure the good blessings of God, and as idle drones, do but sucke vp the sweete of other mens labours; as also Ibedem 11. vpon any their maintainers and relee∣uers; together with such and so many as Ibidem 10. neglect their time∣ly apprehension: and I doubt not but that there will be corne enough in our countrey, and the prices thereof continued stil at a reasonable rate. Briefly, let his said excellent Maiestie be likewise pleased to command his said Iustices in euery countrey, from time to time See Pulton, in the title, Alehouses. sect. 2. to execute very sharply the breach of his lawes vpon all disordered Alehouses, as also to put presently in practise Ibidem sect. 1. the speedie suppressing of superfluous Alehouses to the sixt part at the least in our land: and I doubt not to haue plentie enough of corne in our countrey, and the same at a reasona∣ble rate from time to time. For I make no question at all, but that ten hundred thousand quarters of mault at the least (be∣sides the abundance of wheate and other the good blessings of God) are very riotously, wastefully, and needlesly besto∣wed from yeare to yeare in our land, by reason of such super∣fluous tippling houses: which said mault, wheate, and the rest of Gods good blessings (being otherwise most frugally dis∣pended onely for the present necessitie of his Maiesties sub∣iects) would make more plentie of corne in our land by
much, and continue the same from time to time at a reasona∣ble rate, without any such needlesse augmentation of til∣lage. Capn. Surely Sir, if these things were prouidently obserued, and carefully executed from time to time (as in equitie they ought) according to the true intent and mea∣ning of law, we should haue from yeare to yeare such abun∣dance of corne, and at so reasonable a rate withall, as the augmentation of tillage would rather be hurtfull then helpefull to all estates: and therefore that the disordered enterprice of those our tippling Tobacconists (for any thing I do perceiue) was idle, and vtterly needlesse. Hydr. Very true as thou sayest, and the needlesnesse also thereof may yet be made more apparent by much, if thou considerest rightly the very true cause it selfe of these our To∣bacconists wants. Which their said wants arise not (I assure) from any defect of corne in our countrey, or through the ex∣cessiue prices of corne for the present, but rather from their owne inordinate riotous, licentious, and loytring carriage. For, what is the cause that all other Artificers, Trades-men and poore labouring people do now (notwithstanding this falsly supposed want of corne, and the excessiue prices of graine) so competently and so commendably maintaine their seuerall charges, with monie from time to time in their purse for any their needfull affaires: and these our disordered To∣bacconists are each houe so oppressed with penurie and want, as they are eftsoones enforced to aduenture vpon such vndu∣rifull and desperate attempts, to preserue them and all theirs from famine and hunger? Capn. Howsoeuer I my selfe might shrewdly ghesse thereat, yet can I not certainly set downe the certaine rea∣son thereof: and therefore do heartily intreate your as∣sistance therein. Hydr. With very good will. Wherein this also obserue by the way, that if it were the present want of corne, or that the excessiue prices of corne might iustly be adiudged the
cause thereof, then all other poore men besides, hauing fat greater charges than they, and (setting their painefull la∣bours apart) as little to take to as any of them, should haue as great cause to complaine of their wants as themselues. Neither is it their want of a competent skill, or sufficient strength of bodie to maintaine their labours that constraines them thus to complaine: for therein they farre exceede, and go beyond those other poore men by many degrees. But it is their onely want of grace, their want of a Christian consci∣ence, their want of an honest heart, and the want of a readie will to walke industriously in their seuerall callings, that cau∣seth this stirre. It is their lazie, their loytring and idle life, be∣ing hardly brought to labour soundly one day in a weeke. It is their prodigall dispending of whatsoeuer they get, about their filthie Tobacco fumes, and superfluous carousing cups. It is their fine daintie tooth, their excesse in apparell, and their riotous behauiour in euery place. Yea it is their profluuious lashing forth of whatsoeuer they get, at cards, ice, and o∣ther vlawfull, nay rather vnthriftie pastimes. Ad now when all is thus spent, yea more than all, and themselues growne impatient in that their penurious estate, then forthwith they make most dangerous outcries about their priuate wants, and most desperately vndertake a causlesse supply thereof, by their disordered disparking of all Inclosures forsooth, vnder a false pretence of the needlesse augmentatn of tillage. By all which thou maist plainly perceiue, how pestiferous those their bad practises are to the long setled peace of our Soue∣raigne Lord the King: and consequently, how pernicious withall to the present good of our publike State. Capn. Sir, the case is apparently euident, like the Sunne in his strength, so as euen all (but such as are wilfully blind) may very easily espie the euident truth thereof. Hydr. Very true as thou sayest, And therefore, that these our poor-blind platformers in publike affaires, as also, euery of their polypragmaticall applauders may the more readily
be made to recouer a cleare vnderstanding concerning these matters, let vs now next, endeuour to draw those Act. 9.18. filthie scales of corruption from out of their eies, by demonstrating yet more plainly to euery of them what further pestiferous perils to the present good of our publike State did still pro∣ceede, and poysonsomely breake forth from those their des∣perate attempts. For here I would haue thee to obserue a∣fresh, that the late disordered enterprise of those our intem∣perate Tobacconists, it was not onely flat opposite to the well established peace of our soueraigne Lord the King as thou heardest euen now, but very rebellious likewise to his king∣ly soueraigntie it selfe. Not onely, because they so desperate∣ly attempted the wilfull breach of his peace, but for that they so proudly resisted his kingly power, and did thereby most impudently declare themselues very obstinate, and open re∣bels against his sacred Maiestie. Capn. Oh Sir, I would to God you had bene somwhat more spare in your spéech, and not so satyrically haue ter∣med them Rebels; for that terme (I feare me) will hardly be brooked. Hydr. Howsoeuer thy selfe would haue me be spare, I loue to be plaine in my spech, and to call a spade, a spade, how hardly soeuer digested. And why should they them∣selues, or any man else (I pray thee) dislike of that name which they in the very secret of their hearts so earnestly desi∣red, and (by their outragious carriage) so iustly deserued? That they in their owne hearts desired this name, it is more then apparently euident: because neither peaceable intreatie, nor any plausible meanes might possibly perswade their du∣tifull departure, nor once make them desist but a while from those their desperate attempts. And that their outragious ca∣riage di duly deserue such an odious name, they may not denie it themselues: not onely for that they would not (vpon his Maiesties Proclamation) depart from the field, but rebel∣liously persisted and proceeded afresh, in that their vnduti∣full practise. Howbeit (to the end thou maist more exactly
vnderstand my meaning herein) it shall not be greatly amisse, to examine first, the ordinarie vse of the word rebellare, ac∣cording to the iust proprietie of seuerall languages: and then next, to set succinctly downe a true definition of the very matter it selfe, as is properly intended by those the said seue∣rall languages. Capn. A very excellent order, and therefore I pray you procéede in your purpose. Hydr. With very good will. Wherein, I would haue thee obserue with deliberate consideration, that the Hebrewes they vse The He∣brewes haue , as in Gen. 14.14. Ios. 22.16.29. Ezech. 2.3. Dan. 9.5. the word maradh, which signifieth to offend by re∣belling against, to reuolt or forsake, to fall finally from one, to rebell, to deale perfidiously: as thou maist plainly perceiue by those seuerall Scriptures which are purposely put downe in the margine to make it more manifest. This word maradh, it hath a maruellous affinitie with another word Cognationē habet cum  & cum.  called ma∣rah, that is, to make bitter or sowre; as also with iaradh, that is, to descend or fall from: because the man that rebelleth, doth seeme (as it were) to reuolt or fall from his superiour so, as he doth vtterly vexe and grieue his heart. According to that which Abner vttered to Ioab, in an onely regard of the exceeding great slaughter betweene them, saying thus: 2 Sam. 2.26. Shall the sword deuoure for euer? Knowest thou not that it will be bitter∣nesse in the latter end? The Grecians they vsually haue for this matter, the The Greci∣ans haue  word aphistamai, which properly signifieth to resist, to withstand, or to depart from one: because the man that rebelleth doth seeme (as it were) to depart, or to withdraw himselfe from that other whom he so vniustly resisteth. The French-men they commonly haue The French haue rebeller, se reuanger. Rebeller, se reuan∣ger, that is to say, to rebell, or to reuenge himselfe: because the man that so vniustly resisteth his lawfull Superiour, doth seeme to rest (as it were) vpon his owne proper reuenge without all authoritie. The Italians they do vsually put downe for this point, the word The Italians haue rebellare, resorgere. rebellare, resorgere, that is, to resist, or rise vp against
one: because the partie rebelling doth rebelliously rise vp in armes against his Superiour whom he so proudly resi∣steth. The Latines they do eftsoones obserue the word The Latines haue repugna∣re. repug∣nare, that is, to fight purposely against, or to raise vp an op∣posite warre: because the partie so rebelling, doth vndutiful∣ly beare armour against him, whom he so vniustly resisteth. So as all these seuerall languages, they do (by this word to rebell) euen purposely speake of all such as abide not very firmely in that loyaltie or faith wherein they are authentical∣ly obliged, and dutifully bound to their soueraigne King, and naturall countrey. Or they vnderstand it of such as (being victoriously subdued before and (vpon their humble submis∣sion receiued to mercie) do nothwithstanding endeauour eft∣soones to stirre vp rebellious strifes against some such as they are orderly subiected vnto, and from whom they formerly receiued much mercie. Now then, as a warrior is properly called of the Hebrewes, Hebrew,  Grec.  Gal. Guerroy∣eur, homme de guerre. Ital. Combat∣titore, guerri∣eur. Lat. Bellator. Ish-milehamah, that is to say, a man of warre; also of the Grecians, Hebr.  Grec.  Gal. Caeluy qui rebelle. Ital. Rubello. Hisp. Eque rebela. Lat. Rebella∣tor. polemisteis, that is, a man at armes, or one rightly enabled for warlike affaires; also of the French men, Guerroyeur, homme de guerre, that is, a warriour, or a man of warre; also of the Italians, Combattitore, gueeri∣eur, that is, a combatter, or warriour; and of the Latines, bel∣lator, that is to say, a warriour, or bearer of armes: So surely a rebell he Hebr.  Grec.  Gal. Caeluy qui rebelle. Ital. Rubello. Hisp. Eque rebela. Lat. Rebella∣tor. is vsually called of the Hebrewes, posheang, that is to say, a transgressour, a perfidious, or mischieuous person; also of the Grecians aphistamenos, that is to say, a reuolter from an open resiter, or a wilfull withstander of publike authori∣tie; also of the French-men, Celuy qui rebelle, that is, one that obstinately, or stubbornely rebelleth against his Superiour. Also of the Italians, he is called rubello that is to say, a very pestiferous, or most persidious rebell; also of the Spaniard he is termed, rebela, that is, one which rebelleth, or taketh vp armour against his Prince: and of the Latines, rebellator, that is to say, a rebeller, an obstinate resister, or a wilfull withstan∣der of the Princes power. By all this then it is very apparent
what the word (rebellare) doth signifie, according to the na∣turall proprietie of each seuerall language. Capn. Good Sir, you aue sufficiently set forth the sence and meaning of the word rebellare, and therefore, now I pray you procéede to put downe a perfect definition of the matter it selfe, which is purposely intended by the naturall proprietie of those seuerall languages. Hydr. Content. And (for this respect) thou hast here to obserue afresh from the premisses, that a rebell is he who (ha∣uing bene lawfully conquered before, and vpon his humble submission receiued to mercie) doth estsoones (notwithstan∣ding) seditiously raise vp and vnlawfull war against his liege Lord, and lawfull Superior. Or else, a rebell is he, who abi∣deth not firmely in that honest loyaltie and faithfull obedi∣ence wherein he is strictly obliged to his authenticall King, and dutifully bound to his naturall countrey: but too too re∣belliously reuolteth from both, and resistingly taketh vp ar∣mour against his said authenticall Soueraigne and naturall countrey. By this then it is apparently euident, that rebellion is nothing else but a wilfull resisting or rising vp against a lawfull authoritie. And that therefore, if the word bellare be properly and purposely put downe to import and authenticall and lawfull warre, then the word rebellare it doth not impro∣perly, but euen purposely betoken an vnlawfull rebelling, or an vndutifull raising of warre against a lawfull authoritie. As also, if the word bellator, be truly translated an authenticall warriour, then the word rebellator, is not vnaptly termed a treacherous rebellour. I will yet more plainly demonstrate this matter thus. When two fight together in a cause contra∣dictorie, or in a matter of meere repugnancie, that quarrell (in the one of them) is vndoubtedly iust: but yet (in the other) it is vtterly vniust, so as (in this case) the imputation of rebel∣lion it cannot be truly imputed to both. For he that hath the iust quarrell, is properly said bellare, that is, to fight lawfully in the necessary defence of his owne proper right: but he that vpholdeth the vniust quarrell, he is not improperly said
rebellare, that is, vnlawfully to rebell or rise vp in an vnneces∣sary opposition to him that stands in the lawfull defence of his owne proper right. Not the other then, but this man that maketh the vniust opposition, is properly termed the partie rebelling. To apply this to our present purpose. The Kings Maiesties power, and these our disordered persons did skir∣mish together in a cause contradictorie, or in a matter of meere repugnancie. Because the Kings power it stood for the timely supportation of publike peace, and the necessary defence of his Maiesties positiue lawes against that their vn∣lawfull assembling together for the lawlesse and needlesse disparking of pastures inclosed: those disordered person so vnlawfully assembled they rose vp in their owne proper per∣sons against that his authenticall power, to mannage the vn∣lawfulnesse of that their desperate attempt against those his Maiesties lawes. Not both, but the one of these may truly be said to rebell. If they had dared to say then, or at this present do but thinke that his Maiesties power rebelled against them, and not they against his Maiesties power, it were more then high time they were all cut off quite, for so proudly Iudg. 9.14.15. aduan∣cng the base bramble-bush of Shechem against the tall Cedar of Libanon. For Cicero. Bella∣re cum Dij, id est, naturae re∣pugnare? Nā vbi maioritas, ibi mandan authoritas, vbi minoritas, ibi obediendi ne∣cessitas. were not this (in very deed) to warre with the gods, I meane, to resist, and rise vp against Nature her selfe? Because in whomsoeuer there is a maioritie, in them there is placed a commanding authoritie, and in whomsoeuer there is a minoritie, vpon them is imposed an obeying necessitie. And therefore, if his Maiesties power may not iustly be said to rebell in that action, because it authentically stood vp for the onely supportation of publike peace, and the timely de∣fence of his Maiesties positiue lawes: it must then necessarily follow, that they themselues (so vnlawfully arising against his said Maiesties authenticall power) did make the rebel∣lion. And euen so, those our disordered persons (in that their vnlawfull resistance) they are very aptly and properly cal∣led obstinate rebels, how vnsauourie soeuer the word rebell doth seeme to that their vnsauourie taste. And that therefore
the one part of them (for that their vnlawfull rebellion) were iustly put to the sword, and all the rest of them since, not vn∣iustly deserued the gallowes as Felons, had not his excellent Highnesse (euen by the meere motion of his Kingly clemen∣cie without any their merit) then mingled Psal. 85.10. Mercie with Iustice, according to the approued testimonie of the blessed Apostle, who telleth them thus: Rom 13.1.2.3.4.5. Let euery soule be subiect to the authoritie of the higher powers. For there is no power but of God, the powers that be, are ordained of God: whosoeuer therefore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receiue to themselues damnation. For Princes are not to be feared for good workes, but for e∣uill. Wilt thou then be without feare of the power? Do well, so shalt thou be praised for the same, for he is the Minister of God for thy wealth. But if thou do euill, then feare; for hee beareth not the sword for nought, for he is the Minister of God, to take vengeance on him that doth euill. Wherefore you must be subiect, not because of wrath onely, but also for conscience sake. What sayest thou Capnistus, to the word re∣bellion, now? as also to the testimonie of the Apostle con∣cerning the same? Were they not rebels in that their resi∣stance? And was not that their rebellion a very pestiferous enterprise against the present good of our publike State? Capn. The case (I confesse) is much more apparently euident, than that any sound hearted subiect may once dare to oppose himselfe to the same. Although notwithstanding, they themselues, and their vnderhand fauourites do séeke to suppresse the imputation of rebellion thus: Indéed (say they) if those silie poore soules had taken vp armour against his Maiesties power, they might iustly be called rebels: but (alas) they were silie poore snakes, vtterly vnarmed, and therefore no rebels. Hydr. Why man, that their disordered intention (it be∣ing wilfully persisted in, with a resolute mind not to depart from the place) is by those (the forenamed statutes) made a plaine rebellion against his Maiestie, though neither armour
nor weapon were vsed at all. Yea and the word which the Apostle puts downe in the forenamed Scripture, importeth so much. For the word there . Rom. 13.2. is antitassómenos, that is, one op∣posing himselfe vnto; one that resisteth, or withstandeth the power. Signifying thereby vnto vs, that not to obey, or not to submit to the power, is a plaine resistance, or a standing a∣gainst the power of God, albeit neither armour nor weapon were vsed at all. Otherwise Saint Steuen could not iustly haue challenged the stifnecked Iewes for Act. 7.51. resisters and rebels against the holy Ghost, because (in that their wilfull resistance) they vsed no materiall armour at all, but onely Rom. 6.13. the weapons of vnrighteousnesse to sinne. But tell me Capnistus, do those cap∣tious confederates then onely accompt it rebellion when as weapons are vsed with warre against warre? Or is it onely the bearing of armour against his Maiesties power that maketh the rebell? How then may themselues be (that way) set free from the iust imputation of an obstinate rebel∣lion? For (besides that their vndutifull withstanding of his Maiesties Proclamation so authentically made in their owne proper hearing) had they not armour? had they not weapons? Had they not hatchets, axes, mattocks, shouels, spades, forks, staues, bowes and arrowes, bils, partizans, guns, with other like implements? were these no weapons thinkest thou? And would they be commanded (in a peaceable manner) to deli∣uer vp these? Nay did they not with violent force, and to their vitermost power, make a rebellious resistance with eue∣ry of these, against his Maiesties power? Yea and (which more is by much) did they not (like proud railing Shimeis) very villanously 2 Sam. 15.4.5. cast pibbles and stones against our most vertu∣ous Dauid his authenticall power, euen then, when all the men of warre were 2 Sam. 16.6. on their right hands, and on their left hands, I meane, had enuironed them round about on euery side? If therefore, it be the onely bearing of armour against his Ma∣iesties power that makes the rebellion, why, yet then surely euen they also themselues (so vsing these weapons against his Maiesties power) they are here very clearely concluded for
Rebels, and therefore very pestiferous persons against the present good of our publike State. Howbeit (besides those their former disordered courses, and desperate attempts a∣gainst good lawes of our land, against his Maiesties peace, as also against his said Maiesties soueraigne power) their dis∣ordered enterprise was yet more hurtfull to the present good of our State, by procuring o causelesly their owne, and other mens bloud to be so fearefully spilt about that their rebelli∣ous enterprise. The timely consideration whereof, should euen forcibly constraine the principall procurers of such a bloudie massacre to tremble and quake all the daies of their life, for feare, lest that shed bloud (at one time or other) be iustly Gen. 4.10. reuenged with bloud-shed vpon their owne pates. Capn. Oh nay Sir, such a consideration is so farre off from working their feare, as it rather procureth their com∣fort. For Gen. 9.6. the liuely image of God being (by that massacre) so fearefully defaced in those sillie poore soules whose bloud was so cruelly spilt, they doubt not (they say) but that the iust reuenger of bloud (whose image was so fearefully de∣faced in euery of them) will one day require an accompt for their bloud, according to his owne infallible promise, say∣ing thus:Gen. 9.5. I will surely require your bloud wherein your liues are, at the hands of euery beast will I require the same. At the hand of man, euen at the hand of a mans brother, will I require the life of man. For Gen. 9.6. Matth. 26.52. Reuel. 13.10. whosoeuer sheddeth mans bloud, by man shall his bloud be shed: because Gen. 1.27. and 9.6. Eph. 4.24. in the image of God hath he made man. Now Sir, (this being certainely so) they doubt not (they say) but that euen those war-horses, as also the warriours them selues shall one day yéeld an heauie accompt for so cruelly spilling their bloud. Hydr. Why man, thou didst freely confesse but euen now, that their rebellious disorder (in this their rebellious at∣tempt) was very well worthy of death. Capn. I did so indéed: and am still of that mind. Hydr. Yea, but tell me this one thing I pray thee. Who is the man that either may, or will dare to execute such a de∣serued
death vpon any one of them all, if (as themselues do blindly imagine) their bloud must be required at the hands of such as shall put them to death? Thou must necessarily ac∣knowledge thus much at the least, that some kind of men (in such an orderly execution of death vpon malefactors) are clearely acquited of those malefactors death, and so freed from yeelding an accompt vnto God for their bloud: or else (if that which these our fantastickes do fondly conclude from the forenamed Scripture be soundly concluded) that then no malefactors bloud may (at any hand) be split, with∣out the dreadfull displeasure of God. Capn. That must néeds be certainly so: and therefore, I pray you explane that portion of Scripture, for the bet∣ter satisfaction of them, and of me. Hydr. With all my heart. Wherein thou hast here to con∣sider afresh, that (immediatly after the first creation) the al∣mightie Iehouah designed to Adam himselfe Gen. 1.26.28 the primarie and soueraigne dominion ouer all other his creatures in generall, by Psal. 8.6.7.8 putting them vnder his feete: and then next (in a more spe∣ciall manner) ouer Euah her selfe, by Gen. 3.16. &c. 1.22. 1 Cor. 14.34. subiecting her desire to Adam her husband, appointing him withall, to haue the ma∣iestical soueraigntie ouer her person. After this, the Lord ra∣tified afresh, that selfesame maiesticall soueraigntie in Caine; by constituting him Gen. 4.7. a princely ruler ouer Abel his brother; by subiecting Abel his ordinarie desires vnto Caine; and by authorising the said Caine to rule ouer the person of Abel. By this meanes, insinuating to all the succeeding ages, that as he is 1 Cor. 14.33▪ the God of order, so would he haue 1 Cor. 14.0. order obserued a∣mong his creatures. And thereupon (by this his primarie pre∣sident of such a princely soueraignty in the said person of Caine) dis plainly demonstrate to all the world throughout their generations from age to age, how he had decreed for euer, that (in all humane societies to the end of the world) there should be some to beare rule, and some to obey. Now then, to the end the of-spring succeeding might not too too grosly imagine, that this selfesame princely preheminence of
some speciall person ouer the people, after the first age of the world was come to the full period or vttermost date, the Lord therefore immediatly after the floud (when the Gen. 8.2.13. win∣dowes of heauen were closed vp, and the waters quite fled from the vpper face of the earth) he Gen. 9.1. powerfully renewed the world afresh, by that selfesame primarie blessing wherwith Gen. 1.28. the pro∣pagation of man was blessed at first: and Gen. 9.2. reestablished also in man his primarie dominion ouer birds, beasts, and fishes. Yea and euen then also (recalling eftsoones to remembrance Gen. 10.8.9. the bloudie massacres of Nimrod and others, as also intending a maruellous increase of the world afresh, by those eight sur∣uiuers after the floud) he purposely diuised a very proui∣dent restraint concerning all such outragious murders as might any waies hinder his forenamed purpose for propaga∣tion: telling Noah and the rest, that he would vndoubtedly Gen. 9.5. require the bloud of man, at the hands of euery man outragious∣ly spilling the same. And because there should no scruple of conscience remaine in any those iust reuengers of bloud, the Lord God therefore doth authentically establish afresh, a perpetuall supereminent power ouer man and beast, for the orderly execution of that his vnchangeable ordinance con∣cerning the lawfull reuenge of any such wilfull murthers, tel∣ling them thus: Gen. 9.6. Whosoeuer sheddeth mans bloud, in man, or by man shall his bloud be shed, or let his bloud be shed. Lo this I assure thee, is the true sence and meaning of that portion of Scrip∣ture. Capn. Surely Sir, this sene which you giue, it seemeth very congruent with the proportion of faith, and scope of the text. Although yet, I haue heard say of some who do ve∣rily thinke that Ioh. Caluine in Gen. 9.6. the Lord (in that text) hath not exactly and purposely put downe any politique or positiue law concerning the authenticall punishment of outragious murders. Hydr. There are some (I confesse) who affirme as thou sayest, and those also of reuerend regard with the Churches of God. But whosoeuer more considerately examineth the
apt coherence of this one, with all the precedent verses, he will (I verily suppose) be soone of a contrary mind. For sith the Lord God (by the very tenure of that text) doth directly determine a timely reuenge of euery such wilfull murders by the subordinate ministerie of some one man or other: what man is he that may vnblameably vndertake the timely exe∣cution of that selfe same determined reuenge, but only some such a one as the Lord himselfe hath publikely and power∣fully enabled thereunto? Besides that, if we consider some∣what more strictly, the very maine reason it selfe which the Lord God hath purposely rendered for the vndoubted ap∣probation of such a ministeriall reuenge: we shall find (in my iudgement) the matter more euident than that it may proba∣bly be impugned of any. For whereas Noah, and his sonnes (conceiuing some doubt concerning the matter propoun∣ded) might haue made this exception, saying: Lord thou hast told vs euen now, that the outragious spiller of any mans bloud shall vndoubtedly be sure to haue his owne bloud spilt againe by man: but here shew vs (we pray thee) what one man in the world may reuengingly shed such a murderers bloud, and not be made guiltie of bloudshed himselfe? That may the magistrate to (saith the Lord) into whose au∣thentical hands alone, I haue (for such a determined reuenge) euen purposely put Rom. 13.4. my reuenging sword. Lo, here is the proper coherence, and the purposed scope of this present text. Capn. Very well. But why may such a man do it more than another, and not be made guiltie of murder him∣selfe? Hydr. For answer herein, let me first aske thee this question: namely, Whether thou beleeuest that the Lord God himselfe may take an immediate reuenge of innocent bloud vpon the murdering person? Capn. That I do verily beléeue; both because he hath iustly decreed such iust reuenge: and for that also he (be∣ing onely the supereminent God) may 1 Sam. 3.18. Do whatsoeuer
seemeth good in his owne eies, without the checke or controle∣ment of any. Hydr. Well, and that which he may immediatly so worke by himselfe alone, may he not likewise mediately accomplish the same, by the ordinary meanes of another? Capn. Yes Sir, he may worke either by himselfe, or by another, what pleaseth himselfe. But sith he hath vn∣changeably determined such a reuenge vpon any the cause∣lesse spiller of bloud, how may this his mediate reuenger of bloud performe such an action more then another, and not be guiltie of bloudshed himselfe? Hydr. Such a man may vnblameably do it (saith God) because I my selfe (for that selfe same purpose) haue vndoub∣tedly substituted him thereunto, according to Gen. 9.6. the very i∣mage of that mine owne maiesticall soueraignty. That is, I haue (in a more especiall manner) aduanced him to such an excellent seruice, by inuesting his person more properly with a most liuely resemblance of mine owne reuenging power: & by making him especially, the authenticall representation or the expresse image of that mine owne immaculate iustice against malefactors. Thus then, these words of the Lord, namely (for Gen. 9.6. in the image of God hath he made man) they are euen purposely annexed to that the precedent decree of the Lord, as the very maine reason why such a substituted magi∣strate may powerfully and vnblameably require like of a murderer as a decreed reuenge of the murder committed: namely, because (for that selfe same businesse) he is the au∣thenticall image of the Almightie his absolue authority. Capn. Surely Sir, those words (as you say) they séeme to haue in them a very probable reason of that the prese∣dent decrée concerning the iust reuenger of bloud: and are therefore euen purposely annexed thereto, for a further con∣firmation thereof. Howbeit, some others (by your leaue) they do imagine that these words (Gen. 9 6. for in the image of God hath he made man) they were Iohan. Cal∣inus, in Gen. 9.6. not put downe there for any such supposed confirmation of the magistrate his subordi∣nate
power, as your selfe do séeme to affirme; but as an am∣plification rather, to aggrauate the sinne of such murder committed: telling the murderer thus, that not onely he hath bene most iniurious to the man whom he murdered, but that also the Lord his supereminent Maiestie is migh∣tily wronged thereby, Gen. 1.26. because his owne image in man (by such an outragious murder) is most monstrously mangled, marred, and (in a manner) defaced. Hydr. Although this which those men affirme, be (in it owne selfe) such a sanctified truth as proportionably con∣sorteth with the analogie of faith: yet is it not truly col∣lected (I verily thinke) from that portion of Scripture, if we more strictly consider the same according to the maine pur∣pose of the Almightie himselfe. Because these words (the i∣mage of God) they haue not any such reference there to the murdered man, but rather to the magistrate himselfe, so se∣uerely reuenging the murder committed. The Lord very plainly declaring therby, that Tremelius in Gen. 9.6. Petrus Mar∣tyrus in Gen. 9.6. not onely a iust reuenge must seuerely be executed vpon the outragious murderers, but that also, the said reuenge must onely be orderly vndertaken by a man authentically endued with the authoritie of God. Yea and this sence of the place may yet more euidently breake forth to euery mans apprehension, if we aduisedly consider, first the seuerall significations of the image of God: and then next, if we examine more strictly the word  gnasa it selfe, put downe in the forenamed text. Capn. Shew me first (I beséech you) the seuerall signi∣fications of the image of God. Hydr. Touching the seuerall significations of that selfe∣same image, so frequent and ordinary in sacred Scriptures, we haue here to obserue, that a man is said to be made ac∣cording to the image of God, in a threefold respect: namely first, respecting the nature of his soule: the same being a spiritu∣all essence, immortall, eternall, inuisible, and very significantly resembling the immortalitie, eternitie, and inuisibilitie of his Lord and Creatour. And in an especiall regard hereof, each
man (so created) is fitly called Gen. 2.7. 1 Cor. 15.45. a liuing soule Secondly, a man is not vnaptly said to be created also according to the image of God, in an onely respect of the essentiall qualities of that his said soule, namely, righteousnesse, and holinesse: because man al∣so was therein accordingly created after Gen. 1.26. Eph. 4.24 Col. 3.10. the image of God. And thirdly, a man may very well be said to be created also in the image of God, in a more speciall respect of the holy attri∣butes thereof bestowed vpon him, namely, dominion, dignitie, and glorie: because man also himselfe (euen by a more speciall dispensation from God) obtained from God Gen 1.26. and 9 2. Psal. 8.5.6.7. a most princely so∣ueraigntie ouer all the inferiour creatures, as also more specially Gen. 3.16. and 4.7. Wisd. 4.7. and 9 6. 1 Cor. 11.7. concerning mankind. Capn. This Sir (I confesse) is maruellous strange, and more then euer I heard. But what do you inferre from this thréefold signification of the image of God? Hydr. Euen that which notably tendeth to the timely confirmation of our purpose concerning the true ence of this text. For we may not (in any wise) vnderstand this portion of Scripture according to that primarie signification of the i∣mage of God, namely, according to the spirituall essence, im∣mortalitie, eternitie, and inuisibilitie of mans soule: because there∣in the soule of man was made immortall; and the Lord speaketh here precisely of that image of God in man, wherin mans bloud may be spilt, which cannot properly be said concerning mans soule. Neither may we vnderstand this portion of Scripture according to that secondarie signification of the said image of God, namely, according to the essentiall qualities of that selfesame soule, I meane, true righteousnesse, and holinesse: be∣cause those the essential qualities appertaining to the soule of man, as they were vtterly lost in our forefather Adam, so surely (being now eternally restored to a man in Christ) they are no way subiected to any such outragious spilling of bloud. And therefore we must necessarily vnderstand this making of man in the image of God, according to the third signification of the image of God, namely, according to that 1 Cor. 11.7 See Caluin. hera. diuine dominion, power, or soueraignetie which (by ye speciall
dispensation of God) is more especially designed to some such speciall persons as are (by his absolute authoritie) to take a iust reuenge vpon all malefactours. Capn. Surely Sir, this thréefold signification of the image of God, doth shew forth the true sence of that text by sundry degrées 2 Pet. 1.19. like the day-dawne in the morning. But how may this sence be yet further confirmed from a more strict examination of the word gnasa, put downe in that text? Hydr. Exceedingly wel. Because the word gnasa, (which is there translated (made) it may not properly be referred to that speciall worke of creation wherein Adam Gen. 2.7. 1 Cor. 15.45. was primari∣ly Gen. 1.26. and 5.1. Ephes. 4.24. Col. 3.10. or secondarily made according to the said image of God, concerning either the essentiall being, or the essentiall qualities of that his said soule, which are no way subiected to any such outragious spilling of bloud: and therefore it cannot bee rightly referred to either of them. Capn. Oh yes Sir, maruellous fitly, especially if the word gnasa, be vsed indifferently for that thréefold significa∣tion of the image of God. Hydr. It were certainly true as thou sayest, if the word gnasa indeede, were vsed indifferently for euery of those se∣uerall significations of the said image of God. And therefore, we haue here now to consider afresh, that as the holy Ghost hath purposely distinguished those seuerall significations of the image of God the one from the other: so hath he pre∣cisely obserued three seuerall words in the originall tongue, to set forth the different degrees of those the said actions of God, according to their different conditions. Capn. What are those thrée seuerall words, I beséech you? Hydr. The first word is  bara, that is, to create, or to make: and more properly it betokeneth Gen. 1.1. the bringing out of something, without any matter at all preexisting in nature. And euen so accordingly this word bara, it is vsed sometimes Gen. 1.1. and 5.1. for creation; sometimes againe Gen. 1.11. and 2.18. for procreation; or the brin∣ging
of one thing from out of another, and sometimes also for Psal. 51.12. recreation, or making againe: because euery of these three seuerall actions there appeareth a wonderfull inherent power in God, who Psal. 135.6. worketh whatsoeuer pleaseth himselfe in heauen and earth: and Rom. 4.17. calleth those things which are not, as though they were. Secondly, the Lord sometimes vseth the word  sarath, which properly and naturally signifieth to Iere. 6.29. burne vp, to boyle, to melt mettall, to trie forth by fire, and so metapho∣rically, to Psal. 26.2. and 66.10. Isa. 48.10. trie out the children of men, to search through their hearts and their waies: also sometimes if signifieth to Isa. 43.7. to forme, or to fashion a thing, and to bring it vnto that exact and absolute condition which 1 Cor. 15.22. doth proportionably con∣sent with the primarie patterne thereof. And thirdly, the Lord sometime also he vseth the word  gnasa put downe in this portion of Scripture, as also Gen. 4 9. and 5.1. Isa. 41.4. in sundry other places where occasion requireth. The which word (in like manner) is diuersly obserued in the sacred Scrip∣tures, according to the diuerse and sundry occasions offered. For sometimes it signifieth Gen. 1.11. the timely producing, and the orderly bringing forth of the fruites of the earth according to Natures primary appointment; sometimes it signifieth Gen. 14.5. Ezech. 28.4. the procuring, the getting, and the gathering, together of things, as men vsually do, when they gather vp goods and treasures; sometimes it signifieth Gen. 18.7. to prouide, to prepare, or to make readie a thing, as men commonly do, when they prepare and make readie their meate for the hungrie trauel∣ling persons; sometimes it signifieth Psal. 115.3. to do, to make, to fa∣shion, to forme, or to finish a thing, as the Lord did his workes in the first creation; sometimes it signifieth Exod. 10.25. Leuit. 16.9. to pre∣sent with sacrifice, or to offer vp sacrifice as men vsually do in the seruice of God; yea sometimes againe it signifieth Deut. 32.6. 1 Sam. 12.6. to aduance, to extoll, to grace, or to magnifie, as men common∣ly do vnto some such speciall persons as they aduance vnto dignitie, and euen so is the word gnasa Gen. 9.6. vsed in this our pre∣sent text.
Capn. I perceiue the variety of significations concer∣ning those the forenamed thrée words, but what do you ob∣serue from the same? Hydr. Surely, euen that which sufficiently tendeth to the true opening of this portion of Scripture according to that onely sence which I set downe before. For seeing the holy Ghost hath not here put downe the word bara, which pro∣perly betokeneth the creating of something from out of no∣thing preexisting in nature; neither yet hath vsed the word tsarath, which properly signifieth to forme or fashion a thing (as it were) by melting the same in a mould: therefore, this portion of Scripture (being not purposely declared by any of those two words) it cannot properly be vnderstood of that primarie image of God which more particularly respecteth the first creation of man; and so consequently the speciall reason comprehended therein, it can haue no such peculiar reference to that murdered man in whom the created image of God is so defaced. Moreouer, sith the holy Ghost doth precizely put downe in this portion of Scripture, neither bara, nor tsarath, but the onely word gnasa, which properly betokeneth to aduance, to extoll, or to magnifie with honor, as I told thee before: therefore the text cannot significantly be resolued thus; For in the primarie image of God, hath the Lord created or formed that murdered man: but rather more proportionably thus; For in the secondary image of God, hath the Lord aduanced, and magnified that his subordinate reuenger of innocent bloud. And so the maine reason ren∣dred there in that text, it hath (thou maist see) a much more peculiar reference to such a reuenger of innocent bloud as is peculiarly authorised thereunto according to that diuine i∣mage of soueraignetie, wherein such a reuenger (by a peculiar dispensation from God) is authentically aduanced, extolled, and most honorably magnified. Now then, the Almightie Ie∣houah (protesting to Noah and the rest, that the Gen. 9.5. outragious spiller of any mans bloud▪ should by man haue his owne bloud spilt againe in a iust reuenge) doth presenly put downe the maine
reason, why such a subordinate reuenger of bloud may bold∣ly, and vnblameably accomplish that businesse: namely, be∣cause such a man (such a ministeriall reuenger of bloud I meane) is authentically formed or made in the image of God; or (to speake more significantly and properly according to the originall text) because such a subordinate reuenger, is au∣thentically aduanced, dignified, extolled, or magnified with the authenticall image, or liuely resemblance Gen. 9.6. Rom. 13.4. of that the Almightie his maiesticall soueraignetie, wherewith he may boldly and vnblameably execute vengeance vpon all such malefactors as are formerly condemned to death for any their enormious or capitall crimes. Lo Capnistus, this (I assure thee) is the very true sence and meaning of that portion of Scripture. Capn. Surely Sir, this sence which you giue (in my proper conceipt) it is without all contradiction. More espe∣cially, if those the former thrée words be not méere Synoni∣ma, words (I meane) of one and the selfesame significa∣tion, but are vsed rather (as you say) for such different termes as are purposely put downe by Ioh. 14.16.17. the spirit of truth, to distinguish those the forenamed thrée actions of God, ac∣cording to their different, and diuerse conditions. Hydr. There is (I assure thee) no question thereof. Yea and therefore the Rom 16.27. onely wise God (to take quite away all colourable shewes of any such idle conceipt) hath of very purpose compacted and coupled euen those the former three words (I meane, bara, tsarath and gnasa) all ioyntly toge∣ther in one and the selfe same verse, yea and (which more is by much) for those the three former different respects which we precizely spake of before, saying thus: Euery one shall be called by my name, for Isa. 43.7.  berathiu, ietsarethiu, aph-gnasithiu that is, I haue created him, I haue formed him, yea I haue exalted him. We may not therefore too too grosly imagine that these three seuerall words were here put downe by the Prophet, onely for bate Synonima, as words (I meane) of one and the
same signification; for so should he haue made but an idle tautologie, that is, but a superfluous and a needlesse re∣petition of one and the selfe same matter, propounded thus: I haue created him, I haue created him, I haue created him. But those three seuerall words they are vsed there rather See Tremeli∣us in Isa 43.7. as different termes, or as an elegant gradation, to set forth more succinctly, the excellent and most admirable order of the Lord his exceeding great kindnesse towards the elect. For first of all the Prophet he telleth the people, that (from the very first houre of their creation) the Lord Pro. 16.4. hath ordained them to his owne euerlasting glorie Eph. 1.5. according to the eternall purpose of his owne will. Then next, that he formeth or fashio∣neth them afresh, being fearefully fallen from their former integritie: that is, Rom. 8.30. he calleth, iustifieth and preserueth them to himselfe, by this holy Spirit of regeneration, And last∣ly, that he aduanceth, extolleth, or magnifieth them with a soueraigne dominion, dignitie and honour 1 Sam. 12.6. both in this, and the life to come. Capn. The matter (as you make it) both seeme verie probable. But yet do tell me (I pray you) wherefore you your selfe haue purposely translated the word gnasa put downe in that place (aduanced or magnified) rather then (made or formed that man in the image of God) as it is vsually turned in many of our Latine and English Bi∣bles? Hydr. I haue purposely translated the word gnasa so, for three principall reasons. First, because (among the manifold significations of that word set downe before) it is no impro∣per, but a most proper signification of the word it selfe. Se∣condly, for that the very coherence and purpose of that pre∣sent text doth euen proportionably require that selfe same translation. And thirdly, because (in sundry other places Deut. 32.6.15. 1 Sam. 12.6. of Scripture besides) the same word gnasa (vpon the like vrgent occasion, by many most excellent and learned See R. D. Kimbi, in 1. Sam. 12.6. See Tremelius in Deut. 32.6.15. and 1. Sam. 12.6. Isa. 43.7. Isa. 46.4. Linguists) is ordinarily and vsually translated, to aduance, to extoll, and to magnifie with a soueraigne dignitie, dominion, prehemi∣nence,
or princely power. As in Deuteronomie thus, Is not the Lord God thy Father, that hath redeemed thee, that hath magnified thee, that hath proportioned thee? And a little af∣ter, thus: He forsooke God that magnified him, and regarded not the strong God of his saluation. Also in Samuel, thus: It is the Lord that magnified Moses and Aaron, and brought your fathers out of the land of Egypt. Also in▪ Isaiah thus: E∣uery one shall be called by my name (saith the Lord) for I created him, I formed him, I magnified him. And againe in another place thus: I the same, euen I will beare you vntill the hoare haires, I haue magnified you; I will also beare you, I will carrie you, and I will deliuer you. Where also he vseth the like elegant gradation, (though in different termes) to that which he spake of before. Now then, sith such excellent Linguists (notwithstanding the forenamed opposition in some of our Latine, and English Bibles) haue thus (vpon vr∣gent occasion from those the former propounded Deut. 30.6.15. 1 Sam. 12.6. Isa. 43.7. and 46.4. Scrip∣tures) of very purpose translated the word gnasa (not made, but magnified rather) according to the naturall signification thereof: why may not I Capnistus (vpon a like vrgent occa∣sion from the text it selfe) translate the word gnasa, put downe Gen. 9.6. in Genesis (not made, but magnified man in the i∣mage of God) notwithstanding any thy pretended oppositi∣on in the forenamed Bibles? Capn. Surely Sir, I sée no reason at all why the like lawfull libertie herein, may not (vpon equall occasion) be vsed by you, which was formerly vsed of others, yea and so much the rather, by how much the sence which your selfe haue giuen concerning this portion of Scripture, is there∣by made so apparently euident to each mans apprehension, as that I (for mine owne part) am presently constrained to Esdr. 4.41. crie out and say thus, Oh great is the truth, & must néeds preuaile. Hydr. If any besides they selfe do yet seeme scrupulous concerning this sence of the place, I do here purposely referre him (for further satisfaction herein) to that the authenticall
interpretation thereof which our Sauiour himselfe, and the holy spirit of God (vpon iust occasion) haue authentically put downe: saying thus vnto Peter (and all other whatsoe∣uer being onely but persons of priuate regard) Put vp thy sword into his place, Math. 26.51. Reuel. 13.10. for all that take the sword, shall perish with the sword, Wherein our Sauiour Christ doth See Caluine in Mat. 26.10. make no restraint of the Magistrate his lawfull authoritie in the vse of the sword: but only inhibites an surped authoritie, or a law∣lesse abuse thereof. And therefore, these words in Mathew  accipientes. hoilabóntes, that is, all that take the sword, would rather be translated (saith Beza) thus See Theod. Beza in Mat. 26.52. omnes vsurpantes, that is, euery one vsurping the sword shall perish with the sword. Yea and so the Hebrew word . nasa (saith he) whereunto answereth the Greeke word, tò lambánein, is eftsoones obserued in Exod. 20.7. Deut. 5.11. Psal. 50.16. the sacred Scriptures. And in very deede, those men, they may iustly be said to take, that is, to vsurpe the sword, to whom the same is not purposely giuen by the Lord himselfe, or who do abuse the said sword beyond the appointed limits and bounds of their proper calling. As did Peter there, and as all others before the law written should vndoubtedly haue done: had not the Almightie law-giuer (in that Gen. 9.6. ninth of Genesis) authentically enabled their persons to take iust re∣uenge vpon any the outragious spiller of innocent bloud. Thus then I hope the Magistrates authoritie (concerning such a sanctified vse of the sword) was sufficiently established among the old Patriarkes, euen by that selfesame legall de∣cree which the Almightie concluded there with Noah, and the rest immediatly after the floud. Wherein also I haue la∣boured the matter so much the more, by how much I would not willingly (without very apparent reason) be said to dis∣sent from so worthie & reuerend a man, concerning the true and naturall sence of that portion of Scripture: as also to let thy selfe and the rest perceiue, that his Maiesties power (so authentically suppressing those our rebellious Tobacco∣nists) was no waies made guiltie of shedding their bloud. Capn. The truth thereof is so apparently euident, as
(I thinke) all men but such as are purposely blind, will fréely acknowledge the same. But yet Sir, they and their vnderhand fauourites do excéedingly wonder, that so ma∣ny poore soules should be put to the sword, being al English men borne, and bred in our countrey. Hydrophorus. How many (thinkest thou) were put to the sword? Capn. I do not certainely know the number my selfe, but ye report goeth currantly in many mens mouthes, that there were fouretéene score slaine and hurt at the least. Hydr. What maruell is it, though such a false report ran currantly among that disordered companie, sith their words seemed Psal. 55.21. softer then butter, when (not withstanding) there was war in their hearts: & seeing their speech appeared more smooth hen oyle, when as yet they imagined nothing but mischiefe, being not vnlike to Psal. 52.2. a very sharpe razour which cutteth so deceitefully, as hardly a man may perceiue the same. But oh impudent mouthes, which are no whit ashamed (vnder a falsely pretended couerture of foureteene score per∣sons) to shilter foureteene score lies and foure at the least: for there were not slaine aboue sixteene persons at most. Notwithstanding, behold here the bad disposition of those our monstrous Minotaures? For as they had desperately Psal. 55.20. laid their bloude hands before vpon such as were soundly at peace with euery of them, and broken the holy couenant of their dutifull subiection to his Maiesties power: so surely (to hide the horrour of that their horrible enterprice) they are not now ashamed to make knowne to the world, that they Psal. 52.3. do rather loue euill, then that which is good, and do take a far greater delight to broach abroade lies, then to vtter the truth of the matter. Capn. But yet Sir (notwithstanding all this) they do boldly affirme, that a most barbarous crueltie was shelved vpon sillie poore women and children; one woman being sauagely killed with two young babes in her wombe, ano∣ther runne bloudily through with a speare, the one end
thereof sticking fast in the ground, and the other end being pitifully shattered on péeces in her harmelesse sides: also vpon old men, women and children, being but weeding their corne in the fields: and lastly, vpon poore passengers likewise, that did but trauell by the way. Hydr. It seemeth rather (by the purport of thy speech) that a most barbarous villanie is vsed against his Maiesties souldiers, by these most barbarous and sauage reports. How∣beit, it now plainly appeares, that these barbarous Canni∣bals can do nothing else but Psal. 140.3. Rom. 3.13. vse their bad tongues to de∣ceipt▪ that they Psal. 140.3. haue sharpened their said tongues like a ser∣pent; that Rom. 3.13. the poyson of Aspes is vnder their lips; and that they Psal. 64.3. delight in nothing at all, but to shoote out their ar∣rowes (I meane) most bitter and venimous words. For I assure thee this on my credit, that there was killed neither woman nor child; neither yet any one creature weeding their corne, was so much as once challenged at all. It may be (I confesse, which yet I beleeue can neuer be proued) that some one passenger (carelesly crowding himselfe in the midst of the throng as they fled) receiued some little hurt at vna∣wares, but wittingly and willingly not touched at all: and therefore those his Maiesties souldiers are most barbarously belied by these their beastly reports. Howbeit, the best reme∣die they haue against Ier. 18.18. those deadly stroakes of the tongue, is (with good David) to crie out to the Lord and say, Psal. 140.1.2. Deliuer vs oh Lord from the euill men, preserue vs fro! such pestilent persons, and protect our harmelesse soules from all those ly∣ing lips which Psal. 120.2. imagine but euill things in their rebellious hearts, and stirre vp a deadly strife all the day long; which do Psal. 52.2. mischieuously furmize all manner of words that may do hurt, oh false deceitfull tongues. But thou oh Lord wilt Psal. 21.12. shoote an arrow sodenly at euery of them, yea their deadly stroaks they shal be at once. They shall cause their own tongs to fall pat on their pates, in so much as whosoeuer seeth them shall flee from them, and say thus vnto euery of them:Psal. 120.3. What good haue those your deceiptfull tongues procured vnto
you? or what do those your venimous mouthes auaile you at all? Hath not the Almightie Iehouah destroyed you for e∣uer? hath he not plucked you out from your tabernacles, and made you a present terrour to those that passe by the way: when they daily behold what monuments of mischiefe you are iustly become to all disobedient and rebellious raskals? Euen so Iudg. 5.31. let all thine enemies perish oh Lord, that shall any waies raise up themselves against thine annointed, but let all those that loue thee and thy sauing health, be euen as the Sunne, when he ariseth in his strength. So be it Lord Iesus. Thus then thou seest now Capnistus,that (notwithstanding any their barbarous babblings abroad) his Maiesties power is euery way freed from blame: and those Gen. 4.10.11 cursed Cains themselues are euery way guiltie of spilling their owne and their confederates bloud, either then in the skirmish, or at any time since, in the orderly execution of iustice vpon them. Capn. Good Sir, I do not as yet perceiue, how they themselues should be made guiltie of any mans bloud but their owne, vnlesse haply they did most outragiously lay their violent hands vpon any their associates slaine. Hydr. Thay they themselues became guiltie of their owne, and their confedrates bloud, it is more then apparently eui∣dent. Because howsoeuer it be necessary that offences should come, yet Math. 18.7. woe be to that man whatsoever, by whom the of∣fence first cometh on foote. Yea and the ciuill law telleth vs confidently, yt Qui occasio∣nem damni dat: damnum dedisse vide∣tur. whosoeuer administreth an occasion of hurt, that man is accompted ye doer of the hurt it selfe. Moreouer, if their laying of violent hands vpon any of those their associats (though otherwise, neuer so worthie of death) had vndoub∣tedly made them guiltie of that their bloud: what a dange∣rous condition then, are those wretches in (thinkest thou) before the Maiestie of the immortall God, who so desperate∣ly combined themselues in one, and with such bloudie and murdering resolutions made haste to murder his Maiesties authenticall power? Yea and (which more is by much) what
a fearefull case are those blind Cannibals in before God in their conscience, who so causlesly, so cruelly, so cursedly, and with most rebellious minds to the King his excellent Maie∣stie, did so villanously execute such a villanous, merciles, and monstrous massacre vpon Sir Henrie Fowkes Knight. that excellent Captaine, who was the deputed conducter of his Maiesties power for the pre∣sent? whose experimented valour for seruice of weightie importance, and whose admirable worth for the timely at∣chieuing of any notable exploit, is famous throughout the whole world; yea and whose wofull want for future imploy∣ments of trust, is ten thousand times more then would be the want of an hundred thousand of such sillie fresh-water souldiers as rebelliously bare armour then against his said Maiesties authenticall power. Well, sith i is now as it is, let them praise God with all their hearts, for his Maiesties excee∣ding great clemencie in so pardoning, and sparing their liues for the present; and let them (in Gods holy name) endeauour now to spend the remainder of their wofull daies, in an earnest and heartie desire to be freed forthwith from Psal. 51.14. that one bloud-guiltinesse aboue all the rest, before the presence of God; lest good Abel his innocent bloud Gen. 4.14. Heb. 12.24. do continually crie out for vengeance against them: and themselues (being iustly cast forth from the face of the earth) begin with horrour of conscience Gen. 4.14. Pro. 17.11. Isa. 19.4. Ier. 50.41.42. to run hither and thither like runagate-vagabonds, being hourely afraid to be cruelly killed of euery one that shall but happen to meete them. Lo Capnistus, this is the worst I wish to them all, and this is the best I can do for them. In the meane time, thou maist now very plainly perceiue by that which is spoken, what a pestilent crew of pernicious persons all those our disordered Tobacconists were (for the present) to the publike good of our State; as also, what fur∣ther mischiefes might forthwith haue followed vpon those their mischiuous attempts, had not our merciful God (by the prouident care of those his Maiesties most prudent magi∣strates) very mercifully met with the mischiefes in time:
Namely, many mutinous broiles among our owne selues; ci∣uill dissentions in euery coast, the spending of our selues a∣gainst our owne selues, much spilling of English bloud, a pre∣sent spoile of all the good blessings of God, the opening of a fearefull gap to forreine inuasions, most cruell massacres on euery side, with an extreme hazard of King, of Queene, of kingly of-spring, of our happie estate, yea & of this our flou∣rishing kingdome also, without the more mercie of our mer∣cifull God. Capn. It is vndoubtedly true as you say. And therefore the Lord of his infinite mercies forgiue all men their sins in deseruing, and those men their sins in attempting such horrible beginnings of mischiefe. Hydr. The Lord God say amen to the same, for the me∣rits of Iesus Christ. Now then, (to knit vp the second part of this our present discourse in a summarie speech) sith those the disordered courses of our gracelesse Tobacconists are eue∣ry way so exceedingly hurtfull to their owne proper persons, first by poysoning their bodies and soules, and then next, by procuring a prodigall dispending of their ancient patrimo∣nies and other preserments; sith they are so vnnaturally iniu∣rious to their owne wiues & children, by causing their need∣lesse pouertie, and wofull complaints; sith they are so barba∣rously cruell towards their poore Tenants, for the chargea∣ble supply of their vnnecessary wants; sith they are so outra∣giously resolute vpon the present spoile of other mens sub∣stance; sith they are so fearefully opposite to the well setled peace of our countrey; sith they are so starely repugnant to the good established lawes of our land; sith they are so dan∣gerously occurring to the publike peace of our soueraigne Lord the King; sith they are so proudly rebellious to his Ma∣iesties soueraigne power; sith they are such ineuitable prouo∣cations to the vntimely spilling of their owne and other mens bloud; briefly, sith they are the horrible beginnings of many mutinous broiles, of ciuill dissentions, of spending our selues, of spilling much bloud, of spoyling the present good
blessings of God, of opening a fearefull gap to forreine inua∣tions, of cruell massacres, of an extreme hazard to our graci∣ous King, our Queene, the royall Progenie, to our happy Estate, and most flourishing kingdome: Let their owne pro∣per bodies, their patrimonies, their wiues, their children, their poore oppressed Tenants, their honest good neighbours, the quiet of our countrey, the lawes of our land, the publike peace of our soueraigne Lord the King, his Maiesties soue∣raigne power, their owne and other mens blouds, the for∣reine powers about vs, our King, our Queene, the whole Progenie, our present good, the flourishing state of our king∣dome, yea and Capnistus also himselfe, in the name of those our disordered Tobacconists; let all these (I say) both ioyntly, and seuerally conclude with me, and for me, whether those their filthie Tobacco fumes are, not onely pernicious to their owne proper bodies, but ouer profluuious also for those our isordered Tobacconists purses, and too too pestiferous to the present good of our publike State. Capn. Surely Sir, I (for mine owne part) do not one∣ly conclude it an infallible truth from my very heart roote, but will (herewithall) very readily afford you a generall applaud from the rest, and my selfe: praysing the Almigh∣tie with heart and mouth, that it was his gracious proui∣dence to bring me so right in your companie, before that I entred vpon my purposed voyage: protesting withall from an vnfained heart, to haue from henceforth those filthe To∣bacco fumes in no lesse detestation then the diuell of hell. Hydr. Not so Capnistus. For howsoeuer I am heartily glad to heare thee brought now into such a deadly deflation with those their former Tobacco fumes, yet let not my present speech, bring any such preiudice to that thy purposed voy∣age. Thou art a proper young man, of exceeding great hope in our countrey, even now in thy best flourishing state; and young-men (thou knowest) by trauelling forreine countries, may haply attaine to a notable experience; besides that, this thy purposed adventure, may become very gainful vnto thee.
Capn. I am a young man (Sir) I confesse; and there∣fore do stand in more néed of a sound and setled experience. Howbeit, I have now gathered (I thanke my good God) such an experimented and sanctified wisedome from this your present discourse, as doth very plainly demonstrate vnto me, the palpable foolerie of all my former West In∣dia voyages. Although this I acknowledge withall, that (if my purposed iourney had this way bene prosperous) I could (by the onely trafficke of Tobacco it selfe) haue cleare∣ly gained thrée hundred pounds by my voyage at least; so vainly are our vaine English-men affected after a vaine, and vanishing filthie fume. But Sir, (Gods holy name be blessed) I begin now to abhorre the gaine that is enter∣prised with such imminent perils, and accomplished also with such endless paines. For what will it Marc. 8.36. Luke. 9.25. profit a man to winne the whole world, and lose his owne soule? And (Sir) you told me but euen now, that Qui occasio∣nem damni dat, damnum dedisse vide∣tur. Whosoever but administreth an occasion of mischiefe, he is the principall master of that mischiefe himselfe. Hydr. That is certainly so. But God grant Capnistus, that this so forward a protestation proue not a fire-flash, resem∣bling those sodaine flames of thy filthy Tobacco fumes, which (being sodainly kindled with the flame of a candle) are as sodainly quenched with good ale fumes. Yea I beseech the Almightie with all my heart, that this thy sodaine illumina∣tion proue not (in the end) and odde Interiection, I meane, some sodaine passion of a passionate mind prolated vnder an vnperfect voice, and thereupon as sodainly vanish away like a flash or a fume. Capn. Nay Sir, my protestation procéeds from a firme and setled iudgement: and (that you may the rather credit my spéech) I will tell you what seale shall be set to the same for a further confirmation thereof. I have (at this present) two hundred pounds worth of this beastly Tobacco at home in my house; all which (not∣withstanding the great value thereof) shall either pre∣sently
packe to the fire as a burnt oblation for this my aduised vow, or else be sent swimming downe the Thames at the least, directly towards West India from whence it first came, in an vtter detestation of the most detestable foo∣leries of those our disordered Tobacconists. Hydr. Not so Capnistus. For howsoever the filthie fume of Tobacco taken inward be most pernicious to the bodies of men, yet may there a very good vse be made of the hearbe it selfe for sundry diseases befalling the bodies of men, as I told thee before. Capn. Good Sir, I am altogether hopelesse for euer beholding any good vse of that which (being first abusiuely brought to our countrey by bad and wilde dispositions for the onely abuse thereof) hath euer since bene beastly abused by like dispositions, and never yet conuerted to any good vse at all. And therefore (for mine owne part) I will neuer regard whatsoever supposed good vse may hereafter bee made of Tobacco it selfe, all the while I perceiue the pre∣sent abuse of filthie Tobacco fumes in such earnest request a∣mong our disordered Tobacconists: more especially among those our insatiable deuourers of all the good blessings of God; and therefore I will (for euer hereafter)beware of giuing the least occasion to any such fearefull abuse. Hydr. Gods holy name be blessed for these his good be∣ginnings of grace, and the Lord multiplie his sweete mercies vpon thee an hundred fold. But yet thus much I would haue thee remember withall, that as it is the vndoubted true na∣ture of all those to whom the Lord restoreth Psal. 51.12.13. the ioy of his sa∣uing health, and more fully establisheth with the spirit of free∣dome, to shew forth his mercifull waies to the wicked: so is it a speciall dutie imposed vpon euery Christian Conuert (be∣ing soundly conuerted himselfe) euen then also most serious∣ly to labour Luc. 22.32. Ioh. 1.40.41.45. 1 Tim. 1.15.16 the sound conuersion of all others besides. And therefore (good Capnistus) I pray thee heartily, do thou now make knowne thy Christian conuersion, by that thy Christi∣an care in conuerting thy brethren. Shew thy selfe Pro. 11.30. wise(for
euer hereafter) in winning of soules: and so shalt thou certain∣ly know, that Iam. 5.20. he which hath conuerted a sinner from going astray from the waies of the Lord, shall saue a soul from death, and couer a multitude of sinnes. Hydr. Good Sir, my good will that way (by the grace of God) shall neuer be wanting when, or wheresoeuer I méete with any of them: how furiously soeuer their filthie Tobacco fumes do make them to fret, to frowne, or to to fume at the same. Hydr. Indeed Capnistus, whensoeuer thou dost soundly vndergo such a Christian course, thou must looke forthwith for the Ier. 18.18. strokes of the tongue. For thou shalt no sooner begin Ier. 20 8. to proclaime desolation against those their shameful disorders, but the sweete word of the Lord will be made a reproach to thy person, and thy selfe shall be had in derision for it. Then shalt thou be forced Ier. 20.10. to heare the raylings of many, and be assaulted with feare on euery side: yea then be thou sure Psal. 41.9. Ier. 20.10. that euen those thy former familiars will narrowly watch for thy halting, and daily endeauour to execute all their out∣ragious villanies vpon thee. But 1 Pet. 3.14. be thou nothing dismaid with any their terrours, feare not their fierie threatnings, nei∣ther bee thou troubled at all with, the rufull remembrance thereof; nay rather, be thou euery houre ready Isa. 50.6. to offer thy backe to those smiters, and thy cheekes to those nippers, and neuer hide thy face from their shame and spitting. But endure thou with meeknesse 2. King. 18.22 the outragious raylings of those ra∣ging Rabshakeians, and vndergo with patience, the 2 Sam. 16.11.12. causeles curses of any those shamelesse Shimeis, because the Lord himselfe hath bidden them curse: it may be, the Almightie will much more mercifully behold thy affliction, and do thee much good for their cursing that day. Capn. Good Sir, (being thus resolutely bent as I am 1 Sam. 25.28. 1 Cor. 10.4. to fight the Lords battailes, neuer make you any doubt (I beséech you) but that I haue long since Luc. 14.31. set downe, & seri∣ously cast with my selfe, whether I be able with bare ten thousand, to méete him y• cometh against me with twenty
thousand, or not. Do as you may be certaine of this, that (if I had either felt a fainting heart, or found too féeble a force, I would rather Luc. 14.32. send an Ambassadour, and desire conditi∣ons of peace, then desperately aduenture my selfe vpon any so bloudy a bickering. And therefore, I pray you ceasse wéeping Act. 21.13. and breaking my heart: because (by the helpe of my God) I will rather endure ten thousand tortures and torments, then suffer his glorious name to be so déepely dishonoured by any their disordered dealings, or permit his gracious blessings to be so prodigally and so profluui∣ously Iam. 4.3. dispended vpon the inordinate lusts of those our in∣satiable and lasciuious suckers in of filthie Tobacco fumes, if any my priuate admonitions, or open reproofes may hinder the same. Hydr. If thy resolution be thus, why then, Act. 21.14. the will of the Lord be done; but in any wise obserue (I pray thee) a Christian course in those thy rebukes. Capn. My Worshipfull Fathers, and fellowes for for∣reine aduentures: We that Psal. 107.23.24.25.26.27.28.29.30.31. go downe to the Sea in ships, & occupie our businesse in huge great waters, we haue eft∣soones séene the great works of the Lord, and his wonders done in the déepe. How he commandeth the stormie winds to arise, and lifteth vp those the mighty waues of the Sea, which make our tottring ships mount vp to the heauens, and downe againe to the déepe. So as our soules they melt for trouble, to sée our selues tossed to and fro, to stagger like drunken men, and to be hourely brought to our wits end for feare. We remember (I hope) that when wee cried heartily out to the Lord in the midst of those our dange∣rous troubles, he brought vs forth from our present di∣stresse, by turning those great tempests into a quiet calme, and by causing the waues of the Sea to be still. Lo, then began wee to be heartily glad, because wee were safely brought to the hauen where we longed to be. These things (my deare brethren) we all know to be true in our owne proper experience. Oh let vs therefore most highly exalt the
Lord in the congregation of his people, and praise his great name in the assemblie of the Elders. Let not our goodnesse herein, be Hosh. 6.4. as a morning cloud, or like to the morning deaw that goeth away. Let vs not within a while Psal. 106.21 forget God our Sauiour: who hath dealt so wonderfully with e∣uery of vs, aboue many the sonnes of mortall men. But let vs eftsoones be perswaded, that those terrible stormes of wind they did onely pronosticate the ineuitable stormes of God his excéeding great anger against our excessiue sins: yea and let vs acknowledge withall, that there can be no greater wickednesse concerning our ordinary callings, then wittingly to trafficke home that from forreine parts, which doth both willingly and wickedly procure a generall wastfull consuming of all the good blessings of God. More especially, whē those selfe same blessings are prodigally dis∣pended vpon that which not onely doth our countrey people no one good at all, but also which hurteth their health, consumeth their wealth, and hazardeth eftsoones their hap∣pie estates. Perhaps your good worships do wonder much what this hurtfull trafficke might be? I will here tell you the same without further delay. It is that our filthie Tobacco fumes which we so dangerously aduenture to get; which our owne countrie-men so gréedily deuoure, and which hath so egre∣giously endangered our publike State. I know there is an excéeding great gaine to be gotten thereby: yea I feare me (alas) that too too many of our miserable Merchants (by the very sale thereof) haue gotten the diuell and all. But ac∣cursed be that gaine whatsoeuer Mat. 16.28. Marc. 8.36. Luc. 9.25. which is so dangerously obtained with the excéeding great griefe, and hazard of body and soule in hell. The pernicious, the profluuious, and pestiferous effects of these our filthie Tobacco fumes, do vniuersally appeare throughout this whole countrey of ours, and Mat. 18.7. woe bee to them that are found the primary cau∣sers thereof. Let not vs (my worshipfull Fathers, and fellowes in
forreine aduentures) for a priuate gaine to our proper pur∣ses, procure the cause of a publike bane to our owne coun∣trey people. Let not our inordinate care of superfluous wines, be made an ordindary Psal. 62.2. Isa. 7.20. razour to our countrie-mens throates. Let not our preposterous profession, be any occa∣sion at all to our countries perdition. Let vs no longer co∣zen our poore countrey neighbours, by bringing them home a filthie pestiferous fumes, for their rich and substantiall fruits. Let vs not still shew our selues to be those insatia∣ble hungrie Merchants, who (hearing once what wonder∣ful gaine may be got from the intoxicated minds of Moone∣headed Minotaures) do most shamefully 1 Macab. 3.41. take ouer with them an abundance of gold and siluer, to sell the sonnes of Israel for slaues, Amos. 8.6 Reuel. 18.13. and to make open sale of the soules of men for old shooes: lest the Almightie reuenger of innocent bloud 1 Kin. 22 49. 2 Chron 20.37 do breake our whole Nauie in péeces, and disable them finally for all forreine aduentures. Let vs not here∣after any more vndergo such dangerous voyages for vaine and vanishing smoke, but endeuour to trafficke home ra∣ther 2 Chro. 2.8. and 8.18. the cedar trées, and firre trées, the Algummin wood, the gold of Ophir, and precious stones: so shall we be wor∣thely estéemed those honest and frugall aduenturers who séeke rather the publike good of our countrey, then the pri∣uate gaine of our purses. But if (notwithstanding any thing hitherto said) we neither care what bad trafficke we buy, nor passe not what excessiue prices our poore countrey∣men pay for our paysonsome pelse, all the while wee our selues may liue by their losse, then surely we shall most fil∣thily shame our selues, and plucke a iustly deserued reproch vpon our worthie profession. For mine owne part (my reuerend brethren) I had ra∣ther vndergo (I assure you) ten hundred thousand tortures of death, then but once more to vndertake the enriching of mine owne selfe by the sale of that, which not onely doth no manner of good, and which is many waies so pernici∣ous to the bodies of men, so profluuious to poore mens
purses, and so pestiferous to the publike good of my natiue countrey. For surely (knowing so much as now by the swéete mercies of my God I do sincerely know, and féeling what comfort by the worke of his spirit I presently féele) if I should still continue that my former most couetous, nay rather most cutthroate-like course, all the whole world might iustly conclude, that (if time would serue to vent them forth by open sale) I would desperately Reuel. 18.13. aduenture (with the Babilonish Merchants) to trafficke also from Rome, euen Agnus Deies, crucifixes, popish pardons, with other like paultrey pelfe, by the fearefull Tale of any poore countrymens soules. Yea and (which more is by much) that I would (with the most vicious Venetian Panders) ve∣ry desirously packe ouer whole ships-full of sorrie Venetian Courteghianes, and most shamefully lease them forth in fée∣farme for a filthie lucre. Alas (my deare brethren) alas, what a proportionable e∣quitie is that (thinke you) which chaffereth but chaffe vn∣to men for their precious wheate; which giueth them goose∣quils for their glittring gold; and which onely affordeth them a foule thinking fume, for their seuenfold refined sil∣uer? Is not this to accomplish that ancient hyperbolicall prouerbe, which so accustomably accompleth each vile con∣temptible trafficke, no better in effect, then Sopholes in Antigone.  Fumi vmbra. the very shadow of smoke? that is, but a vanishing shew, without any substance at all. Is not this, to make men beléeue that we prouided them very daintie fine cates, howsoeuer most dearely bought; when yet (as is vsually spoken) we set one∣ly before them, Lucianus.  Sacrum sine fumo. an holy sacrifice (forsooth) without any swéete smoke? that is, a poore beggerly banquet, without ei∣ther béefe or browesse at all. Would we our own selues (my reuerend masters) be willingly feasted so at other mens ta∣bles. Could we (at any hand) endure to pay so excessiuely deare for our suppers before hand, and (when all cometh to all) be then so conie catchingly fobbed forth with such a vaine shew of fantasticall fooleries: Can we be contented
(I pray you) that any one liuing person (vpon any such our former most chargeable payments) should promise vs the gainefull purchase of golden mountaines, and then (for our substantiall siluer) procure onely vnto vs but Martialis, Vende fumos. the deceipt∣full sale of a most filthie vanishing fume? that is, should make vs many great & glorious promises, which notwith∣standing are finally destitute of their wished effects. Might we not (my worshipfull brethren) for these our insatiable Psal. 59.14.15. Isa. 56.11. and dog-like inordinate desires of gréedie gaine, be iustly termed (not the worshipfull Merchant venturers) but ra∣ther those worrie-shéep mucke-scrape Vespasian vipers, who (for filling their extraordinary gaping after gréedie gaine) do make an ordinarie sale (being spoken with reuerence) of their most filthie stinking stale? Yea and (which more vile is) when at any time their godly minded Matrons, or their sanctified sonnes (with great anguish of heart, and griefe of mind) do but once séeme to distaste or dislike of such kind of sale, euen then (most contemptuously)to proffer the most poysonsome stinke of that stinking gaine to their sanctified noses, bidding them boldly to smell thereof, and then tell him withall, whether that same siluer (so gathe∣red together) doth not yéeld as redolent a sauour as any of the swéetest gold couched vp long since intheir Cabbinets made of spruce. By this meanes making good vpon their owne paultrie pates the pestiferous Vespasian prouerbe; which telleth them plainly, that Vespasianus, Lucribonus est odor ex re qualibet. the sauour of insatiable gaine (from what filthie matter soeuer the same ariseth) doth afford as fragrant a smell to those their insatiable and hunger-sterued nostrils, as any the finest ciuet or muske. Thereby also canonizing that heathenish Poet for a Prea∣cher of truth; who Ennius, Vn∣de habeat cu∣rat nemo, sed oportet habere. telleth them plainly thus: From whence it comes we neuer care: So it may fall vnto our share. Perhaps your good worhips would willingly know the maine reason it selfe, why those filthie mucke merchants should become such hungersterued Heluoes, concerning
Auri sacra fames. the holy hunger of gold, such gréedie gormandizers of fil∣thie gaine, yea and such insatiable Philargyrians, in ga∣thering treasures togither: the reason hereof (saith Zeno∣dor) is onely this, namely, because Zenodorus, . Mendicanti∣um sacculi, semper inanes. the néedie beggars satchell can neuer be satisfied. Now then, if we also our selues (my worshipfull ma∣sters) should (in these our sea-faring courses) declare our selues to be such: were we not very well worthie (euen for this onely respect) to be no lesse odiously estéemed of, and therein also as deseruedly (in all points) to be dealt with∣all, as was that notable conie chatcher Thurinus, in the daies of Alexander Seuerus? Who (being sharpely accused, and presently produced before the said Alexander, for that he (remaining otherwise in no fauour at all with his Ma∣iestie) did notwithstanding, continually beare the sillie poore subiects in hand that he was all in all, and in excellent accompt with his Highnesse. By this base and paltrie pra∣ctise (vnder an onely pretence of speaking for them to his Maiestie) he did very péeuishly pilfer much mony from out of the poore mens purses. Howbeit (so soone as that his said knauerie brake forth to the open view of the world, and the same accordingly made knowne to the King) he was forth∣with adiudged to be surely made fast to a stake, and (ha∣uing great store of gréene wood then kindled about him) to be so smothered to death by the violent smoke of that fire: The Executioner also then crying out to the by-standers and saying thus; He Martialis dignus vt fu∣mo pereat, qui fumos vendi∣dit is worthily adiudged to perish with smoke, who hath so deceiptfully sold forth his smoke vnto others. And herein moreouer that conie catching companion did perso∣nally accomplish the old ancient Prouerbe which speaketh thus: Lucianus  Fmum fugi∣ens, in flāmam incidi. By flying from smoke, I fell forthwith into the flame it selfe. These the precedent matters being now more naturally, and more exactly considered, with their seuerall circum∣stances concurring also therewith, let vs in Gods name (my worshipfull fathers and fellowes) at no time here∣after
after giue any further offence this way: but very conscio∣nably and carefully (from henceforth) carrie our selues to∣wards all sorts of people, 1 Cor. 10.32. whether they be Iewes, Gen∣tiles, or the Churches of Christ. Let vs héedfully 1 Thess. 5.2 abstaine from all appearance of euill. So shall the Lord God Psal. 128.1.2. &c. abun∣dantly blesse vs: so shall the Kings Maiestie Rom. 13.4. most power∣fully protect vs; so shall our deare countriemen 1 Tim. 2.1.2. pray heartily for vs; so shall not the land at any time hereafter Gen. 15.16. vomit vs forth for filthie Amorites; yea so shall we be sure to haue Rom. 12 18. Heb. 12.14. peace in our conscience with God and men. Lo (Sir) this I assure you (if the Lord God say amen to my purpose intended) shall be the whole and the onely course that I will take with these kind of men. Hydr. Surely Capnistus, I do freely approue of this thy purposed course: yea and I doubt not at all, but that so many of them also as haue but one halfe dramme of Gods holy feare in their secret hearts, as haue but one scruple of true honestie in their open foreheads, yea as haue but one onely graine of common humanitie in their ordinarie courses, will euery of them very conscionably, & most carefully accompt of the same. As for those insatiable companions, of whom thou didst speake euen now, there is no hope at all to pre∣uaile with any of them. For Ier. 13.23. can the blacke More change his skin? or is it possible the Leopard should after his spots? Then also may those men learne to do good, who haue bene accu∣stomed so long to do euill. Otherwise, howsoeuer Iere. 4.22. they may be wise enough to do euill, yet to do well they haue no wis∣dome within them at all. But now shew me what course thou wilt take with the rest. Capn. The course I intend to take with them, shall be this. Having first made throughly knowne to euery of thē, this your present discourse, I will then wish them withall, for very shame to remember themselues in time, to giue o∣uer all those their former carousing courses with spéede; to forbeare now any longer to make such beastly swine of themselues, by swillings in so superfluously the manifold
blessings of God; to abandon all their former vnnaturall dealings towards their owne wiues & children, towards their true hearted Tenants, towards their honest poore neighbours, and naturall countrie. To take héede moreo∣uer, lest (in pursuing such a superfluous supply to their in∣satiable gulling throats) they do not procure Amos. 4.6. a cleannesse of teeth throughout the whole kingdome; lest (in going a∣bout such an vnorderly augmentation of tillage) they Isa. 24.5. do not cause the whole earth to deceiue the dressers therof; lest (by this their inordinate swallowing downe of their filthy Tobacco fumes) they do Isa. 24.9. make their swéetest drinkes to be mingled with Myrrhe, and to haue a most bitter fare-well to all the drinkes thereof; lest (by procuring such a néed∣lesse hauocke of wine, ale, and béere) they themselues Lam. 5.4. be constrained to drinke their owne water for monie; lest (in∣stead of Isa. 5.12. the harpe, the violl, the timbrell, the pipe, and the wine at their extraordinarie wanton feasts) they be driuen Ezech. 12.18 to eate their owne bread with a trembling feare, and to drinke their water with trouble and carefulnesse; lest (for their former most filthie abuse of the manifold blessings of God) the Lord himselfe Ezech. 5.16. do shoote forth the arrowes of fa∣mine among them, and breake the staffe of their bread in péeces; lest (for this their abundance of victuals now) they Ezech. 4.9.10.11.12. be compelled to take wheate, barley, beanes, lentils, mil∣let, fitches, with whatsoeuer else they can get in one vessel together, to make them their bread thereof, according to the number of daies wherein they must be faine to sléepe on their sides; yea and to bake their said bread in the dung of men, to eate it by weight, and to drinke their water by measure. Briefly, lest they be enforced to heare a most hor∣rible crie before, and behinde them, saying thus: Ioel. 1.5. Awake you drunkards, wéepe and houle you quaffers of wine, be∣cause of the new wine, for it shall finally be plucked away from your throats. Whereas (on the other side) if they once soundly forsake their former most filthie waies, and be heartily conuerted
to God, he will then so excéedingly Deut. 28.5 blesse their basket and store, as they shall not néede thus disorderly to run vpon any such desperate and dangerous attempts for the aug∣mentation of tillage. Because, whensoeuer they do consci∣onably sow that selfe same portion of tillage which they haue (at this present) in their owne proper vse, the Lord God of hoasts will euen then giue such a bountiful blessing vnto it, as they shall be sure Gen. 26.12. to find in one yeare an hun∣dred fold more by due estimation. For the Lord he will Ioel. 2.23. giue them the early, and the latter raine, and Ioel. 2.25. render them the yeares that the grashopper had eaten before. Yea their Ioel. 3.24. very barnes shall be filled with wheate, and their winepresses abound with wine and with oile. And herein no maruell at all, because the Lord (in the day of this their holy conuersion) will heare Hosh. 2.21.22. yea the Lord God of hosts will heare the heauens; and the heauens they will heare the earth; and the earth, it will heare the corne, wine and oile; and the corne, wine, and oile will heare the people; and the people shall Psal. 65.13. sée the vallies stand so thicke with corne, that they shall laugh and sing, and say one to another, Behold how Psal. 67.6. the earth doth yéeld her increase; and God, euen our owne God hath giuen vs his blessing. Lo (Sir) this is all the whole course I will take with that sort of men. Hydr. This course (I confesse) is very conuenient, were they men capable of it. But alas (Capnistus) the wisedome of the word is a matter ouer loftie for such fantasticall fooles as do so insatiably affect their owne inordinate lusts: they may (by no possible meanes) attaine to the height thereof. Not because the words of wisedome are idlely bestowed a∣mong any the sonnes of mortall men, (for Pro. 1.7. the feare of the Lord is the very beginning of wisdome) but for that all such vnregenerate fooles do most disdainfully despite true wis∣dome it selfe, and all holy instruction. Neither yet hath the authenticall sound of such sacred knowledge bene hitherto held backe from any of them. For behold Pro. 1.22.23. Ier. 7.23. Wisdome her selfe hath cried without, she hath vttered her voyce in the open
streets, she hath called to them all in the publike assemblies, yea euen in the very preasse of the people themselues, as also in the middest of the Citie hath shee solemnely vttered her words, saying thus: Oh you foolish, how long will you affect your owne foolishnesse, and you scornfull take such plea∣sure in scorning? Oh turne you at my correction, for loe, I will now euen powre out my mind vnto you at large, and make you vnderstand my words to the full. What (I pray thee) might Wisdome do Isa. 5.4. Mich. 6.34. more to the sonnes of men, then shee hath hitherto done vnto euery of them? But what? be∣hold Pr. 1.27. how obstinately they do despise all her counsels, and most scornfully set her corrections at nought. Lo then, here is the onely cause of their foolishnesse. Capn. And why should not all these be as capable of heauenly wisedome, as those other we spake of a little afore? Hydr. Because they will Ierem. 7.24. not obey nor incline their eare vnto wisdome, but run headlong after the counsels and stub∣burnnesse of their owne wicked hearts, Eph. 2.2. walking moreouer according to the course of this sinfull world, and after the Prince that ruleth in the aire, that wicked spirit (I meane) which euen now worketh effectually in all those children of disobedience: who Eph. 4.18.19 hauing their owne cogitations euen vt∣terly darkened, and being meere strangers from the gracious life of God (by reason of that in-bred ignorance which is na∣turally ingraffed in euery of them) and being become with∣out feeling, haue given themselues ouer to worke all man∣ner of vncleannesse, euen with an insatiable kind of greedi∣nesse. And therefore, as they haue no regard at all Rom. 1.28. to know God, so surely, the Lord (iniustice) deliuers them vp vnto reprobate minds, to do such things as are not conuenient: sending them withall 2 Thess. 2.10.11.12. very strong delusions to make them beleeue all manner of lies, because they received not the truth: that thereupon, they all might iustly be damned which beleeue not the truth, but take an exceeding great pleasure in those their vnrighteous courses. Which their iust recom∣pence
also euen then shall iustly fall vpon euery of them. 2 Thess. 1.7.8.9.10. when the Lord Iesus shall shew himselfe from heauen with his mightie Angels in flaming fire, rendring due vengeance to so many of them as know not God, and which obey not the Gospell: who shall be then punished with euerlasting perdition from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his maiesticall power. When notwithstanding he shall be eternally glorified in all his Saints, and be made maruellous in euery of them that beleeue: because our testimonie to∣wards them, was so soundly beleeued in the day of their ho∣ped saluation. Capn. Well Sir, whatsoeuer be the successe, I will earnestly endeauour to speake plainly unto euery of them, and (it may be) that many of them will willingly heare me. Hydr. It may be they will not: and more likey it is so, by a thousand fold. Capn. Oh, I beséech you Sir, neuer say so, but hope the best: 1 Cor. 13.7. for charitie (you know) must not be suspitious. Hydr. I know it very well Capnistus, and this I dare tell thee withall, that charitie (in like manner) it must not be foo∣lish in grounding so firme a perswasion of hope 1 Cor. 10.12. vpon so hopelesse a ground as standeth onely on may bees. Hydr. Why Sir, the word was purposely giuen, you know, for Act. 17.30. the hoped, and happie conuersion of sinfull soules. Hydr. Very true (as thou sayest,) although yet for the onely conuersion of those poore sinfull soules, whose effectu∣all calling to grace was purposely and eternally Rom. 8.29.30 Eph. 1.9.13. decreed of God, by the ordinarie meanes of that selfe same word. For they being Eph. 1.4. 2 Tim. 1.9. before all beginnings the elected of God in Ie∣sus Christ, were sure (in their appointed time) to haue their effectuall calling to the true knowledge of God, by the po∣werfull n preaching of his holy Gospell. And therefore, euen as all they which are eternally elected, are sure (in time) to be effectually called: so surely all such as haue finally no calling
at all, or but onely a temporarie calling to grace, they cannot certainly conclude to themselues, any one certaine or groun∣ded hope of their eternall election in Christ. Seeing there∣fore the true sauing faith is primarily 1 Pet. 1.20. begot in the hearts of the heaters by the word of God preached, and must seconda∣rily 1 Pet. 2.1.2. grow vp and increase by that selfe same meanes it was first begottē, how is it possible (thinkest thou) that those men should euer be effectually called by the ordinarie preaching of Gods holy word Psal. 58.45. who cannot possibly be brought to the ordinary hearing therof? sith men must necessarilyIsa. 1.19. giue their willing consent to ye word, before they can be drawne to the obediēce therof. Or when at any time (for fashions sake) they come to the ordinarie preaching of that selfe same word, if they then heare it onely Ezech. 33.30.1.32. as a minstrels song, with their mouthes make mockes at those preachers which bring it, their prophane hearts still pursuing their former inordinate affections: what other thing else will befall them (thinkest thou) but that which the Prophet proclaimeth saying, Habak. 1.5. Act. 13.41. Be∣hold you despisers, and wonder, & vanish away, for I worke a worke in your daies, a worke, which you will not beleeue, though a man should declare it vnto you? Capn. Whether they heare, or not heare, fleare and floute, jeare or jibe, make moes with their mouthes or not, if God giue me power, I will neuer forbeare them. Hydr. Oh say not so Capnistus, for Christ telleth thee Mat. 15.26. it is not alwaies good to tumble the childrens bread vnto whelpes: forbidding thee moreouer Math. 7.6. to cast those thy pre∣cious pearles before beastly swine, and to hurle thy holy things vnto filthie dogs; because the swine they will treade those pearles in the mire, and Ier. 20.7.8. Math. 7.6. the dogs, they will turne a∣gaine and teare thee in peeces. And howsoeuer those scor∣ners may shew themselues holy a time, yet be thou assured of this, that the dogs (first or last) will Pro. 26.11. 2 Pet. 2.22. returne to their vomire afresh, and the swine which seemed before to be washed cleane, to their wallowing againe in the mire. And therefore, if (at any time) they shew themselues such, or if they will
Reuel. 22.11. needs become filthie, let them be filthie still: assuring them∣selues that all the while they be such they shall neuer haue Reuel. 22.14.15. entrance through the gates into the celestiall Citie, but be shut out among dogs, enchanters, whoremongers, murde∣rers, idolaters, and such as take a delight in their lying. Al∣though yet I doubt not at all, but that the ordinarie prea∣ching of the glorious Gospell, shall Isa. 55.10. accomplish that thing whereunto it was purposely sent of God: namely, it shall ei∣ther be a blessing or a Isa. 13.1. burden; a word of Rom. 1.16. conuersion, or a word of confusion; a 2 Cor. 2.15.16. sauour of life vnto life, or a sauour of death vnto death: yea and in either of both, the same shall be a sweete sauour to God. Capn. Why then (God willing) I will not ceasse cry∣ing vnto them, that (whether they heare or not) they may yet know Ezech. 2.5. and 33.33. there hath bene a Prophet among them. Hydr. Surely Capnistus, as thy resolution herein in excee∣ding honest, thy purpose godly, and thy intended course cor∣respondent to both: so I doubt not at all but that (if thy practicall proceeding be sutable in euery respect) exceeding much good may be wrought by the same. More especially, if thou (for thine owne part) doest Christianly consider, that such as are but lately wained from the milke, and newly drawne from the brest, must haue Isa. 28.9.10.11. precept vpon precept, precept vpon precept; line vnto line, line vnto line; there a little, and there a little: yea and must also be spoken vnto with a stuttring tongue, and a stammering language. And then next, if they also (for their parts) laying apart Iam. 1.20.21 all filthinesse, and superfluitie of maliciousnesse, do reuerently, cheareful∣ly, and in the spirit of meekenesse receiue the word at thy mouth: acknowledging withall, that those thy Psal. 141.5. friendly strokes are beneficiall for them, and that thy pretious balmes will not breake their heads. For the timely accomplishment whereof, both thy selfe, and euery of them shall be sure (from time to time) to haue the hourely assistance Eph. 1.16.17. of my heartiest praiers to almightie God Ioh. 15.7.16. in the name and mediation of Ie∣sus Christ. In the meane time, the houre appointed for mine
ordinarie studies, beginneth now to approch, and very loth I am to let slip the same, vnlesse vpon very important and vr∣gent occasions. Capn. And in very déed (Sir) the time also, and the tide it selfe for my former purposed voyage, doth draw ve∣ry neare: so as I my selfe (for the present) must euen ne∣cessarily make hast to the Psal. 107.30. hauen, either to vnlade, or forth∣with to dispose of some other designement concerning that vesell of mine, which alreadie is full fraught for some for∣reine aduenture; and therefore must euen now craue leaue for my present departure. Hydr. With all my heart: beseeching the eternall God Est. 2.15. Iudith. 10.8. to giue thee fauour with forreine nations, and to make thy iourney exceeding prosperous to thee. Capn. I Rom. 1.8. thanke my God in Iesus Christ, for this your godly care for the good so my soule: and I humbly beséech the Father of mercies to assist you from time to time, with his holy Spirit of wisedome, for the publike good of our Church and countrey. And euen so I most heartily take my leaue for the present. . Psal. 119.168.
If in this my present Discourse, I do haply faile of any such delectable speech or eloquence as might giue good con∣tentment to the Ciceronian and delicate eares, I pray you pardon mine imperfections that way. For how should I pos∣sibly deliuer any daintie discourse of so noysome, so stin∣king and so offensiue a Subiect, as is the poysonsome sauour of filthie Tobacco fumes? In the meane time, season your tastes, I beseech you, with this succeeding Sonet. TOBACCO TORTVRED. WHat doth the foule contagious fume and smoke Of this Tobacco (filthie stinking weede) But senses all, and spirits liuely choake, And through ye members strange infection breede? The moysture naturall it doth consume, Wherein the treasure of the life is laid: Which being lost, and wasted by this fume, Thou then (of something) art iust nothing made. Thou then (of something) art iust nothing made, Thy wasted body straight is turn'd to dust: And (dire contagion through thy limmes conuai'd) Thy life to wracke and ruine, run needs must. If thou desire to know, and cause demand Why such strange monstrous maladies are rife? The cause is plaine, and reason is at hand; Men like and loue this smokie kind of life. Men like and loue this smokie kind of life, Whereby doth vanish into aire most thinne, The vigour of the mind, and bodies chiefe Strength; force and power also of life and limme.
This is the wel-spring of diseases all, The tree which direfull death doth yeeld for fruite: Whereby their loathsome limbes do quickly fall, And run to ruine, clad in wofull suite. This is the mortall foe which doth assaile The members vigour, and the bodies power: A Tyrant which most cruelly doth hale The vitall breath (hearts handmaid) from her bower. This is a Traitour, and doth treason warke; Braine cleare and bright, with smokie mists polluting: And with his colour blacke, obscure and darke, Throughout the body euery part imbruing. And (that it might more easily effect The dire perdition of the heart and head, The body with contagious rotte infect, And through the members deadly poyson spread:) A Conduite pipe deuised is by Art, Whereby the smokie aire might haue a way. Through the whole body, and through euery part, The dire destroying venime to conuay. And when the direfull venime is conua'id Through all the body, and through euery part, Then fainting life withall, doth quickly fade, Strength quite consum'd, and vigour of the heart. Let him therefore eschue pernicious draught Of filthie, loathsome, vile infectious fume, That doth desire strength fresh, or hath a thought To keepe his bodie sound and limbes in tune. .
If neither m former Prose may perswade, nor my pre∣sent méeter make glad your mal-contented minds, I pray you then make your selues some sport about the reading of my subsequent riddle, vntill my next arriuall. Reade me a riddle, What is that, That is Times greatest daunter, cause of idlenesse, Tobacco. That is Old Ale-house haunter, friend to drunkennesse, Tobacco. That is Vile bewitching weede, healths huge consumer, Tobacco. That is Wits most wofull speede, breaths foule perfumer, Tobacco. That is Intrails foule blacknesse, bodies braue dier, Tobacco. That is Dame Natures slacknesse, quenching her fier, Tobacco. That is Wiues, childs dysaster, Tenants contrition, Tobacco. That is Wealths wofull waster, countries perdition, Tobacco. That is Offence to manie, bringing good to none, Tobacco. That is Not lou'd of any, vntill it be gone. Tobacco. Ioca, seriáque. .
Certaine faults escaped in the printing, which are to be corrected as followeth. Pag. 11. l. 32. reade either. p. 38. l. 1. reade, make good. p. 55. l. 25. put out one of the words healths. p. 61. l. 4. reade sharpsighted. p. 66. l. 10. reade manuary. p. 74. l. 7. reade lip. p. 87. l. 5. reade, shoomaker. p. 92. lin. 31. reade drudges. p. 116 l. 23. reade respe∣cted. p. 137 l. 26. reade Fie, fie p. 149. l. 16. reade I assure thee. p. 62 l. 25. reade life. p. 184. l. 14. reade shipfuls. p. 186. l. 33. reade maturely. p. 187. l. 36. reade swilling. p. 192. reade and with. Typographi Encomium. Fieldus opus pressit; mendâ vacat iste Libellus: Non nisi correctas imprimit ille notas.
