7287.7 23378645 26614
LAVVES and Ordinances militarie, sett downe and established by the right excellente ROBERT Earle of LEYCESTER, Baron of Denbigh, Iustice of Oyer and ter∣miner of her Maiesties Forestes, Chaces and Par∣kes on thisside Trente, Maister of the Horse to the Queenes moste Excellente Maiestie One of the Lordes of her moste honorable priuie Coun∣saile, Knight of bothe noble Orders, of the Garter and S. Michaell: her Highenes Lieute∣nant and Captaine GENERAL of her Maiest. Armie and Forces in the lowe Countries: And Go∣uernour GENERAL of all the Prouin∣cies and Cities vnited in the saide lowe Countries, and there associates. To be obserued by all suche as shall serue in her Maiest. Armie vnder him in the saide Countries. Imprinted at Leyden by Andries Verschout / the xxv. of Ianuarie. 1586. de stilo nouo.
FOrasmuche as there is not any Estate, which in peace or warre can be ac∣counted sure, or preserued from dishonour & ruine, vnlesse it bee supported and borne vp by Iustice duely administred, and discipline orderly obserued: And for that no man can be so ignorant as not to knowe, that honor, fame and prosperitie, doe duely follow that common Wealth or Nation, wherein good lawes are established, the Magistrate ministring Iustice is duely regarded, and the people fearing to offende, are drawen vnder the rules of Iustice and obedience: And seeing that martiall discipline aboue al things (pro∣per to men of warre) is by vs at this time most to be folowed, aswell for the aduancemēt of Gods glorie, as honourablie to gouerne this Armie in good order: And least that the euill inclined (pleading simplicicie) should co∣uer any wicked facte by ignorance: There∣fore these martiall Ordinances and Lawes followinge are established and published, whereby all good mindes endeuouringe to attaine honour, may stand armed, and receiue
encouragement to perseuere in well doing, & such as are inclined to lewdenesse, be war∣ned from committing offences punishable. which being embraced with carefull respect, and followed with obediēce, doe promise good order and agreemēt amongst our selues, with victorie and good euēts against our enemies. 1 First, Blasphencers. Forsomuch as the holy Name of our most mightie and inuincible God, with all reuerence ought to be regarded, and that destruction is pronounced to suche as blas∣pheme or abuse the same: it is therefore ordei∣ned and commanded, that no person whatso∣euer, either in common conference or commu∣nication, or for any cause whatsoeuer, shall blaspheme, or take his Name in vaine, vpon paine of losse of v.s. to the releefe of the poore for the first offence: for the seconde, fiue dayes inprisonment: for the third, losse of his place and wages. 2 And because the continuall and vnspea∣keable fauours of our Almightie God, Diuine seruice. by our vnthankfulnesse may be taken from vs, and that no good euent of any action can be expec∣ted, wherein God is not first and principally honored and serued: It is therefore especially ordeyned and commaunded, that all persons whatsoeuer, shall vpon general warning gi∣uen either by sound of Trompet or Drum, re∣paire to the place appointed, where the Diuine
sernice is to be vsed, there to heare the same read and preached, vnlesse for the present by sicknesse or other seruice he be impeached, vpon paine to lose his dayes wages for the first, two danes wages for the second, and so to be encreased by the discretion of the Iudge, and for euery such default in the Souldier, as∣well the Captaine as his inferiour officers, to be punished with like penaltie. 3 And seeing it well beseemeth all Chri∣stians, Vnlat full ga∣mes. especially such as professe the militarie seruice, to passe away the time in matters re∣quisite for their profession: And because no ti∣me can be more vainely spent, then that which is consumed in vnlawfull games, be∣sides the breeding of much contention and quarrelles: And for that there be many allo∣wable and commendable exercises for all for∣tes of men to vse: Therefore it is streightly commanded, that no priuate Souldiouror inferiour Officer shal play at Dice and Car∣des, nor any other vnlawfull games, vpon paine of two dayes imprisonment for the first time, and for after committing the like, to bee further punished by the Iudges discretion. 4 And for that it often happeneth, Vagrant woe∣men. that by permitting of many vagrant & idle wo∣men in an armie, sundry disorders and horri∣ble abuses are committed: Therefore it is or∣deined that no man shall carrie into the fiel∣de, or deteine with him in the place of his
garrison, any woman whatsoeuer, other then such as be knowen to be his lawful wife, or such other women to tende the sicke and to serue for launders, as shall be thought meete vp the Marshall, vpon paine of whipping and banishment. 5 And insomuch as clemencie amongst men of warre in some respectes is a singuler vertue: Woemen with Childe. Aged persons. Midowes. Dirgins. Babes. It is ordeined that no man in any part of this seruice that he shall doe, shal lay violent handes vpon any woman with chil∣de, or lying in childebed, olde persons, wido∣wes, yong virgins, or babes, without espe∣ciall order from the Magistrate, vpon paine of death. 6. Noe man of what degree so euer he be, Violent defyling of women. shall enforce any wife, widowe, maide or virgin, and by violence defile anie of them vppon paine of death. 7 What person soeuer that shall be com∣monly giuen to drunkennesse, Dronkenes and riotuousurs. or riotously be∣haue himselfe, shall be banished the Armie. 8 Whosoeuer shall conceale, or in any sort kepe secrete, Concealement of treason. Conspiracie. Treason, any dangerous conspi∣racie, or other practise which may be hurtfull, and may concerne the peril of her Maiesties person and realme, or of her General, or the estate of this Armie, and shall not with all diligence reueale the same either vnto the Ge∣nerall, or some other Officer of especiall trust, shal incurre the paines of death with tormēts.
9 If anie man whatsoeuer shall practice and conspire anie thinge to the hurte or perill of her Maicsties person, Treason and Conspiracy. and realme or of her Generall, or the estate of this Armie, and be therof laufullie convinced, shall suffer death with torments. 10 No man shall haue speeche or confe∣rence, send message, Conference / or writinge with or to the Ennemie. deliuer or receiue letters to or from the enemie, or any his confedera∣tes, either secretly or openly, without mani∣festing the same presently vnto the Generall or Marshall, or hauing former authoritie so to doe, vpon paine of death. 11 No man being in this seruice shal de∣part the Campe or place of Garrison for any cause whatsoeuer, Departinge from the Camp or the Garrison with∣out leaue. without the Generals es∣peciall Pasport, or other head Officer autho∣rised, vpon paine of death. 12 No man shall breake out, Breakinge order of the ranke. or leaue the order of his ranke, being once ordered in the fielde by the Marshall or Sergeant Maior, without some great occasion first made kno∣wen vnto the saide Officer, vpon paine of losse either of life or limne, at the discretion of the Generall or of the Marshall. 13 No man appointed to watch or war∣de, shall shun or depart the place, Watch worde neglected. neither shall sleepe, or neglect his duetie therein, especially after the watch is set and the woorde giuen, vnlesse he be orderly relieued, or for some great occasion enforced, with licence of his
Captaine or Officer, vpon paine of death. 14 No man shall bewray the watchwor∣de to the enemie or to any other, Watchworde be∣wrated. or giue any other worde then is deliuered by the Officer, vpon paine of death with torment. 15 No man shal raise any mutinie, Mutynie / or un∣lauful affemblies or procure vnlawfull assemblies vpon priuate, secrete, or hidden purpose, whereby to distur∣be the peace and quiet of the Armie, vpon paine of death. 16 Noe man shall lift vp his weapon against the Magistrate, Weapon against Magistrats. his Captaine or Of∣ficer, vpon paine of death. 17 No man shall quarell, Quarrelinge or fraiemakinge in Campe / or Tow∣ne of garrison. brauwle, or ma∣ke any fray within the Campe or Towne of garrison, vpon olde malice, or newe occa∣sion whatsoeuer, but shall complaine to the Officer, who is to decide the cause and punish the partie offending, vpon paine of losse of life or limme, at the discretion of the Generall or Marshall. 18 And whereas sundrie nations are to serue with vs in these warres, Forreiner abused vp English men. so as through diuersitie of languages occasion of many con∣trouersies may arise or happen to growe: It is therefore ordeined, that if any person of English nation shall finde him selfe agrieued with any wrong profered him by any forrei∣ner, that then without profering further re∣uēge hee shall signifie the same vnto his Cap∣taine or other officer, whereby order man be
taken so, as no further quarrell growe thereof, but that quietnesse in all respectes may be pre∣serued, vpon paine of such punishment as the head officers shall thinke meete, either by los∣se of life or limme. 19 No man appointed to the defence of any Breach, Trench, or Streight, Leavinge breach / trench or streight vppon fained excuse. either Captaine or Souldiour, shall willingly leaue it, or vpon any false or imagined cause or excuse shall ab∣sent himselfe from the place, without sufficient warrant, vpon paine of death. 20 No man shail enrolle his name vnder two Captaines, Souldier enrol∣led vnder two Captaines. nor muster in seuerall compa∣nies at one time, or otherwise passe in an other mans name, or lende armour, weapon, or other furniture vpon the muster day, whereby to abuse her Maiestie, and weaken the present seruice, vpon paine of a moneths imprison∣ment, and banishment. 21 No man shall embezill or deminish any of his Armour, weapon and furniture, Armour embezil∣led / dyminished / or pawned. which is appointed him by his Captaine, vnlesse he can prooue that he lost the same in seruice. And that no man shall take in pawne any Soul∣diours weapon or furniture, vpon paine to the Souldiour of losse of his place, and to the o∣ther that shall take it in pawne, the losse of the double value. 22 No man shall play away, engage, Playing awaie of Armour. or lende away his furniture, but shall alwayes keepe his Armour and weapon cleane and
seruiceable, vpon paine of being discharged. 23 No man shall deceitfully take away his companions prouision, Pilfering of his fellowes victuals victuals, or furniture, vpon paine of imprisonment. 24 No person trancyling, Forceable trac∣tion of victuals or goodes. lodging, or abi∣ding in any the Townes or Contreis of her Maiesties friendes or Allies, shall in any wi∣se exact or take by force from the people either victual or other their goods whatsoeuer, with∣out present payment, or other sufficient or∣der to the iust satisfaction of the partie, vpon paine of death. 25 No man shall forestall any victuals brought for the Campe or place of garrison, Victuals forestalled. but suffer the same peaceably to come into the Market place, there to bee rated and priced by the Marshall or his officer, before he buy the same, vpon paine of death. 26 No man shall robbe or spoyle any Shop or Tent, Robbing or spoi∣linge of vitler or Marchant. or any victualler or Marchāt comming for reliefe of the Campe or garrison, but in all good sort shall entertaine and de∣fend them, vpon paine of death. 27 No Souldiour commaunded at any time to take victuals for certaine dayes, Excrabing the dates for takinge of victuals. shall exceede the same dayes, or spēd the same other wise then according to the proportions and time allowed him; vpon paine of imprison∣ment, or other such punishmēt as the lawfull officers shal appoint. None to be spoi∣led beinge of the Generalls pro∣tection. 28 No man shall distresse or spoyle any
person standing on her Maiesties partie, or beinge vnder the Generals protection, vpon paine of death. 29 No man shall disobey or transgresse any Proclamation made by Drumnie or Trumpet, set foorth by the Generall, Proclamation transgressed. vppon such paine as he shall set foorth. 30 No man shall resist the Prouost or his other officer in apprehending of any malefac∣tour, but if neede require, Resistinge the apprehension of Malefactor. shall ayde and assist him therein, or otherwise if by suche occasion any escape be made, it is ordeined that euery person by whose defaulte the escape was com∣mitted, shall suffer like punishment that the parties so escaped shoulde haue endured. 31 No man shall molest or trouble any person being vnder his owne regiment, Disturbance of any there lod∣ginges. or the leading of any other, once placed by the Mar∣shall, forrier, or Herbinger in the Campe or Towne, but quietly to permit and suffer eue∣ry one to enioye his seuerall roome or lodging, vnlesse it be by mutuall consent and agree∣ment, neither shall any man lodge out of his Captaines quarter without licence, vppon paine of imprisonment. 32 No man shall ouerthrowe or destroye any water Milles or water workes without speciall commaundement of the Generall, Water Milles. or other heade Officer vppon paine of death. 33 No mā contrarie to order shall set on fire
or burne any house, Burnynge vp fyre. milne, or corne, nor at dislodging or remoouing shall set the Campe on fire, without speciall commaundement from the General or other head Officer pre∣sent, vpon paine of death. 34 No man shall make anie owterie or noise in any watch, Silence in match warde or Am∣bush. warde, Ambushe, or anie other place where silence is requisite and ne∣cessarie, vppon paine of losse of use or lymme, at the generals discretion. 35 No man without great occasion shall make any Alarme, Alarme. but if any chance to arise, then shall euery man presently repaire in all haste vnto his appointed place, vnlesse some true excusable cause doe hinder him, vpon pai∣ne of death. 36 No man shall harbour or receiue into his lodging any person being a stranger, Harboring of Strangers not in paie. or of our owne nation not being enrolled in her Maiesties paye, but shall presently acquaint the Generall or Marshall with his name, countrey, the time of his comming, and bu∣sines, vpon paine of imprisonment, and losse of his place and wages. 37 No man shall talke or haue conuer∣sation with any Trumpetter or Druminer of the enemies, Talkinge with the Enemies Trumpeters. or other sent in message, but such as bee appointed by the Generall, vpon paine of death. Attendance vp∣pon Cariagies. 38 No man shal attende vpon the ca∣riages,
but such as are appointed to that charge, neither linger, or loyter behinde with them to ride or ease themselues, vnlesse it be such as by sickenesse, hurtes, or other infirmi∣ties knowē to the officers, to be permitted so, vpon paine of imprisonmēt, & losse of wages. 39 No man shall attempt to goe a forra∣ging, Foraginge. without the officer appointed for that purpose deliuer them a sufficient guarde for their defence, vpon paine of death. 40 Euery Souldier shall present such prisoners as are taken, Souldiers prisoner. to their Captaine im∣mediatly at their returne to the Campe, and none shall either kill them, or license them to depart, without commaundement or leaue from the Generall, or other head Officer the∣reunto appointed, vpon paine of being disar∣med, and banished the Campe. 41 Euery Souldier at all times in ser∣uice shalbe obedient and faithfull, Obedience of the Souldier to his Captaine or his deputie. aswell to their Captaines as other inferiour Officers, & not to refuse direction of any, vnder whom they are appointed to serue, vpon paine of imprisonment, and losse of a moneths wages. And whensoeuer anie Captaine of anie ban∣de shall vppon vrgent causes appointe in his absence anie other whome he shall thinke good to supplie and execute his roome of cap∣tainship, euery man owght to followe and oven the saide deputie with noe lesse care and diligence, then they woulde the Captaine
him self vppon the same paine. 42 Euery man shall support and defende his owne Ensigne both night and day, Supporting the Ensigne. and shall resort vnto the same vpon the first war∣ning, and not depart vntill it be brought into safetie, vpon paine of death. 43 Euery souldier shal diligently obserue and learne the sound of Drums, Sounde of Drum Fifte or Trumpet to be learned. Fiftes, and Trumpets, to the end he may knowe howe to answere the same in his seruice. 44 No man shall slaughter or kill any beast of what nature soeuer within the Cam∣pe or Garrison, Slawghter of beastes. Garbage. but in such places as are ap∣poynted for that purpose, Waters vnde∣filed. nor shall suffer the garbage to remaine vnburied, neither shall any man trouble or defile the waters adioy∣ning, but in the lower part of the streame so∣me good distance from the Campe, vpon pai∣ne of imprisonment. 45 No man shall ease himselfe or defile the Campe or Towne of Garrison, Easementes. saue in such places as is appointed for that purpose, vpon paine of imprisonment, and such further punishment, as shall be thought meete by the chiefe Officers. 46 If any man doe take a prisoner or bootie, Prisoners and booties certified. he shall immediately after hee is re∣turned vnto the Campe or Towne of Garri∣son, make his Captaine or Gouernour ac∣quainted therewith, and the Captaine shall declare the same vnto the Marshall, who
euery eight dayes shall make certificate the∣reof vnto the Generall, vpon paine of impri∣sonment, and further punishment as the Ge∣nerall shall set downe. 47 In Marching by the fieldes, Crie att the put∣tinge vp of any hare. no man at the putting vp of any Hare, or any other beast shal make any shout or crie, whereby to disquiet or stay the rest of the hands, but to vse all quietnesse and silence in their march, vpon paine of imprisonment. 48 No man shall giue vp or deliuer vnto the enemies any place left to his charge or keeping, vpon paine of death. Place of charge / geuen to the Ene∣mie. 49 If any man flie to the enemies, Flyinge / to the Enemie. or be taken vpon his departure towards them, he shall suffer death. 50 That no person whatsoeuer shall passe by any other way either in Towne or Campe, Passage by ordy∣narie waie. but at the ordinarie gates and passa∣ges, vpon paine of death. 51 That all heraults of Armes shall doe there messagies, Heraults. and make proclamation at such times and places and in such order with∣out addicion, dymynucion or alteracion, ac∣cordinge vnto there direction and commission from the generall, vppon paine to be inflicted at the generals discretion, accordinge to the qualitie of there faulte.
Captaynes, 52 No Captaine, Entricinge of a Souldire from his Captaine. Officer, or other per∣son, shal receiue or entertaine any other mans Souldiour or seruant, without consent of his former Captaine or Mayster, neither shall entice an other mans Souldiour from him, vpon paine of losse of a Monethes wages, and to restore the partie to his former Cap∣taine or Maister. 53 No Captaine shall sende foorth any men to doe any enterprise, Doinge any En∣treprice without the generals knowledg. without know∣ledge of the Generall, or chiefe officer appoin∣ted thereunto, vpon paine of losse of his place. 54 All priuate Captaines, Watch and ward vp priuate Cap∣taines. being no head Officers, shal watch and warde with their Ensignes, vnlesse it be by speciall leaue, vpon paine of the losse of a monethes paye, and for the second time, losse of his place. 55 No Captaine shall sell or caunsome his prisoner without license of the Generall, Prisoner caunso∣med or solde. and shall not suffer them to depart without making the high Marshall prime to the same, vpon paine of losse of his prisoner, and im∣prisonment. 56 Any Captaine finding any Souldier of what band or company so euer, Souldier trans∣gressing to be taken vp any Captaine. which hath transgressed any of these Lawes and Ordi∣nances, may take him and bring him vnto the Marshall to be punished.
57 That no Captaine shall receine or enroll any person into his paye vnder him, Souldier sworne before he be re∣ceaued. but that he cause the sayde Souldier to recei∣ue the othe, vpon paine to the Captaine for not obseruinge the same, of losse of a mo∣neths pane. 58 Noe inferior Captaine shall for cor∣ruption, Captaine not to license any soul∣dier to departe the Campe. or any other cause license any of his souldiers to departe the Campe, or Garrison without speciall license of the Generall, or other hedde Officer, vppon paine of losse of his monethes paie, and expulsion out of his office. 59 If any Captaine hereafter receauinge his souldiers paie, Souldiers paie. doe not paie the same vnto them within 8. daies after, and beinge de∣maunded, Then vppon complainte made, and the Captaine therof convicted, he shall lose his monethes paie, and be deprived of his of∣fice, banished the Campe, and disabled from thensforth to serue in this Armie. 60 Captaines and Officers shall fre∣quent & reforte vnto the Souldiers lodgings to see in what state there Armour and Muni∣tions be in, Disiringe the souldiers furni∣ture. And to geue greate charge that there furniture be alwaies in a rediues, the∣re corstlets with all peeces belonginge to the same, and there Caliuers to be made cleane and onled, to haue match and powder drie, and Stringes for there Bowes, there bylls and halberts to be kepte cleane and sharpe,
vppon paines and punishment arbitrarie, accordinge to the qualitie of there necligence. 61 All other offences and Actes that may tende to disorder, Punishment of all other Offen∣cies. not comprised within these Articles, shalbe subiect to such maner of pu∣nishment, as the Lieutenant Generall shall inflict vpon them, as if it had bene specially expressed and set downe. 62 And to the intente that no man maie pretende and alleage any iuste cause of igno∣rance of the afore recited lawes and Ordi∣nanceis, Publishinge of the Articles. or anie of them, the said lord Gene∣rall dothe ordaine, That all chief Officers, and Captaines of this Armie shall cause the same to be red and published with in there Bande euerie xx. daies, to all those whitch be vnder there charge respectiuelie accordinge to there quarters, especiallie in all those placeis where then shall lie in Garrison, aswell horse∣men, as footemen, and to cause the same to he kepte and obserued inuiolablie asmuch as in them lieth in euery branche & article of the same, accordinge, to the tenor, forme and effecte therof.
The forme of the Othe Whiche all Officers, Captaines, Soul∣diers, and all other seruinge in this Armie shall take and performe. I. A. B. doe sweare and promise to doe all loyall, Othe. true and faithfull seruice vnto the Quene of England her moste excellente Maiestie, and vnto the Prouinces and Cities vnited in these Countries, and there associats vnder the charge and obedience of the right excellente the Earle of LEYCESTER, Gouernour gene∣rall of the saide Prouinces and Cities, & there associats, and of her Maiesties armie and forces within the same. And all laufull and due obe∣dience vnto the saide Gouernour, and to any other superior, that shall haue charge vnder him for gouerment in this Armie. And farther I do promise to endeuour my self to fulfill and kepe all suche laufull Ordinances as his Ex∣cellencie hath or shall sette forth and establishe for the better ordering of this Armie, as muche as concerne me, so longe as I shall serue in the same vnder him. So helpe me God, by Iesus Christe.
