7565 99856909 22551
The true fourme and shape of a monsterous Chyld / Whiche was borne in Stony Stratforde, in North Hampton shire. The yeare of our Lord, M. CCCCC. LXƲ. ¶ This is the fore parte. depiction of conjoined twins ¶ This is the backe parte. depiction of conjoined twins THis Childe was borne on Fryday, being the .xxvi. daye of Ianuary, betwyxt .vi. and .vii. of the clocke in the morninge, and lyued two howres, and was christened by the Mydwyfe, and are both Women Chyldren, hauing two bodies, ioyning togither With .iiii. armes, and .iiii. legges perfecte, & from the Nauell vpward one Face, two Eyes, one Nose, and one Mouth, and three Eares, one beinge vpon the backe syde of the Head, a lytle aboue the nape of the Necke, hauing heare growinge vpon the Head. Whyche Chylde was borne out of Wedlocke. The Fathers name is Rychard Sotherne, who is now fled And the Mother is yet lyuyng in the same Towne. And this Childe was brought vp to London, wheare it was seene of dyuers worshipfull men and women of the Cytie. And also of the Countrey. To witnes that it is a Trouth and no Fable, But a warninge of God, to moue all people to amendment of lyfe. YOu that do see this Clilde disfigured here, Two Babes in one, disguised to beholde, Thinke with yourselues, when such thinges do appere All is not well, as wise heades may be bolde: But god that can in secretes shew the signe Can bringe much more to pas, by poure deuine. ¶ And we that lyue to see this wonder, howe The gase is geuen, to make this meruaile great, Let one by one that this beholdeth nowe, Be warned as the wonder giues conceate: To liue to mende the wonderous shape we see, Contrarie much, in all that ought to bee. ¶ For as we finde, this figure semeth straunge, Because it showes, proporsion not in vre, So bare in minde. how time can choppe and chaunce, Disguising workes, in willes that be vnsure: From meane to more, from more to much excesse, Where Nature willes, desire should be lesse. W. Elderton. ¶ Finis. ¶ Imprinted at London in Fletestrete beneath the Conduit: at the signe of S. Iohn Euangelist, by Thomas Colwell.
